Title       : Collections Improvement for Paleobotany at the Denver Museum of Natural History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1997  
File        : a9509619

Award Number: 9509619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122559             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk R. Johnson kjohnson@dmns.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Logan D. Ivy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Denver Museum of Nat & Sci
	      2001 Colorado Boulevard
	      Denver, CO  80201    303/370-8261

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The paleobotanical collection at the Denver Museum of Natural History (DMNH) is
              an  important national and regional resource for research on the nature of
              vegetation and climate in the  Western Interior of North America.  There are
              approximately 26,000 specimens in the collection  including four type specimens
              and a number of significant  assemblages from the Late Cretaceous,  Paleocene,
              and Eocene.  Highlights include superb collections from Cretaceous-Tertiary
              boundary  sections in North America and New Zealand.  Most of the collection
              (89%) has been amassed since 1991  and, as such, is associated with precise and
              reliable locality and stratigraphic data.  This  collection represents the
              fourth largest collection of Late Cretaceous and Early Tertiary plant  fossils
              form the Western Interior, and the only such collection located in the Western
              Interior.  Since 1991, the Department of Earth Sciences (DES) at DMNH has had a
              commitment to the acquisition,  storage, and study of paleobotanical specimens.
               In 1991, a full-time courator was hired and since  then the Museum has
              supported research,  fieldwork, collections management, and collections
              storage.  In the past four years, nearly 24,000 specimens have been added to
              the collection, and nearly 3,000  specimens have been catalogued and housed in
              steel cabinets.  In addition to Paleobotany Curator, the  Department has a
              Vertebrate Paleontology Curator, a Collections Manager, two Preparators, and a 
              Registrar who are devoted to work on the paleobotanical and vertebrate fossil
              collections.   Although  recent  DMNH support has improved the condition of the
              collection considerably, approximately 78  percent of the collection remains
              housed in cardboard boxes, and all of the collection is stored in an 
              inadequate space behind exhibit dioramas.  The collection is presently at risk
              form water damage and  access-related  handling problems.  In 1993, DES
              received a grant form the NSF to improve its  collection of vertebrate fossils.
               This grant is nearing completion and most of the vertebrate fossils  will soon
              be archivally stored and accessible.  Rearrangement of DES storage space due to
              the  installation of vertebrate fossil compactors and the acquisition of new
              space presents an opportunity  to build an adjacent compactor unit for fossil
              plants.   This project will assist in housing the  paleobotanical collection in
              steel cabinets in a compactor system.  The goal of this effort is to  preserve
              the collection so that it is available for research and to allow for continued
              growth of the  collection.  Primary needs are for steel cabinets and drawers, 
              a compactor system, and additional  personnel to label and move the specimens. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
