Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Rapid Atmospheric CO2 Variations and
               Ocean Circulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1995    
File        : a9509247

Award Number: 9509247
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Regina A. Figge   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9509247  Figge      The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twenty-four months of research abroad. The  program's awards provide
              opportunities for joint research,  and the use of unique or complementary
              facilities, expertise  and experimental conditions abroad.    This award will
              support a twelve-month postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Regina A. Figge to
              work with Dr. Thomas F.  Stocker at the University of Bern in Switzerland.   
              The objective of this research is to improve understanding    of the Earth's
              carbon cycle dynamics using the Bern 2D    coupled ocean-atmosphere model.  It
              is important to    understand the processes that control the cycling of carbon 
                to be able to assess future climate change associated with    past and
              continuing emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2), which    is one of the major
              "greenhouse" gases.  The Bern model's    strength in studying the cycling of
              carbon by the ocean is    its computational efficiency combined with its
              ability to    resolve the global features of the ocean thermohaline   
              circulation which may be a critical driving mechanism behind    the Earth's
              natural atmospheric CO2 concentration,    especially on brief time scales.  Dr.
              Figge will help to    modify the Bern model by adding an organic carbon cycle
              to    the ocean's existing inorganic component.  She will use this    version
              of the model to investigate the important features    and processes involved in
              the Earth's natural carbon cycle    as observed in the geological record.  And
              she will measure    stable carbon isotopes on a peat core to be collected from
              a    Swiss peat bog to verify a new method for reconstructing    atmospheric
              CO2 concentration. ***
