Title       : California Current Sensitivity to Pacific Climate: Interdecadal Changes
               Reconstructed From Tree Rings and Varves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1998      
File        : a9509780

Award Number: 9509780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herman Zimmerman                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231388             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolfgang H. Berger wberger@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel R. Cayan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9509780  Berger, Wolfgang  University of California, San Diego 
              Title: California Current Sensitivity to Pacific Climate:         Interdecadal
              Changes Reconstructed From Tree Rings and          Varves    Instrumental
              oceanic and atmospheric parameters along the American  West Coast contain
              substantial decadal variability, but the record  is too short to resolve
              temporal and spatial details at time scales  greater than a few years. 
              Observational studies  of the climate  "shift" in the North Pacific basin
              during the late 1970's suggest  that decadal fluctuations may be linked to the
              Tropical Pacific  perhaps via the frequency and intensity of El Nino versus La
              Nina  events.  An understanding of inter-decadal variability is crucial  to
              evaluate global change phenomena.  This award supports a project  using proxy
              records for describing the decadal-to-century  variability of the California
              Current at it relates to the Aleutian  Low/West Coast Ridge complex and to warm
              and cool episodes in the  Tropical Pacific.  Since low-frequency temporal
              fluctuations  usually have large spatial effects, this project will exploit an 
              array of proxy climate records for the last millennium provided by  tree-ring
              chronologies over the Western U.S. and by varve sediments  in the Barbara
              Basin.  This study will clarify whether recent  decadal changes in the eastern
              North Pacific are a reflection of  low-frequency natural variability or whether
              they represent a  unique episode wit no analog.  The proposed research is an 
              interdisciplinary project involving the Geological Research  Division and the
              Climate Research Division of Scripps Institution  of Oceanography, together
              with the Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research  of the University of Arizona.
