Title       : RUI: Hormonal and Body Condition Effects on Natal Dispersal in Birds: Tests of a
               New Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1995    
File        : a9509079

Award Number: 9509079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165005             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Belthoff jbeltho@boisestate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred M. Dufty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boise State University
	      1910 University Drive
	      Boise, ID  837250001    208/385-1011

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9509079    Natal dispersal, the movement from place of birth to location of
              first breeding, occurs in virtually all higher vertebrates.  These movements
              have important implications for population regulation, mating systems,
              genetics, and conservation biology. The goal of this project is to understand
              the physiological ecology of natal dispersal movements in birds.  A new model
              of dispersal, based on interactions among hormonal changes, body condition, and
              social stimuli, will be tested using both captive and free-living birds.  The
              model predicts that level of corticosterone, a hormone known to stimulate
              increased locomotor and foraging activity, increases prior to dispersal due to
              a combination of endogenous and external events.  This stimulates the locomotor
              activity that underlies dispersal behavior, and juveniles with sufficient fat
              reserves will disperse at that time.  Birds in poor body condition will delay
              dispersing, but will increase their foraging activity.  Dispersal of their
              siblings will reduce aggression and/or competition for food, enabling the
              remaining juveniles to improve their body condition and disperse.  To test this
              model, hormone profiles of captive birds will be manipulated and their
              subsequent activity levels examined in relation to timing of dispersal.  A
              second set of experiments will examine the relationship between corticosterone
              and timing of dispersal movements by free-living juvenile birds.  These
              experiments will determine how activity levels, body condition, and hormones
              interact to control natal dispersal.  This study will provide significant new
              insight into the factors controlling natal dispersal. The results will provide
              a basis for future studies of hormones and dispersal in vertebrates, and may be
              of applied value in managing the dispersal of species whose management is
              important.
