Title       : iSWORD: Instrumented Streaming Research and Testbed
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0117810

Award Number: 0117810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $804002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary K. Vernon vernon@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Barford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal seeks funding for research in the design, implementation, and
              instrumentation of new
methods for scalable wide-area on-demand reliable
              digital (SWORD) streaming. The larger goal of the
research is to enable new
              streaming media applications, such as immediate access to a television
              show
whenever a client anywhere would like to view it, by devising new
              practical cost-effective methods for on-demand real-time streaming of very
              popular streaming media content. The key aspects of the research to
be
              undertaken are:
1. The development of innovative practical new reliable
              multicast techniques that optimize client stream
sharing to conserve server
              and network bandwidth, improve bandwidth cost-sharing, and maximize
system
              scalability.
2. The design of delivery techniques that work over the Internet
              or over satellite/cable networks, or any
combination of these network
              technologies.
3. The development of new metrics and models to determine which
              popular streams or partial streams
should be cached at regional (or proxy)
              servers in order to minimize delivery cost for the data.
4. The development of
              new network instrumentation facilities for the streaming media delivery
              protocols
that enable deep understanding of the impact of network events and
              conditions on the performance of
the protocols.
5. The use of the new on-line
              network instrumentation facilities to develop new streaming methods
              that
optimally adapt to current network conditions.
6. The development of a
              novel testbed that allows experimentation with alternative new reliable
              multicast
methods as well as alternative algorithms for caching streaming
              content closer to the clients, uses the
new instrumentation facilities, and
              operates seamlessly and transparently in a live environment with
ordinary
              clients accessing widely used media servers over large-scale networks such as
              Internet2 or the
Internet MBONE.
