Title       : The Columbia Hot Spot Rescue Service
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0117738

Award Number: 0117738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1399999            (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward G. Coffman egc@ee.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jason Nieh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dan Rubenstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Predrag R. Jelenkovic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Although Internet traffic is routinely quite heavy, there has usually been
              more than enough storage,
processing and bandwidth capacity to provide
              acceptable performance. However, it is well known that, more
and more
              frequently, demands for network resources are mushrooming locally into hotspots
              or data storms,
and in such cases the affected web sites and subnetworks
              founder almost completely, creating revenue
losses and client dissatisfaction
              on a large scale. We propose a novel collaborative technology to alleviate
the
              effects of these hotspots, a technology that we will apply by designing and
              prototyping a Hotspot Rescue
Service (HRS). This work will build on the past
              research of the PI's in networking, operating systems, and
distributed
              caching.
    A key premise on which the technology is founded lies in the
              observation that existing Internet band-width
resources are sufficient to deal
              effectively with hotspots. In other words, rescues of heavily-overloaded
sites
              can be assembled from underutilized resources lying elsewhere. It follows that
              there is no inherent need
for resources held in reserve uniquely for this
              purpose, i.e., there is no need for over-provisioned, under-utilized resources
              such as distributed caches to protect against hotspots. We propose instead a
              paradigm shift in which efficient mechanisms that we provide will enable
              communities of participating sites to share their resources to suppress
              hotspots. The service in action will be transparent, in part self-regulating
              and will take the form of automated traffic redirection to sites with available
              bandwidth.
    The proposed Columbia HRS will be proactive as well as
              reactive. We will amass hotspot data that
will be modeled and analyzed with
              the aim of designing hotspot daemons or plugins, software devices
              for
monitoring traffic behavior and signalling incipient hotspots via hotspot
              watches and advisories, along with
relevant statistics. We will implement two
              complementary approaches to the technology, a server-based
approach and a
              client-based, peer-to-peer (P2P) approach.
    In the server-based approach,
              servers monitor their own loads, the loads of a small set of servers that
they
              would service in the event that the other server overloads, and, via probes
              between servers, network
conditions. When a server or network component is
              identified as going into possible overload, the system
activates a replication
              mechanism to duplicate the hot content. Clients can then retrieve the content
              from
the server sites acting as replicas, alleviating the load on the original
              overloaded resource.
     In the P2P approach, clients install a plugin into
              their browser that communicates with similar plugins
installed on other
              clients' browsers, as well as with a distributed directory service. Clients
              cache their recent downloads, and, through the plugin, inform the directory
              service of the objects that are cached. The directory service can then identify
              the most popular content, as well as cached locations and notify additional
              clients of these alternative locations for download. By using client machines
              to store and deliver the hot content and if requests for the given content can
              be redirected to the client machines, the hotspot at the server can be
              eliminated. In this way, hotspot response becomes self-organizing and
              self-regulatory.
    There are several issues that need to be addressed as we
              develop this rescue service. First, we will use
experimentation and analysis
              of collected data (including data sets obtained via a company partnerships)
to
              develop models of causes and effects of network hotspot activity. Next, we will
              analytically evaluate
the effect on server and network load that techniques
              such as caching, redirecting, and migrating have
upon hotspots within the
              network. Last, we will implement and evaluate prototype systems to
              validate
their effectiveness, either upon simulated hotspot activity within a
              testbed, or if possible, on actual hotspots
through agreements with content
              providers.
     Development of the HRS will provide research opportunities to
              multiple students at Columbia, and
its deployment will improve web performance
              of objects served from academic institutions and non-profit
companies whose
              content is to date not hosted by commerical third-party content delivery
              companies.
