Title       : Ito-Volterra Integral Approach to Optimal Filtering and Control of Processes
               with Continuous, Discrete and Delayed Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a0117300

Award Number: 0117300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245476             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mikhail Skliar mikhail.skliar@utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is mostly concerned with the problem of the optimal state
              estimation of continuous systems based on continuous and discrete measurements,
              subject to arbitrary, time-varying and a priori unknown time delays.  The
              sampling rate of discrete measurements is allowed to vary in time in a priori
              unknown way.  The optimal filter equation in this case must be continuous to
              reflect the continuous nature of the process, and to account for continuous
              measurements.  This optimal filter will be subject to discontinuous inputs at
              the moment when discrete measurements become available.
     The innovation of
              the research is that (1) the problem is approached directly as a continuous
              problem with discontinuities without simplifying assumptions, and (2) the most
              general case of time-varying and a priori unknown delays in discrete and
              continuous measurements is studies.  The aims of the proposed research are
              to:
1. Develop the theory of optimal state estimation for continuous systems
              with discrete and continuous measurements;
2. Extend the developed theory for
              the case when sampling rates of the discrete measurements are unknown and time
              varying;
3. Extend the developed theory to include the case when both discrete
              and continuous measurements are subject to arbitrary, time varying and a priori
              unknown time delays;
4. Reduce the general theoretical results of an integral
              approach to practically important cases of state space systems and systems with
              plant and measurement memory;
5. Develop the software that implements the
              developed methods, and
6. Test and compare the developed methods using
              simulation and experimental studies.
Additional objectives are to lay the
              foundation for extending the proposed integral approach for the 
case of
              discontinuities of plant structure and parameters, constraints and inputs; to
              extend the results on nonlinear systems; and to study the application of the
              developed filtering methods to dual control problems.
The research will
              include international and industrial collaboration.

The estimation, based on
              available measurements, of variables characterizing processes and systems
              during their dynamic operation, is the fundamental problem in the variety of
              engineering and science areas.  A special case of the estimation problem when
              it is desirable to estimate variables that are not directly measurable requires
              that we use the model of the process in the estimation procedure.  A particular
              important case of the model-based estimation methods for the case of discrete
              and continuous measurements with time varying and generally unknown delays is
              the subject of the proposed approach.  The method developed during this project
              will be applicable in such areas as state and parameter estimation for
              processes with manual sampling, human-triggered data acquisition and state
              estimation of remote processes with time delays in measurements and actuation
              introduced by non-deterministic properties of the information transport through
              the data network.  The theoretical foundation developed in the course of this
              research will be relevant to practically relevant cases of linear dynamic
              systems with any combination of discrete and continuous measurements subject to
              arbitrary and time-varying time delays.  The extension on the case of
              non-linear systems is also proposed.   

