Title       : Atlantic Ocean Tropical/subtropical Processes from the Seasonal to the Decadal
               Time Scales: Models/Data, Model/Model Comparisons and Model/Data Synthesis
               through Assim
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0117567

Award Number: 0117567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio J. Busalacchi tonyb@essic.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1324,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project builds on previous studies and extend them to the more relevant
              time scales for climate studies, i.e. the interannual to decadal variability of
              tropical/subtropical interaction in the Atlantic ocean. New research avenues
              will be pursued: the degree to which decadal-scale changes in the circulation
              may result from the role of nonlinearities and eddies in determining multiple
              equilibria states versus more slowly evolving surface forced decadal
              oscillations. Two hypotheses will be tested. The first one is that The oceanic
              component of the tropical/subtropical connections in the Atlantic ocean as
              represented by the STCs significantly affects the interannual to decadal
              low-latitude SST variability and hence plays a significant role in climate
              variability. The second one poses that Low-frequency variability in the
              multi-annual and decadal time scales exist in the tropical.subtropical
              wind-driven circulation that are associated with nonlinear eddy processes and
              lead to multiple states characterized by different energetics which produce
              lo-frequency variability in the meridional heat transport. Most studies of the
              variability of tropical/subtropical interactions have focused on the
              deterministic response to surface forcings in the same spectral range. The PI's
              will explore a venue of low-frequency variability to our knowledge never
              investigated before in the tropical ocean, i.e. to assess the possible role of
              internal modes of variability linked to multiple states of the wind-driven
              circulation produced by eddy-mean flow interactions, modes possibly connected
              to the analogous modes of decadal variability already found for the subtropical
              circulation. The approach will use models/data comparisons, model/model
              comparisons, model/data synthesis through data assimilation, coarse resolution
              experiments aimed to address hypothesis I and eddy-resolving experiments aimed
              to address both hypothesis I and II.

