Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing and Modeling Forest Edge Effects and
               Habitat in Tropical Dry Forest of Upland Oaxaca, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0117458

Award Number: 0117458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicky Meretsky meretsky@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5922,9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Forest edges are areas of vulnerability and diversity that are distinct from
              interior forest in structure and function.  The unique characteristics of
              forest-edge vegetation arise due to edge effects such as additional light,
              greater dryness, and increased risk of wind and fire damage.  At broader
              scales, edge effects vary across ecosystems and are frequently associated with
              forest fragmentation, losses in biodiversity, and reduced spatial distribution
              of forest species.  Edge effects in forest ecosystems have been studied
              primarily in tropical wet and temperate forests, but differential distances of
              edge effects are expected to exist for different forest types.  This doctoral
              dissertation research project will develop empirical evidence to test the
              hypothesis that edge effects in tropical dry forest are different from edge
              effects documented in tropical wet forest.  Edge effects in tropical dry forest
              are examined by synthesizing field, remote sensing, and geographic information
              system-based methods to determine the distance of edge influence for vegetation
              surrounding timber harvest clearings, develop methods to identify low-contrast
              edges associated with adjacent forest-management zones with different cutting
              schedules, and link vegetative edge response to bird distributions in a habitat
              model.  The study area is in Oaxaca, Mexico.  The Mexican tropical dry forest
              has a very high level of biodiversity and endemism, but little is known about
              edge influence on the system or the extent of edge influence.  The Mexican
              tropical dry forest is important economically for timber production and other
              natural resources extraction, impacts that are also important from a forest
              management perspective.  The study combines the remote sensing technique of
              spectral mixture analysis with geostatistics to identify and determine the
              distance of edge influence from a clearing to surrounding interior forest and
              to locate low-contrast edges.  Multivariable statistics are used to determine
              relationships between vegetation structure and bird community composition in a
              spatial context.  It is expected that edge effects in a tropical dry forest
              will be more subtle than in other forest types, particularly in the distance of
              edge influence and the actual responses to edge in vegetation and bird
              species.

The results of this project should improve bird habitat inventories
              based on remote sensing, extend current applications of the remote sensing
              technique of spectral mixture analysis, improve understanding of tropical dry
              forest response to disturbance, and contribute to conservation and management
              of tropical dry forest ecosystems.  Overall the project will improve methods
              that quantify land-use change effects on biodiversity by converting maps of
              forest cover to assessments of habitat.  This research will contribute to
              scientific knowledge and reflect societal concerns by increasing the sparse
              understanding of how edges change tropical dry forests, addressing issues of
              forest and habitat loss, and improving the methods used to study forests.  The
              results will be applicable to local management activities because they will
              describe the response of local forest bird populations to edge-affected habitat
              and provide information that is relevant to sustainable forest use and
              management in the study area.  The methods developed for this project to
              determine the extent of edge effects are also expected to be useful to land
              managers in other parts of the world, where inexpensive forest and habitat
              assessments are needed.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
              this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
              a strong independent research career.

