Title       : Biomarker and Isotope Studies of Organic Matter Cycling in the Black Sea: A
               Focus on Bacteria and Archaea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a0117824

Award Number: 0117824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart G. Wakeham stuart@skio.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0117824

The study, a collaboration between Skidaway
              researchers and a group at Texel (NIOZ -Netherlands) will carry out molecular
              biomarker studies of particulate organic matter (POM) and surface sediments of
              the Black Sea in order to delineate the distributions of archaeal and bacterial
              biomarkers, and putatively their source microorganisms. The Black Sea
              environment is chosen to provide a strongly stratified, yet readily sampled,
              bioreactor system that is characteristic of anoxic marine basins, past and
              present. Anaerobic methane oxidation, a globally important but poorly
              understood process in such systems is of considerable interest, given recent
              suggestions that  archael species may be much more common in  oxic and euphotic
              oceanic environments than previously thought.  Membrane lipids, derived from
              the isoprenoid skeletons of  di- and tetraethers, are a diverse group of
              compounds whose presence provides a useful diagnostic for the presence of
              thermophilic, psychrophilic and other groups amongst the Archaea. The
              identification of  which archael groups inhabit what microhabitat (oxic,
              anoxic, hypoxic etc) zones within the water column and underlying sediments is
              likely to be an important key to the interpretation of  other synoptic
              assessments of their microbial ecology, community structure and function. Lipid
              measurements, readily made by modern GC, GC-MS and LC-MS techniques, may
              enhance and extend proposed detailed and exacting genomic probing of these
              complex microbial systems.
Additional insight into carbon cycling and
              preservation in the Black Sea system will be gained from investigation of the
              13C stable isotopic composition of these molecular biological indicators. Such
              measurements are increasingly made possible by compound specific isotopic
              analysis (csia) methods. Broader impacts into the study of organic matter
              cycling in the Black Sea relate to continued definition of the impact of
              archaeal prokaryotes on the earth's biogeochemical cycles, their role in
              consuming sedimentary and water column CH4 (which may otherwise be a very
              important greenhouse gas), use of their lipid biomarkers in reconstructing past
              climate change, and clues to further specification of their exotic cellular and
              enzymic biochemistries.


