Title       : 'Modern Wonders:' Technology In British and German Public Culture, 1890-1945.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a0117994

Award Number: 0117994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59640              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernhard Rieger brieger@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the ways in which public culture promoted
              technological change in Britain and Germany from the late nineteenth century to
              the end of World War II.   While a Visiting Fellow at Churchill College,
              University of Cambridge, Dr. Rieger is gathering archival material for a
              comparative monograph detailing similarities and differences between British
              and German debates about processes of innovation.  This project identifies
              similarities alongside national differences evident in the ways in which public
              discussions about technology worked to create cultural climates conducive to
              innovation in Britain and Germany between the 1890s and the end of World War
              II. In his treatment of how enthusiasm for, and unease about, innovative
              technologies interacted during this period, the principal investigator studies
              the intersecting debates about the following five technologies: aviation,
              passenger shipping, the motor car, photography, and film. Drawing on pictorial
              and textual evidence, this inquiry approaches public debates about
              technological change as productions of knowledge which ascribed meaning to
              artifacts whose workings most contemporaries were unable to understand. Public
              debates about the new "modern wonders" that continually appeared on the scene
              were torn between fears of novel risks and cultural decay on the one side, and
              passionate support generated by
nationalism and social fantasies on the other.
              While investigating the links between public technophobia and euphoria, the
              impact of liberal and illiberal ideologies in Britain and Germany requires
              particular attention in order to uncover the cultural and political mechanisms
              behind the political appropriation of technological innovations.  Thus, this
              comparative study takes the cultural history of British and German technology
              beyond the currently dominant inquiries into productivism or into contemporary
              philosophical debates about "the question of technology" (Friedrich Dessauer).
              Instead, Rieger advances a comprehensive explanation for the
varying reasons
              why British and German public culture promoted technological innovation between
              1890 and 1945.

