Title       : Collaborative Research: Determinants of male reproductive success in natural
               spawns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2002  
File        : a0117623

Award Number: 0117623
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda Goad                              
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335739             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul D. Rawson prawson@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal OCE 0117623
PI - Paul Rawson, University of Maine
Title: 
              Collaborative Research:  Determinants of male reproductive success in natural
              spawns.

Summary:  This proposal is an extension of previous work aimed at
              understanding the effects of reproductive biology on patterns of life history
              evolution in a colonial marine tunicate, Botryllus schlosseri.  The project
              will test five hypotheses about factors that may determine male reproductive
              success in natural spawns of this colonial invertebrate.  The five hypotheses
              specifically aim to explore the effects of timing of sperm release, relatedness
              of mates, population density, and allocation to male function on fertilization
              success in field and experimental populations of Botryllus.  

Previous work
              has shown that there is a narrow temporal window in which fertilization can
              result in a viable embryo,  and there may be a gametic incompatibility system. 
              Furthermore, fertilizing sperm are generally the product of nearby colonies;
              colonies exhibit variation in sperm production, and high levels of sperm
              production only increase local reproductive success when sperm competition
              occurs.

This preliminary information suggests that male reproductive success
              in natural populations is a complex function of timing relative to the
              reproductive cycles of other colonies, gametic compatibility, sperm production,
              and population density.

The proposed research will consist of field and
              laboratory studies, with preliminary work focused to maximize the information
              yield of a suite of nine polymorphic microsatellite loci.  These genetic
              markers will then be used to assay paternity in natural spawns and test the
              series of five hypotheses about the determinants of male reproductive
              success.

