Title       : Mechanisms for Terminating a Neonatal Learning Sensitive Period.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2001    
File        : a0117234

Award Number: 0117234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166719             (Estimated)
Investigator: Regina M. Sullivan rsullivan@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Altricial species, such as humans and rats, have a difficult task at birth: 
              they must be able to identify, remember and prefer their caretaker. This
              attachment is greatly dependent upon perinatal experiences, especially
              learning.  For example, human infants learn their mother's voices, faces and
              odors; rat pups learn their mother's odor, and avian species learn to identify
              the mother visually and/or aurally.  Generally, infants that require perinatal
              learning for attachment exhibit unique learning abilities that have been
              referred to as imprinting, or sensitive period or critical period learning.
              
One consistent aspect of early attachment is that the organism appears to
              have a 
very broad basis for learning an attachment which involves increased
              ability to 
acquire approach responses and a decreased ability to acquire
              aversions (Bowlby, 1965). These unique infant learning capabilities, which
              facilitate attachment, appear throughout the animal kingdom and may have
              evolved to ensure that altricial animals easily form a repertoire of
              proximity-seeking behaviors, regardless of the specific qualities of the
              treatment they receive from the primary caretaker.  However, the sensitive
              periods for attachment must end as animals matures and must learn about the
              environment away from the nest.  
They must now be able to learn to acquire
              approach responses only to special 
stimuli and learn to avoid other stimuli.
              The research proposed in this grant 
will explore the neural mechanisms which
              help an organism make the transition 
from one stage of development to the
              next. While there is some understanding of 
the neural mechanisms that
              underlie the sensitive period, there is very little 
known about what neural
              mechanisms cause the sensitive period to end and begin the next stage of the
              animal's life.  The results of the experiments proposed 
here will begin to
              characterize those physiological events that are involved in 
the termination
              of a sensitive period and the emergence of neural structures for 
the next
              stage of development.
Recent work from this laboratory suggests that
              corticosterone (a neurohormone 
involved in stress and other behaviors) plays
              a critical role in the termination 
of the infant's unique learning abilities.
               Experiments have been proposed that further characterize the role of
              corticosterone in the termination of the sensitive period and assess the
              actions of corticosterone on brain areas important in 
learning: the amygdala,
              hippocampus and locus coeruleus. 	


