Title       : Biological and Cultural Influences on Menopause (Koonenki) in Japan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0117097

Award Number: 0117097
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369183             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol M. Worthman worthman@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia L. Whitten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Margaret Lock's pioneering research on konenki (menopause) in Japan showed that
              menopausal symptoms (i.e., hot flushes, night sweats) may not be universal. 
              Lock and others have proposed that phytoestrogens (estrogenic plant chemicals)
              in soy, consumed in great quantities by Japanese, ameliorate midlife symptoms. 
              This study aims to identify whether and how soy consumption affects the
              menopausal transition. The project will test the following hypotheses:

1A. 
              The menopausal transition will be characterized by highly variable levels of
              estradiol (E2) and the pituitary gonadotropins follicle stimulating hormone
              (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), reflecting dysfunction in the neural
              regulation of gonadal hormones.
1B.  Women with higher phytoestrogen exposure
              will have less variation in FSH and LH.
2A.   Women with more variable E2,
              FSH, and LH will have more frequent or severe midlife symptoms.
2B.   Women
              with higher phytoestrogen exposure will have less frequent or severe midlife
              symptoms.

These hypotheses will be tested in two populations of Japanese
              women, aged 45-55, from Tohoku and Kinki, regions of Japan with the highest and
              lowest soy consumption.  In Year 1, women will be sampled longitudinally for
              E2, FSH, LH, and the phytoestrogens genistein and daidzein using finger prick
              blood spot methods.  Dietary frequency questionnaires, symptom checklists,
              surveys, and interviews will be administered.  Years 2-3 will be devoted to
              analysis and write-up of blood samples, surveys, and ethnographic data.   These
              data will contribute to our understanding of cross-cultural variation in aging
              by enabling modeling of environmental influences on endocrinology and
              experience of the menopausal transition.  

