Title       : A Coupled Modeling and Empirical Approach to the Study of the Life History and
               Physiological Ecology of Cold Seep Vestimentiferans and Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0117050

Award Number: 0117050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Fisher cfisher@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Katriona Shea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A coupled modeling and empirical approach to the study of the life history
              and
physiological ecology of cold seep vestimentiferans and communities.
Seep
              vestimentiferans and their symbionts are primary producers that provide
              complex
habitat structure in a non-toxic setting for a diverse assortment of
              seep-endemic and non-endemic
heterotrophic species. As such, they are arguably
              the most important keystone species
in widespread areas of seepage on the
              continental slope. Recent work has demonstrated that one
species (at least) of
              seep vestimentiferan is extremely long-lived and can support its
              autotrophic
life style with the uptake of dissolved gasses across buried
              portions of its body. Thus, in many
ways, the seep vestimentiferans are
              analogous to long-lived, ecosystem-structuring, woody plant
species in a
              terrestrial environment.
We will develop models to address resource
              acquisition and allocation, life histories, and
community productivity of cold
              seep vestimentiferans that will guide and focus field and
laboratory studies
              of cold seep vestimentiferan communities. We propose to work on the
              upper
Louisiana Slope of the Gulf of Mexico at a depth range of 540 to 1,000m
              and will include
communities on both hard substrata and sediment that are
              exposed to a range of sulfide
concentrations. We will use empirical studies
              and comparative methods to develop, test the
predictions of, and refine,
              Dynamic Energy Budget models, while at the same time addressing
specific
              hypotheses concerning vestimentiferan aggregation physiology and ecology.
Our
              in situ work will be guided by these mathematical models and interfaced with
              very
efficient and quantitative collection methods that will maximize the
              information gleaned from
each collection and provide material for future
              studies, thereby minimizing our short and long-term
impact on the communities.
              Growth rates of thousands of individuals will be measured and
these data used
              to estimate the longevity and to calculate the resources allocated to growth
              by
each vestimentiferan species. We will determine whether "roots" (posterior
              extensions that can
be used to mine sulfide from within sediments) are a
              general feature of seep vestimentiferans and
whether they are environmentally
              induced. The models will be used to explore the relative
importance of root
              sulfide uptake to the sustenance of aggregations in different situations and
              the
implications of vestimentiferan sulfide demand on biogeochemical models of
              sulfide production.
To facilitate this, environmental concentrations of
              sulfide and diffusion distances across root
tubes and tissues will be
              measured, and concentrations and sulfide binding properties of the
hemoglobins
              in the different species will be determined. The biomass, size
              frequency,
distribution, and reproductive state of the vestimentiferans will
              be determined for intact
aggregations and collections processed so that the
              species richness and biomass of all associated
fauna in each collection can
              also be determined. This will allow us to formulate life history
models, to
              scale up the models of individuals to the levels of aggregations, and to model
              excess
production and its use by associated fauna.
Fisher has extensive
              experience with the Gulf of Mexico seep communities and has visited
the sites.
              Shea is a theoretical ecologist with experience in life-history modeling of
              terrestrial
and aquatic autotrophic systems. The proposed approach will
              significantly increase our
understanding of these widespread and productive
              deep-sea communities and their impact on the
surrounding deep sea, and will
              provide a modeling framework to focus related and future
investigations. The
              proposed studies will yield basic insights on the ecology, physiology
              and
reproductive biology of deep-sea systems in general and chemoautotrophic
              systems in particular.
They will also provide new theory, and tests for
              existing theory on the evolution of life history
strategies.

