Title       : Highly Detailed Reconstructions of New England Weather over the Past Few
               Centuries and Their Climatic Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0117376

Award Number: 0117376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326329             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Zielinski gzielinski@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kirk A. Maasch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will enable researchers to reconstruct daily weather conditions for
              New England over the past 300 years by compiling and analyzing written archives
              such as diaries, journals, agricultural records, and marine logs.  These
              archives will be used to reconstruct daily weather maps that will be compared
              with recent climatic conditions.  New England has a large number of lengthy
              weather archives and is a region sensitive to changing climatic conditions. 
              The region is influenced by storm tracks and upper-air disturbances that impact
              the Canadian High, Icelandic Low and the Bermuda-Azores High from
              year-to-year.

Obtaining highly detailed and lengthy records of past climatic
              variability at the regional scale is important to better inform society about
              the range of climatic change in the lives of individuals.  It is also important
              to develop records of past climatic conditions with daily resolution to
              evaluate how the number and magnitude of extreme climatic events (i.e.,
              nor'Easters, hurricanes, tornadoes, and ice storms) have changed with time.  It
              is these extreme events that can greatly affect individuals and
              communities.

The use of the 300-year record from New England and the
              reconstruction of synoptic conditions helps to infer differences in seasonality
              between cold years, warm years, and more common (i.e., normal) years during the
              Little Ice Age.  Instrumental records over approximately the last 100 years
              provide time series for the evaluation of recent changes that may be
              representative of anthropogenically-induced conditions. 

Daily weather
              conditions will be compiled in electronic format and placed on the World Wide
              Web.  These data will be available to the general public, including schools, to
              use when evaluating changes in climate.

