Title       : Nanoscience and Engineering Center: Columbia Center for Electronic Transport in
               Molecular Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0117752

Award Number: 0117752
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10845000           (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Yardley jy307@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1675      NANOSCALE: SCIENCE & ENGIN CTR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1675,1984,5936,9162,9177,9178,9179,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center award to Columbia University is
              co-funded by Divisions of Chemistry (MPS), Materials Research (MPS) and
              International Programs (IN). Columbia University Nanocenter will conduct
              research to establish the foundation for new paradigms for information
              processing through the development of fundamental understanding of charge
              transport phenomena unique to nanoscale molecular structures with special
              emphasis on crystalline organic conductors and carbon nanotube materials.
              Single-molecule structures will be fabricated by the Center through a fusion of
              advanced semiconductor technology and tailored molecular synthesis. The
              research will elucidate the control of charge transport through single
              molecules in terms of the chemical structure and also will examine underlying
              mechanistic questions.  The research program will place strong emphasis on the
              modulation of charge transport through molecules, with the goal of developing a
              molecular transistor.  Scientists from Canada, Germany, Japan and Switzerland
              will collaborate with the Center in solid state surface analysis, single
              crystal growth, and the determination of electron transport properties of
              crystalline nanomaterials.  Nanoscale structures and devices will be fabricated
              and characterized in collaboration with Lucent and IBM research facilities.  In
              addition to electronics, these studies of molecular transport in nanomaterials
              will have potential impact to other disciplines such as photonics, biology,
              neuroscience, and medicine.  Through partnership with Barnard College, City
              College of New York, and Rowan University, the Center will incorporate an
              innovative educational program directed toward a wide variety of students at
              graduate, undergraduate, and high school levels. Educational and outreach
              programs will be designed to attract students to nanotechnology, with
              particular attention to groups, which have been historically underrepresented
              in science.

Columbia University Nanocenter will conduct research to develop
              knowledge of charge transport phenomena unique to nanoscale molecular
              structures such as crystalline organic conductors and carbon nanotube
              materials. Single-molecule structures will be fabricated by the Center to
              elucidate the control of charge transport through single molecules in terms of
              the chemical structure and to examine underlying mechanisms, with the goal of
              developing a molecular transistor. Industrial collaborations with Lucent and
              IBM will be carried out to fabricate and characterize nanoscale structures and
              devices.   In addition to electronics, these studies of molecular transport in
              nanomaterials will have potential impact to other disciplines, such as
              photonics, biology, neuroscience, and medicine.  In collaboration with Barnard
              College, City College of New York, and Rowan University, the Center will
              incorporate an innovative educational program directed toward a wide variety of
              students at graduate, undergraduate and high school levels. Educational and
              outreach programs will be tailored to attract students to nanotechnology, with
              particular attention to groups, which have been historically underrepresented
              in science.

