Title       : Effects of Demography and Genetics on Extinction in Small Populations:
               Experiments with an Exploited Kelp
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2002   
File        : a0117801

Award Number: 0117801
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $736736             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Wootton twootton@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Hudson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Pfister  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The process of species extinction represents both a basic ecological and
              societal concern.  Despite interest in extinction processes, there is little
              empirical information on mechanisms leading to extinction, particularly in
              marine systems, because extinction events involve small population sizes and
              are infrequent. Small population size is thought to increase the risk of
              extinction through several different mechanisms. Ecological mechanisms include
              increased variation in population growth rates due to chance events
              (demographic stochasticity), and positive density dependence (i.e., reduced
              population growth at low density). Genetic mechanisms include loss of favorable
              alleles due to chance events (genetic drift) and inbreeding depression.
              

This project will experimentally disentangle the effects of different
              mechanisms associated with small population size in a commercially-harvested
              marine kelp, the sea palm Postelsia palmaeformis.  To test effects of genetic
              variation, experimental populations will be established from either a single
              founder, multiple founders from the same population, or multiple founders from
              different source populations. The genetic treatment will be combined with a
              density manipulation (large and small populations) to test for ecological
              effects of population size. Experimental populations will be monitored for
              times to extinction, and the underlying processes will be studied in detail by
              marking individual plants and measuring survival, fecundity, and growth rates.
              These data will be incorporated into a population model to determine the
              relative sensitivity of population growth to different effects of small
              population size and to different life stages. Concurrent monitoring of genetic
              structure of the experimental populations using AFLP fingerprinting techniques
              will provide an independent measurement of genetic dynamics and effects on
              population performance, and will validate basic assumptions of the study. The
              study will increase our understanding of the effects of small population size
              on extinction risk, help to characterize the life cycle of marine kelps, and
              provide important information for developing effective conservation and
              remediation strategies for exploited marine species.

