Title       : Bacteria-Phytoplankton Interactions: The Influence of Marine Bacteria on
               Alexandrium spp. Blooms in the Gulf of Maine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0117820

Award Number: 0117820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  2001   
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317883             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juliette N. Rooney-Varga Juliette_Rooneyvarga@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Lowell Res Fdn
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  01854    978/934-4750

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Blooms of the toxic dinoflagellates of the genus Alexandrium have become a
              chronic problem affecting large areas of the Gulf of Maine (GOM) on a
              near-annual basis. These algae are the causative agents of paralytic shellfish
              poisoning, a potentially fatal neurological disorder. Concerns for public
              health have resulted in frequent shellfish quarantines, permanent closure of
              some shellfish beds, and the implementation of costly PSP toxin monitoring
              programs in the GOM. Although considerable effort has been made to determine
              the environmental factors that influence Alexandrium spp. population dynamics
              in the GOM, the factors that control in situ growth and decline of Alexandrium
              populations remain poorly understood. 

Interactions between the marine
              bacteria and toxic phytoplankton are thought to play a major role in
              controlling toxic algal blooms, but their potentially important role
in the
              GOM has received little attention. It is well known that bacteria and
              phytoplankton dynamics are tightly linked in coastal marine environments, with
              strong associations frequently observed between bacterial and phytoplankton
              biomass. In addition, both positive and negative influences of bacteria on
              specific harmful algal bloom (HAB) organisms have been documented. Initial
              research results have indicated GOM bacteria capable of dramatically
              stimulating Alexandrium under laboratory conditions and
that these
              interactions may vary seasonally.  This project will elucidate the role of
              bacteria in Alexandrium spp. population dynamics in the GOM. Several aspects of
              bacteria-Alexandrium interactions will be investigated, including: the seasonal
              and spatial distribution of bacteria that inhibit or promote Alexandrium
              growth; the specificity of bacteria-Alexandrium interactions; and the biotic
              and abiotic factors that influence bacterial community dynamics. Field research
              will be conducted in the southwestern Bay of Fundy with Canadian collaborators.
              In addition,  archived bacterial community samples that were collected from the
              eastern and southwestern GOM in collaboration with the ECOHAB-GOM sampling
              program in 1998 and 2000 will be analyzed to determine the geographic
              distribution of specific bacteria found to interact with Alexandrium. Close
              collaboration with the ECOHAB-GOM team and the DFO HAB program will provide an
              extensive array of data and access to research vessels. Experimental methods to
              analyze bacteria-Alexandrium interactions will include: (1) molecular
              phylogenetic (PCR-DGGE and MPN-PCR) and cultivation-based analysis of the
              seasonal and geographic distribution of bacterial assemblages that inhibit or
              promote Alexandrium; (2) enrichment and isolation of novel bacterial strains
              that interact closely with Alexandrium; (3) analysis of the influence of
              Alexandrium- promoting or Alexandrium-inhibiting bacteria on other algal
              species present in the GOM; and (4) analysis of the isolates' influence on
              Alexandrium growth in mixed cultures.  The study will provide insight into
              interactions between Alexandrium and bacteria in the GOM and may ultimately
              improve our ability to simulate and predict Alexandrium dynamics within a given
              body of water. This research will determine whether certain bacterial
              assemblages are associated with Alexandrium spp. in the GOM and will also
              explore Alexandrium -bacteria interactions that may promote or inhibit
              Alexandrium growth.

