Title       : Making Dysarthric Speech Intelligible
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0117911

Award Number: 0117911
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $999620             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan P. van Santen   (Principal Investigator current)
              John-Paul Hosom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 6846      UNIVERSAL ACCESS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              

Making Dysarthric Speech Intelligible



This is the first year funding
              of a three year continuing award. Of the 2.5 million or more adult Americans
              with significant disability due to chronic neurologic impairment, a large
              percentage present with dysarthria, or speech impairment, as one of their
              disabling conditions, and there are no known cures.    Dysarthric individuals
              report loss of employment, educational opportunities, social integration, and
              quality of life.  Despite some strategies for compensating, the isolation
              caused by  communication impairment is pervasive.   In this project, the PI
              will develop new algorithms that, when implemented in wearable devices, will
              enable dysarthric individuals to be more easily understood.   Currently
              available devices are essentially (digital or analog) spectral filters and
              amplifiers that enhance certain parts of the spectrum.   While these can help
              certain types of dysarthria, many dysarthric persons suffer from speech
              problems that require forms of speech modification that are much more profound
              and complex such as:  irregular sub-glottal pressure, resulting in loudness
              bursts that can be difficult to adjust to; absence, or poor control, of
              voicing;  systematic mispronunciation of certain phoneme groups, resulting in
              certain sounds becoming indistinguishable or unrecognizable;   variable
              mispronunciation;  and poor prosody (pitch control, timing, and loudness).  
              For these difficult problems, new approaches are needed that do not merely
              filter the speech signal but analyze it at acoustic, articulatory, phonetic,
              and linguistic levels.   These approaches can be combined to generate an output
              speech signal that, while preserving certain features of the input speech,
              modifies the input speech along as many dimensions as is needed to achieve
              intelligibility.   The past decade has seen a revolution in speech technology
              that can be applied to these problems;  while little of the currently developed
              technologies are in their present form applicable to dysarthria, the underlying
              algorithms can form a basis for the creation of innovative techniques that are
              specifically targeted to address these more difficult speech problems.  The PI
              will create these technologies in a diagnostic framework, so that the
              appropriate technology is used for a given type of dysarthria.  The results
              will be of great value for dysarthric individuals;   the scientific challenges
              are formidable, and meeting them will produce insights that will be broadly
              useful for other speech technologies as well.

