Title       : Ecological and Geographic Scaling of Bioenergetic Adaptation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0117754

Award Number: 0117754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $433653             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ward B. Watt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      PO 519
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              IBN-0117754, Ward Watt

Spatial patterns of inherited variation in natural
              populations can give important clues to the means by which living creatures
              adapt to their habitats. But patterns alone can result from different causes
              (e.g., natural selection by local conditions, migration patterns of organisms
              with different traits, historical artifacts, etc.).  This study attempts to
              elucidate causes of an interesting pattern of variation in which, despite
              extensive migration among habitats, groups of individuals living in adjacent
              habitat types are less similar to each other than they are to groups living in
              a similar habitat types hundreds of kilometers away.  This research will focus
              on in the insect genus, Colias, and will focus on variation in a key enzyme in
              the energy-processing system that supports the insects' flight in the wild,
              phosphoglucose isomerase (PGI).  Extensive previous work on selection and
              energetics on Colias in the wild and the insect's distribution patterns in
              montane areas make it an ideal system for addressing these questions.

The
              investigators will test several alternative plausible explanations for this
              phenomenon, examining the multiple potential causes of geographical variation
              in organismal traits.  These tests will include studies of the mechanistic
              links between variation in molecular structure of enzymes, enzyme function,
              organismal performance, and other factors that influence population genetics.
              The results will illuminate the relationship between local adaptations to
              habitat and more general and longer-term questions of how adaptive
              specialization varies among species and how different kinds of organisms may or
              may not adapt to common environmental stresses in the same or parallel ways.
              They will also help inform important issues in the genetics of conservation,
              the genetics of agriculture, and the biological impacts of potential global
              change as manifested in changes of local habitat types.

