Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Pollen Dispersal and Deposition on Tropical
               Andean Ice Caps: Quelccaya, Peru, and Nevada Sajama, Bolivia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0117338

Award Number: 0117338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9905               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kam-biu Liu kliu1@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,5926,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Recent developments in the new science of tropical ice-core palynology have
              demonstrated that the fossil pollen found in ice cores drawn from alpine
              glaciers and polar ice caps can provide sensitive records of past vegetational
              and climatic changes.  To date, however, this science has been done in tropical
              alpine environments without the full understanding of pollen dispersal and
              depositional characteristics; a key factor for a reliable and accurate
              interpretation of ice-core palynological records.  This doctoral dissertation
              research project will study the patterns and processes of pollen dispersal and
              deposition on the tropical Andean ice caps of Quelccaya in Peru and Nevada
              Sajama in Bolivia.  This project will analyze the modern pollen found on the
              ice caps themselves and in the surrounding vegetation zones.  Aside from the
              ice caps, pollen surface samples will be collected from the major vegetation
              zones in the central Andes as well as from the subalpine and lowland zones to
              the west (extending to the Pacific Ocean) and east (into the Amazon lowlands). 
              A biogeographical surface pollen study will help address questions of dispersal
              patterns, pollen provenance, regional pollen-rain signatures, sensitivity of
              the ice-core pollen records, and how each of these factors are reflected in the
              distribution and assemblages of pollen found on the ice caps.

This project
              will advance fundamental understandings in the rapidly growing field of
              ice-core palynology.  It will provide new insights into vegetation change in
              and near the central Andes, thereby complementing data from other sources that
              is examining environmental change in the region.  The project will further the
              effectiveness of future pollen studies in the central Andes by broadening
              knowledge about modern relationships among pollen, vegetation, and climate in
              the region, thus laying the groundwork for the derivation of pollen-climate
              transfer functions and response surfaces.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
              Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
              student to establish a strong independent research career.

