Title       : Collaborative Research: Centennial-to-Millennial-Scale Climatic Fluctuations in
               Northeast Siberia during the Last Glacial Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0117220

Award Number: 0117220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54844              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly J. Johnson bjohnso3@bates.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bates College
	      
	      Lewiston, ME  04240    207/786-6093

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Studies of Earth's history show that climate is capable of changing rapidly
              (within a few years or decades) and dramatically (from glacial to interglacial
              conditions).  The response of the Earth's ecosystems to such global-scale
              changes can be spatially complex.  Paleoclimatic fluctuations are evident
              during the last glacial cycle (~12,000 and 110,000 years ago) when temperatures
              were generally cooler than present and were interrupted by 24 warm events
              during which temperature ranged from 15-20 degrees C. 

Understanding the
              mechanisms and timing of such environmental change is particularly important
              for the Arctic, a region particularly sensitive to climate variability. 
              Historically, data from the Greenland ice sheet has been the foundation for
              paleoclimatic reconstruction for the region.  Still lacking, however, is an
              understanding of how northern ecosystems have responded to changes in
              climate.

This research will address this knowledge gap by providing the
              first continuous, high-resolution, multi-proxy record of paleovegetational and
              paleoclimatic change from the Arctic for the period ~22,000 to 50,000 years
              ago.  A sediment core from Elikchan Lake in northeast Siberia will be recovered
              and analyzed for pollen and diatom remains as well as sediment geochemistry
              with sufficient temporal control to be compared to climate trends found in ice
              cores.  

These new data will be used to define the number, magnitude, and
              timing of climatic fluctuations to assess the similarities and differences in
              the climate histories between the eastern (North Atlantic) and western
              (northeast Siberia) Arctic.  Specifically, the research will: 1) evaluate
              computer simulations of past temperature in northern Asia as related to
              climatic and oceanic changes in the North Atlantic region; 2) explore the role
              of Siberia in transmitting climatic fluctuations originating in the North
              Atlantic to the North Pacific; and 3) examine the range of ecosystem responses
              to various climatic conditions and the potential importance of biofeedback to
              the climate system (e.g., whether changes in the distribution of boreal
              forests, a major methane source, can affect levels of methane in the
              atmosphere).

