Title       : Collaborative Research in Chemistry (CRC): Laboratory for Molecular Sciences
               (LMS): Caltech's Multi-Disciplinary Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a0117850

Award Number: 0117850
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmed H. Zewail zewail@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1991      Chemistry Projects
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Division of Chemistry supports the research of Professor
              Ahmed Zewail and colleagues at the California Institute of Technology for
              continuation of a program of research at the Laboratory for Molecular Science
              (LMS). The LMS is a multidisciplinary research laboratory for studying
              fundamental processes in complex molecular systems with atomic scale resolution
              in both structure and dynamics.  The development of time-resolved diffraction
              and imaging methods represents a major focus for examining structures and their
              changes with time, both experimentally and theoretically.  The research program
              at the LMS involves several members of the Cal Tech faculty who will
              collaborate to examine chemical and biological systems exhibiting a wide range
              of complexity.  These faculty come from several disciplinary departments, such
              as chemistry, physics, biology, and engineering.  The Laboratory is equipped
              with state-of-the-art ultrafast lasers, high-speed computers, biochemical and
              electrochemical instrumentation, and mass spectrometry.  Research topics to be
              examined include molecular recognition, macromolecular transient structural
              changes, electrochemical catalysis, nanostructures, and imaging by optical
              tweezers.

Over the last two decades great strides have been made in
              attaining both spatial and temporal resolution of chemical systems down to the
              atomic scale.  This capability has provided new opportunities for studying
              molecular structure and dynamics in many disciplines.  From the elementary
              dynamics of reactions and protein folding to the dynamics of molecular
              assemblies and condensed phases, theory and experiment at the fundamental scale
              of atomic resolution provides the key to understanding molecular function and
              materials properties.  The field of molecular sciences is in the midst of a
              revolution, especially at the interface between chemistry and biology, where
              new experimental tools, such as those being developed and used at the LMS, are
              used to elucidate the structure and dynamics of complex molecular systems.

