Title       : Assessment/Completion of the NEES Experimental Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2001      
File        : a0117935

Award Number: 0117935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joy Pauschke                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frieder Seible seible@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott A. Ashford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmed-W. M. Elgamal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andre Filiatrault  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1644      NETWK FOR ERTHQUKE ENG SIMULAT
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CMS 0117935
Seible

This award provides funding to the University
              of California, San Diego to conduct a national earthquake engineering research
              equipment workshop for the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake
              Engineering Simulation (NEES).  NEES is a project funded under the National
              Science Foundation (NSF) Major Research Equipment program and has been
              authorized by Congress for $81.9 million during FY 2000-FY 2004. In February
              2001, NSF announced the NEES Earthquake Engineering Research Equipment
              Portfolio, Phase 1, consisting of eleven awards to ten institutions for $45
              million.  These eleven awards include new and upgraded shake tables, upgraded
              centrifuges, an upgraded wave basin for tsunami research, large-scale
              laboratory experimentation systems, and geotechnical and structural earthquake
              engineering field equipment. These equipment sites will be part of the NEES
              collaboratory and serve as national, shared-use earthquake engineering
              experimental research equipment installations, with teleobservation and
              teleoperation capabilities, networked together through the high performance
              Internet.  In addition to providing access for telepresence at the NEES
              equipment sites, the network will use cutting-edge tools to link high
              performance computational and data storage facilities, including a curated
              repository for experimental and analytical earthquake engineering and related
              data. The network will also provide distributed physical and numerical
              simulation capabilities and resources for visualization of experimental and
              computed data. Through NEES, the earthquake engineering community will use
              these advanced experimental capabilities to test and validate more complex and
              comprehensive analytical and computer numerical models that will improve the
              seismic design and performance of our Nation's civil and mechanical systems.
              NSF intends to issue a Phase 2 program solicitation during 2001 to complete the
              NEES Equipment Portfolio.  The purpose of this workshop is to bring the
              earthquake engineering community together to (a) summarize the NEES Equipment
              Portfolio, Phase 1, (b) assess other existing earthquake engineering
              facilities/equipment available in the United States, (c) identify possible
              missing components of the NEES Equipment Portfolio, Phase 1, and (d) recommend
              strategies to complete the NEES Equipment Portfolio during Phase 2.    The
              earthquake engineering community can participate in this workshop via input on
              the web prior to the workshop and/or through attendance at the workshop.  A
              report summarizing the recommendations from this workshop will be posted on the
              web for broad dissemination.

