Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biotic and Abiotic Variability Across
               Forest-Field Edges in Southern Sweden: Effects of Management and Acidic
               Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0117202

Award Number: 0117202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan W. Beatty susan.beatty@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The boundaries between community types, which are rich sources of spatial
              heterogeneity, are related to a wide variety of biotic and abiotic edge
              effects.  The prevalence of boundaries in modern landscapes emphasizes the need
              to understand their ecological function.  In order to understand boundary
              function, improved knowledge is needed regarding how environmental factors and
              vegetation vary under human influence and across multiple scales.  Measuring
              and understanding multi-scale influences is a significant challenge in many
              fields.  This doctoral dissertation research project focuses on evaluating the
              relative influence of aspect (local scale), management regime (landscape
              scale), and atmospheric deposition (regional scale) on the character of
              forest-field edges in southern Sweden.  More intensive management, especially
              increased fertilizer application, and greater atmospheric deposition have
              increased soil acidity and nitrogen availability in northern Europe's forest
              and grassland communities, which generally are quite nutrient-poor.  These
              trends have led to marked changes in species composition and declines in plant
              diversity.  Such interactions have likely been intensified across forest-field
              edges because of their ecological function as 'sinks' (areas where matter has
              accumulated).  This project study will evaluate the general hypothesis that the
              biotic edge is directly related to abiotic controls and conditions that vary
              with respect to location and management regime.  Specific objectives of this
              study are to determine abiotic and biotic variation across forest-field edges,
              to assess relationships between abiotic and biotic variables, and to identify
              edge characteristics and functions that differ with respect to location at the
              local, landscape, and regional scale.  The study will be conducted in the
              southwest and east-central regions of Sweden.  Locations of sampling sites
              reflect the regional gradient from high to low deposition.  In each region,
              replicate sites will be located under each of two management regimes: 
              traditional (non-fertilized) and intensively managed (fertilized) meadows.  For
              each management regime, replicate sites will be sampled across a
              southwest-facing and a northeast-facing edge.  Field research will consist of
              sampling vegetation and environmental characteristics (such as air and soil
              temperature, relative humidity, soil pH, and soil moisture tension) along
              forest-field edge gradients.  Soil samples will be collected at a sub-set of
              sites for laboratory analyses.

The results of this project will have both
              theoretical and management implications.  Despite its often-cited importance,
              multi-scale complexity across edges is not well understood.  The project will
              explore a method for measuring and quantitatively examining the relative
              influence of processes operating at different scales across landscape
              boundaries.  Results therefore will provide scientists and resource managers
              with important insights regarding the relationship between regional- and
              local-scale processes in a culturally fragmented landscape.  In addition, by
              examining change in microclimate, soil conditions, and vegetation across
              forest-field edges under varying rates of acidic deposition and fertilization,
              a better understanding can be gained of how boundaries function under
              human-induced environmental change.  Such environmental changes may have a
              direct effect on forestry, agriculture, water quality, and biodiversity. 
              Findings from this study therefore can be used in land-use planning and
              environmental policy formation.  The project should provide empirical support
              for the nature of forest-field boundaries in northern Europe as well as provide
              information about anthropogenic effects at multiple scales.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

