Title       : US-Bangladesh Cooperative Research Basin-Wide Stratigraphy of Cenozoic Sequences
               in the Bengal Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0117405

Award Number: 0117405
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashraf Uddin uddinas@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,5989,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0117405
Uddin

Description:  This project is to support a cooperative
              research project by Dr. Ashraf Uddin, Department of Geology, Auburn University,
              Auburn, Alabama and Dr. M. Mustafa Alam, Department of Geology, University of
              Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh.  These scientists plan to conduct field research and
              to collect representative sediment samples in order to investigate Eocene
              through Quaternary sequences of the Bengal basin for mineralogical and
              geochronological evidence for basin-wide correlation and of the tectonic
              history of the adjacent mountain belts.  They will identify techniques with the
              best potential for constraining basin-wide correlation.  The techniques will
              include fission-track analysis of materials, magentostratigraphic study on
              several sections, and heavy-mineral studies.  The resulting stratigraphic
              framework will be used to evaluate the Bengal basin history, with implications
              for both petroleum potential and a valuable record of the ongoing continental
              collision.

Scope: Dr. Ashraf Uddin is a recent Ph.D. graduate who has made
              significant research on the sedimentology of the Himalayan-Bengal basin
              evolutionary history.  In this project he will be collaborating with several
              senior scholars with extensive experience in some of the techniques to be used.
               One is Neil Opdyke, who will be working on the magnetostratigraphy, and who
              has also used this worked on the western Himalayas study.  Another is John
              Garver, who will supervise the fission-track analysis, has extensive, recent
              experience in the rather complicated area of fission-track analysis that
              relates detrital grain ages to source terranes.  One US graduate student from
              the University of Alabama and at least one from the University of Dhaka will
              also participate in this research and will gain experience in international
              scientific collaboration.  The Department of Geology at the U. of Dhaka will
              provide facilities and support for the project.  The project will benefit from
              the complementary expertise and facilities available to the two sides.  This
              project meets INT criteria for supporting meritorious collaborative research of
              mutual benefit to the US and the foreign country.  This project is funded by
              the Division of International Programs and the Division of Earth Sciences.
