Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Opening Humanitarian Space in Sri Lanka
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0117822

Award Number: 0117822
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9915               (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Roberts geg207@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Although not widely publicized in the United States, children have been used in
              a variety of ways by protagonists in a broad range of armed conflicts around
              the world.  In some cases, they have been trained to carry arms and engage in
              fighting.  In other settings, they have been used to help supply and support
              armed troops, or they have been used as buffers to provide protection for
              military units.  Furthermore, even if not directly involved in the fighting,
              children have been adversely affected by conflicts, as schools often cease to
              function and health risks increase dramatically.  To address these problems,
              the United Nations and many other organizations have tried to implement
              policies and take actions that will reduce the risks of armed conflict to
              children.  The doctoral dissertation research improvement project will
              investigate relationships between the category of childhood and the production
              of humanitarian space during the Sri Lankan civil war.  Six humanitarian
              cease-fires established between 1995 and 2000 and an anticipated seventh
              cease-fire scheduled for September and October 2001 will be analyzed.  This
              study will examine the specific qualities associated with children and
              childhood in the production of humanitarian space as well as the role of
              children in opening and stabilizing space in the violently contested territory
              of Sri Lanka.  Using a variety of ethnographic techniques, such as participant
              observation, semi-structured interview, and document compilation, an archive
              will be constructed that includes a chronicle of events and sites related to
              the cease-fires, the identification of key actors, organizational
              interrelationships and decision-making structures, and an inventory of relevant
              policy texts.  Analyses of this archive will include the identification and
              comparison of "geographs" (geopolitical descriptions involving children, policy
              strategies and events affecting the cease-fires) and consideration of how
              cease-fire policy is related to the specific case of contested territory in Sri
              Lanka.

This research will contribute to the growing literature on state
              sovereignty and the continued interrogation of state-centric concepts found
              within political geographic and international relations discourses.  By
              examining the political significance of conceptions of children in modern life
              and a spatial analysis of the child's role in geopolitical events, this project
              will contribute to scholarship on children and geography, and it will enhance
              understandings of children in cross-cultural perspective.  The project will
              provide original material on the initial aspects of the construction of
              humanitarian space, particularly as a space of diverse organizational
              interrelations and the goals set by individual actors and in combination.  The
              database established through this project will provide a basis from which to
              theorize about humanitarian space and address debates involving sovereignty and
              humanitarian actions, transnational relations, and complex emergencies from
              both a geographic and an international relations perspective.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

