Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Miskitu Governance and Forestry in Alamikamba,
               Nicaragua
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0117811

Award Number: 0117811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9985               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Knapp gwk@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 5209,5926,9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In many parts of the world, changes in economic activity associated with the
              continued growth and interconnection of global markets have had profound
              impacts on local residents.  For some groups of people, globally oriented
              economic activity has created new opportunities; for others, the forces of
              change have been adverse.  In nearly every case, changing economic systems have
              been accompanied by changes in the social, cultural, and political milieu
              within which the groups have operated.  This doctoral dissertation research
              project will examine the resiliency and change in a Miskitu logging village in
              the North Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAN) of Nicaragua as it engages in
              increasing rates of harvesting for the global lumber market.  While Nicaragua
              has some of the most advanced indigenous self-determination legislation in the
              Americas, violations of cultural and land rights remain commonplace due to the
              institutional, economic, ecological, and political landscape.  As in numerous
              other locations, increasing multinational extraction and processes of political
              decentralization have resulted in extensive shifts in socially and politically
              constructed identities at multiple scales.  This research will investigate the
              structure and function of municipal, regional, national, and global
              institutions that influence lumber extraction from the village of Alamikamba. 
              At the core of this investigation will be the village Elder Council, a
              traditional but dynamic institution for resource management.  Some local actors
              recently became conduits through which multinational companies expand forest
              extraction from communal indigenous land, while other community members opposed
              these same forces.  While sensitive to heterogeneity within Alamikamba, this
              study questions prevailing academic assumptions that decentralized decision
              making inherently fosters empowerment and local control.  To achieve this goal,
              this project will combine archival, survey, interview, ethnographic (field
              walks, oral histories, participant observation), and community mapping
              methods.

Documentation of the Elder Council and wider village
              decision-making processes will amplify understanding of indigenous
              self-governance and community-based forest management, including the
              administration of common property land and resources.  The comparison of
              Nicaragua with other decentralizing, multiethnic countries in the hemisphere,
              such as Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Mexico, and Panama, will provide valuable
              contributions to development and resource management theory.  Through the
              examination of a village on the forest extraction frontier, which is similar to
              many other internal colonization fronts in Latin America, the research will
              demonstrate processes of transition in decision-making, power, and governance
              that broadly influence the local ecology and indigenous cultures.  By analyzing
              the devolution of environmental management authority, this project will further
              strengthen networks between geography and related fields such as political
              science, policy studies, development studies, and rural sociology.  As a
              Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
              support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
              research career.

