Title       : New Directions in the Earth Sciences and the Humanities: Implementing Wide
               Interdisciplinarity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2002  
File        : a0117000

Award Number: 0117000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86685              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Frodeman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The PI will convene, in February and again in August of 2002, a paired
              workshop-conference devoted to developing wide interdisciplinary approaches to
              environmental issues of broad public concern. This "New Directions" research
              conference will have a two-part invitational workshop and public conference
              structure. This structure will enable (1) transcending disciplinary limitations
              in addressing environmental issues, and (2) stimulating long-term
              interdisciplinary
research partnerships for tackling such issues. Together,
              the two meetings will break new ground in both the theoretical and practical
              aspects of interdisciplinary environmental research and education. The goals of
              this workshop and conference are: (a) to devise ways to more effectively
              situate scientific knowledge within society; (b) to bring the powerful
              resources of the humanities better to bear on societal questions; and (c) to
              create enduring partnerships across the disciplines, and between the broadest
              array of researchers and educators of all types and the public and private
              realms, in order to more successfully address environmental challenges.  The
              February 2002 workshop will consist of 20-25 invited participants representing
              a wide range of perspectives: the Earth sciences, the humanities,
              humanistic-oriented social sciences, the corporate sector, and community
              groups. The August 2002 public conference will consist of the workshop
              participants, plus a larger group (of similarly wide background) who have
              responded to a call for papers on the theme of developing interdisciplinary,
              topical approaches to environmental challenges. The February workshop will
              launch a six-month period of collaboration across the disciplines and between
              knowledge producers and representatives of the public and private sector,
              helping to ensure that the August conference has the maximum possible effect.
              The overall goal of the paired meetings is to improve  society's ability at
              bringing the insights of academic research to bear upon societal (especially
              environmental) problems, to devise ways to redirect the work of knowledge
              producers so that their research and scholarship is more pertinent to society. 
              


