Title       : Making it Easier to Interact with Technology Through Handheld Personal Universal
               Controllers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0117658

Award Number: 0117658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $505867             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brad A. Myers bam@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              


Making it Easier to Interact with Technology through Handheld
              Personal
Universal Controllers



This is a standard award.   In this
              project the PI will investigate how a hand-held computer exploiting wireless
              communications technologies can be used as a Personal Universal Controller
              (PUC) to control all kinds of home, office and factory equipment.   When users
              point their PUC at a light switch, at a photocopier in an office, at a machine
              tool in a factory, at a VCR at home, at a piece of test equipment in the field,
              or at almost any other kind of device, the device will send to the hand-held a
              description of its control parameters.  The PUC will use this information to
              create an appropriate control panel, taking into account the properties of the
              controls that are needed, the properties of the hand-held (the display type and
              input techniques available), and the properties of the user (what language is
              preferred, whether left or right handed, how big the buttons should be based on
              whether the user prefers using a finger or a stylus).   The user can then
              control the device using the PUC.   The device will not need to dedicate much
              processing power, hardware, or cost to the user interface, since it will only
              need to contain a description of its capabilities and storage for the current
              settings, along with hardware for wireless communication.   PUC programs will
              use intelligent "model-based" techniques to create useful and appropriate
              interfaces that are customized for each user.   The PI's preliminary research
              suggests that an interface on a hand-held can be significantly better than the
              interface supplied by the manufacturer, so the PUC should enable people to make
              more effective use of their equipment, as well as making it practical to add
              intelligence to a broader range of appliances.   The PUC can also facilitate
              access for people with disabilities, since the interfaces will be customized to
              the individual's preferences and needs.   But this research will have benefits
              beyond just remote control devices for appliances, in that it will help further
              the cause of separating the user interface from the application code, which has
              been a basic goal of user interface software research from the beginning.


