Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impacts of Religious Organizations on the
               Livelihood of Rural People in Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0117611

Award Number: 0117611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Bebbington Anthony.Bebbington@Colorado.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 5926,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In many parts of the world, religious organizations provide an important set of
              support and services for local residents.  This doctoral dissertation research
              project will examine the impact of religious organizations on livelihoods in
              predominantly Quechua communities of the central and southern Andes of Peru. 
              The project will evaluate how religious organizations, such as churches,
              missionary groups, and humanitarian organizations, influence the ways that
              rural Peruvians have secured beneficial livelihoods in the wake of the struggle
              between the Peruvian state and the Shining Path revolutionary movement.  The
              theoretical underpinnings of this project suggest that social organizations
              play an important role in determining how "development" will occur.  Further,
              the outcomes of development interventions will vary according to the
              compositions, beliefs, and experiences embodied by different forms of social
              organization.  Existing research has explored how state-run development
              agencies, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and social movements impact
              the livelihoods of specific populations in distinct ways.  This project seeks
              to contribute to these discussions by examining another influential form of
              organization, that of religion, and its impacts on livelihood.  To do so, the
              project focuses on three central questions:  (1) How do the religious
              organizations in these communities impact access to social, material and
              political resources?  (2) How does religious affiliation shape the ways that
              individuals identify themselves and their neighbors, and with what
              consequences?  (3) How do contemporary religious organizations interact with
              and intervene in other governing structures, such as local government or
              informal community groups?  Data will be collected through archival research,
              interviews, and participant observation in two Quechua communities that were
              directly affected by the violence that occurred throughout the southern and
              central Andes through the 1980s and early 1990s.  These data will be analyzed
              and compared through textual and narrative analysis to construct a local
              history of livelihood intervention by religious organizations, to determine how
              the most recent forms of intervention have affected local households and
              individuals, and to decipher the different avenues contemporary religious
              organizations have used to shape how individuals secure a livelihood. 
              Comparison of the two communities, one which has seen high levels of
              development intervention by religious organizations and one which has not, will
              provide an opportunity to understand how religious-sponsored intervention
              differs from secular intervention.

This research will address the need to
              conduct analytically and theoretically rigorous inquiry into the relationships
              between religion and livelihoods in regions that have experienced violent
              conflict.  The centralized position of NGOs in development, combined with the
              rise of liberation theology throughout the 1970s, created space for a new phase
              of indirect and direct intervention by religious organizations in the
              livelihood of the world's poor.  This space was extended throughout the1980s
              and 1990s when religious-sponsored organizations and their members often were
              the only groups able to intervene on behalf of humanitarian needs during
              violent conflict.  Through increased intervention, the flow of capital between
              religious groups in developed and developing nations has increased as
              missionary activities incorporate livelihood concerns.  The project is
              especially timely given the increasing conversion of Latin Americans from
              Catholic to Protestant faiths, a trend that some researchers argue alters
              social networks in significant and varied ways.  The outcomes of this project
              will suggest different models for examining the role of religion in development
              and situations of conflict.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
              award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
              establish a strong independent research career.

