Title       : Workshop: Skeletal Biology, Health, and Economic Development, Ohio State
               University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2002     
File        : a0117958

Award Number: 0117958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Steckel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Clark S. Larsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul W. Sciulli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip L. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project organizes efforts to study patterns of human health in Europe over
              the past several millennia using skeletal remains, which are the most complete
              and useful source of information about the distant past, containing information
              on nutrition and physical growth during childhood as well as processes of
              degeneration associated with aging, including dental decay and degenerative
              joint disease.  Health and nutrition were driving forces in social, political
              and economic change that ultimately contributed to the rise and fall of
              civilizations.  Research on prehistoric and historic skeletons also advances
              understanding of various modern medical problems because numerous modern
              diseases evolved with humans, adapting to people living in proximity to one
              another and to animals in a wide variety of ecological environments. 

The
              workshop will bring 20 to 25 scholars to Ohio State University, including
              physical anthropologists, archaeologists, economists, climate historians and
              historians.  They will plan a research agenda by first discussing details of
              preparing a large database that documents the long-term evolution of health in
              Europe.  They will also formulate a plan for integrating and skeletal
              information with climatic, ecological, archaeological and historical data in
              the study of health patterns and their determinants.  Europe is chosen as a
              starting point as it has the richest source of other historical information. 
              

These efforts will lead to submission of a large grant proposal that will
              provide funding to actually conduct the research.  The research results will be
              distributed to the public through books, journal publications, conferences, and
              via the Internet.

