Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Paleo-Environmental History of San Francisco Bay
               Estuary Using Stable Carbon Isotopes and Pollen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0117531

Award Number: 0117531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9850               (Estimated)
Investigator: B Lynn Ingram ingram@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Growing interest in understanding the processes of environmental change have
              highlighted the need for deeper understanding of complex interactions among
              different natural and human systems in critical regions and localities.  This
              doctoral dissertation research  project aims to produce a history of
              environmental change in the San Francisco Bay Estuary using stable carbon
              isotopes, fossil pollen, sediment analysis and carbon-14 dating spanning the
              last 2,000 to 3,000 years.  This research has two distinct but interrelated
              primary objectives:  (1) to elucidate the history of environmental change in
              the Bay Estuary; and (2) to test and elaborate models of vegetation responses
              to environmental change which are based on modern distributions.  The spatial
              distribution of marsh plant species in the San Francisco Estuary is primarily
              determined by salinity, with other physical and biological factors of lesser
              importance.  A series of sediment cores have been recovered from four marsh
              sites selected along a salinity gradient extending from the western edge of San
              Pablo Bay (highest salinity) to the eastern edge of Suisun Bay (near fresh
              water conditions).  The carbon isotopic composition (13C/12C) of organic carbon
              in marsh sediments is a direct reflection of the source plants, with only
              slight changes over time due to decomposition.  The two salt marsh grasses,
              Distichlis spicata and Spartina foliosa, operate with the C4-type
              photosynthetic pathway, with distinct carbon isotope signatures.  The ability
              to distinguish these C4 grass species in the sediment record is an important
              complement to pollen analysis, as grass pollen is indistinguishable below the
              family level.  Records produced in this research will be compared with other
              published records of paleosalinity in the estuary, which have revealed
              alternating periods of increased and decreased water salinity (relative to the
              present) during the late Holocene.  This comparison will ascertain the degree
              to which temporal distributions of plant species at specific sites are
              analogous to modern spatial distributions.  The record of vegetation change
              from marshes can then be used to expand the record of environmental change. 
              Preliminary results from two marsh sites in this research indicate that the
              plant assemblages have responded consistently to past changes in estuarine
              salinity.  An important part of this research will be to determine what natural
              process (including tectonic activity, sea level rise or climate variation) was
              dominant in causing changes detected in the sediment records.  A strategy that
              establishes high-resolution chronologies from several sites will be used.  The
              sites must be carefully selected relative to tectonic faults and compared not
              only for timing of vegetation changes, but also for sedimentation rates. 
              Integral to this approach will be comprehensive dating of the sediment cores,
              employing both radiocarbon dating and lead-210 dating.

This project will
              result in records that are important and relevant because present knowledge
              about rates of long-term fresh water inflow, salinity variability, and
              vegetation responses in the San Francisco Bay Estuary is limited.  Earlier
              published studies of Estuarine paleosalinity are chronologically incomplete and
              do not include vegetation responses.  Successful application of combining these
              methods in the San Francisco Estuary can be transferred to other estuarine
              settings.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
              also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
              independent research career.

