Title       : Toward an Understanding of Stone Tool Variability: An Ethnoarchaeological Study
               of the Konso Hide Workers of Southern Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2002  
File        : a0117318

Award Number: 0117318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182295             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn J. Weedman katman@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Brandt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
With National Science Foundation support Dr. Kathryn Weedman and her
              colleagues will conduct two field seasons of ethnographic and archaeological
              research in southern Ethiopia among the Konso, who are one of the few people in
              the world to continue to make and use stone tools. Their goal is to investigate
              the meaning behind stone tool variation, which has been a source of great
              archaeological interest for over 100 years, and as a result there are multiple
              explanations for this diversity based on inferential methods, ethnohistoric
              documents, and experimental archaeology. The Konso make and use stone tools on
              a daily basis to process hides into everyday items such as bedding, clothing,
              and bags. Furthermore, the Konso are unique because they represent the only
              known culture, where women primarily make and use stone tools. The team will
              focus on interviewing the hide workers, other artisans, and farmers for
              information concerning the social-economic-political position of hide workers
              and their activities within Konso society.   The manufacture, use, and discard
              of the stone tools will be observed and stone production waste, resharpening
              flakes, and scrapers from each individual will be collected. They will conduct
              macro- and microscopic morphological analysis and DNA residue studies of the
              stone tools and waste products. By combining ethnographic and material studies,
              they will be able to provide a context for interpreting stone tool diversity.
              Lastly, they will  excavate abandoned hide worker households to assess  how the
              morphology, residues (DNA), and the spatial distributions of stone tools are
              affected by cultural and environmental factors through time. 

This research
              is important for several reasons. For most of our prehistory, stone tools were
              the most commonly left object by our ancestors, and in many instances they
              represent the only objects archaeologists have for deciphering our ancestors'
              lifeways.  The Konso, as one of the few peoples to continue to make and use
              stone tools, may provide archaeologists with useful insights for understanding
              stone tool diversity. Unique because of the use and manufacture of stone tools
              by women, they are especially important for enhancing our knowledge of gender
              roles and how they may be reflected in stone tool technology.  With the influx
              of western clothing and other products, hide working with stone tools is a
              dying craft.  Thus, it is imperative that they document this rare occurrence of
              female hide workers through both written descriptions and documentary films. 
              


