Title       : Megafaunal Mammal Genetics and Extinction Dynamics in the Late Pleistocene:
               Testing the Hyperdisease Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0117400

Award Number: 0117400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $473067             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross D. E. MacPhee macphee@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alex D. Greenwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert DeSalle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Infectious diseases can influence evolutionary mechanisms in a variety of ways,
              including extinction of host populations. While disease is rarely considered as
              a forcing agent in extinction, whether alone or in combination with co factors
              (e.g., climate change), it is nevertheless obvious from modern examples that
              disease can have extraordinary effects on the fitness of natural populations.
              

In this proposal it is contended that: (1) extinctions due to disease have
              occurred in the recent past (late Pleistocene); (2) these losses were prompted
              by genetically naive populations of animals encountering infectious diseases
              brought from elsewhere by migrating humans, their commensals, or
              synanthropics), which quickly emerged thereafter in these new hosts, causing
              catastrophic mortality; and (2) empirical evidence of pathogens is recoverable
              from late Pleistocene material, utilizing molecular ("ancient" DNA) and
              immunological approaches (thereby permitting realistic tests of the
              hypothesis).

The target extinction event for this work is the major series
              of losses that occurred in North America and northern Asia ca. 11,000 years
              ago. The principal target taxon is Mammuthus primigenius, the woolly mammoth,
              chosen because it is represented by abundant, high-quality fossils (including
              soft tissues). This taxon is also being heavily investigated by molecular
              methods for systematic and phylogenetic purposes in a number of labs, providing
              a good database for quality control of results. Other late Pleistocene taxa
              will also be utilized where feasible, as will remains other than bones
              (especially feces). The intent is to search for evidence of pathogenic entities
              (in particular, viruses) in well-preserved fossils collected by team members in
              the Taimyr Peninsula, Siberia, as well as other locales.

Hypotheses to be
              tested by relevant experiments are logically linked in a series of steps.
              Experiments may be grouped as follows:

Group 1 experiments are linked to the
              hypothesis that exogenous virus capsid proteins or host antibodies raised
              against virus infection can be detected immunochemically in tissues and feces
              of extinct species. Purpose of experiments is to use radioimmunoassay (RIA),
              enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and immuno-PCR to detect DNA and RNA
              viruses.

Group 2 experiments are linked to the hypothesis that exogenous DNA
              viruses in fossil samples can be detected using ancient DNA techniques
              developed for single-copy nuclear DNA analysis. Purpose of experiments is to
              obtain sequence information on DNA viruses identified by RIA.

Group 3
              experiments are linked to the hypothesis that mammoth populations may have
              suffered from reduced fitness (and therefore increased susceptibility to
              disease) as the result of genetic uniformity. Experiments are designed to
              analyze population genetics of geographically and temporally discrete mammoth
              samples, to look for evidence of genetic bottlenecking.

Any success in
              detecting and characterizing viral elements in fossil material will be
              groundbreaking, leading to the possibility of being able to empirically track
              evolutionary change in viruses at the gene level over periods of tends of
              thousands of years. Further, if the expected correlations between taxa,
              pathogens, and extinction times can be shown to be meaningful, this will have
              substantial impact on evolutionary biology, conservation biology, and virology.
              Dissemination of results through publications, symposia, and Web products is
              planned.

