Title       : SGER: Climate Change in the Middle Miocene and the Distribution of Marine
               Mammals - An Example from Eastern Virginia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a0117295

Award Number: 0117295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46532              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas C. Fraser   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alton C. Dooley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Museum of Natural Hist
	      1001 Douglas Avenue
	      Martinsville, VA  24112    804/329-4028

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the field excavation and laboratory preparation of a rare
              whole specimen of a Miocene (i.e., 15 million years old) fossil whale preserved
              in a rock quarry in Virginia. Fossil specimens of once living organisms,
              especially those of whales, are relatively scarce and offer a unique window on
              environmental conditions prevailing at a particular site at a particular
              time.

Although it is well known that whale diversity has changed over time,
              the reasons for such changes are unknown but the scientific evidence hints at a
              climatic cause. At their height, whales were represented by over twenty
              different genera. Today there are just six genera. It has been suggested that
              shifting ocean currents and sea surface temperatures in the past resulted in
              the radiation of modem whales and that such faunal changes might be correlated
              with worldwide environmental change and physical changes in the Atlantic Ocean.
              For example, establishment of a West Antarctic ice sheet and closure of the
              western opening of the Mediterranean Sea (with a consequent decrease in warm
              water influx) contributed to cooling, steeper temperature gradients, and more
              complex ocean current patterns. These changes in turn may have resulted in the
              development of a variety of ocean habitats and increased partitioning of food
              resources.

The excavation of the whale will be accomplished with a crew of
              local volunteers serving as field assistants. The quarry excavation will
              provide an outstanding public educational experience for the volunteers by
              affording them hands-on science experience. In addition, once excavated, the
              specimen will be publicly displayed at the state-supported Virginia Museum of
              Natural History. This research presents an excellent opportunity to
              cost-effectively share federal and state resources for research and outreach.

