Title       : RUI Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Induced Pathogen Resistance in
               Seagrasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0117582

Award Number: 0117582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95811              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher E. Tanner cetanner@osprey.smcm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Mary's Col of Maryland
	      18952 E. Fisher Road
	      St. Marys City, MD  206863001    240/895-2000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Seagrasses are susceptible to attack by net-forming protists within the
              genus
Labyrinthula (Phylum Labyrinthulomycota). These ubiquitous, largely
              saprophytic or
weakly parasitic organisms can periodically become virulent
              pathogens, causing the
seagrass wasting disease and contributing to sudden
              population declines. These scientists suggest that differences in
              susceptibility of seagrass populations to Labyrinthula attack arise as changing
              environmental conditions alter the ability of seagrasses to maintain or develop
              disease resistance by the production of phenolic compounds via the shikimic
              acid /phenylpropenoid (SA/PP) pathway. The concentrations of phenolic compounds
              in seagrass leaves and shoots are the only characteristics that have been
              linked with resistance to the wasting disease. Previous studies indicate that,
              for certain species, disease resistance is correlated with the content
of
              phenolic acids and other polymeric phenolics, that phenolic production can be
              induced by Labyrinthula attack and/or wounding, and that seagrass phenolics
              inhibit the growth of this pathogen in culture. While the evidence for a link
              between seagrass phenolics and disease resistance is correlative and comes from
              relatively few studies on a limited number of species, it indicates that
              seagrasses, like all terrestrial plants examined to date, exhibit induced
              defenses against pathogen attack. The evidence also suggests that seagrass
              responses involve activation of the SA/PP pathway leading to the production of
              plant phenolics. However, the regulation of the SA/PP pathway has not yet been
              examined in seagrasses, and we do not fully understand how environmental
              factors may affect disease resistance in seagrasses.
	Drs. Arnold, Boettcher
              and Tanner will investigate the regulation of the SA/PP
pathway and the
              resistance of seagrasses to infection by Labyrinthula. Specifically, the
goals
              of the research are: (1) to test the hypothesis that key SA/PP pathway
enzymes
              are induced by Labyrinthula attack, (2) to determine which
              phenolics
accumulate in response to SA/PP pathway induction, (3) to test, in
              vivo, the link between phenolic acid / condensed tannin levels and seagrass
              resistance, (4) to determine whether SA/PP pathway induction and the
              accumulation of phenolic compounds are affected by specific environmental
              conditions, and (5) to test the proposed link between these conditions, altered
              SA/PP metabolism and changes in seagrass resistance to Labyrinthula attack.
              These questions will be addressed in mesocosm populations of two species, the
              tropical/subtropical seagrass Thalassia testudinum and the temperate seagrass
              Zostera marina, both of which are subject to periodic wasting disease outbreaks
              and exhibit induced production of phenolic compounds in response to pathogen
              attack and/or wounding. Activities of SA/PP pathway enzymes, concentrations of
              phenolic acids and polymeric phenols, and indicators of physiological health
              (growth, photosynthesis, concentrations of carbohydrates and proteins) will be
              examined in infected and pathogen-free plants. 
	They will also compare the
              responses of these seagrasses to infection under
different environmental
              conditions. Finally, artificial inhibitors of specific SA/PP
pathway enzymes
              will be used to determine the ability of plants to resist Labyrinthula
attack
              when they are unable to produce SA/PP phenolics. 

