Title       : Sterol Limitation of Zooplankton Growth: Roles in Nutrition and Membrane Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0117132

Award Number: 0117132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336358             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth L. Crockett crockett@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Patrick Hassett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study will provide a first look at cholesterol as a limiting nutrient and
              plasma membrane constituent for zooplankton.  Physical and biotic conditions
              for which dietary sterols become limiting will be identified, and the coupling
              between dietary and membrane-specific requirements for sterol will be defined.
              The central hypotheses to be tested include: 1) Exogenous sterols are limiting
              factors for copepod growth. 2) Cholesterol supplementation of the diet affects
              growth rates but not cholesterol contents in plasma membranes (i.e., an optimal
              level of cholesterol is maintained despite variability in diet). 3) Cholesterol
              contents of membranes and dietary limitation of cholesterol are affected by
              growth temperature.  The foci of the proposed research will encompass a range
              of levels of biological organization from organismal. to biochemical processes.
              Zooplankton (including eurythermal and other, ecologically important, species)
              will be raised on diets using different a) algal species and b) levels of
              supplemented cholesterol. Egg production rates, egg hatch rates, and/or growth
              rates will be determined under different biotic and physical conditions.
              Cholesterol will be delivered in gelatin-acacia microcapsules and ingestion
              rates monitored by particle counter. Plasma membranes will be prepared using
              density-gradient centrifugation and cholesterol contents analyzed. 

Much of
              the research proposed is especially well-suited for undergraduate student
              involvement. Students will gain conceptual and specific knowledge of
              zooplankton and temperature biology as well as fundamental mechanisms in
              physiology/biochemistry. In addition, students will learn valuable laboratory
              techniques from hands-on experience with a variety of methodologies. These
              experiences will be further enriched by interactions with researchers at a
              marine laboratory.



