Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Exploratory Study of Sediment Deposition and Sand
               Dune Encroachment in the Lake Nasser Reservoir Using Remote Sensing Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  2002    
File        : a0117616

Award Number: 0117616
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scot E. Smith ssmit@ce.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ashish J. Mehta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kirk Hatfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 1306,5944,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0117616
Smith

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project
              between a US team headed by Dr. Scot E. Smith, Department of Civil and Coastal
              Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida and a team headed by
              Dr. Hesham E. Monsef, Department of Geology, Suez Canal University, Ismailia,
              Egypt.  They plan to address the question of sediment deposition and filling by
              sand dune encroachment in the Lake Nasser Reservoir (LNR) which was formed by
              the Aswan High Dam in southern Egypt.  Specifically, they will examine
              available satellite images and actual data taken on the ground and in the lake,
              conduct preliminary field work on the phenomena of sediment transport and
              sediment deposition within the LNR, examine the usefulness of satellite remote
              sensing data in monitoring sediment deposition patterns in the LNR, and plan a
              study of sand dune migration in the vicinity of the LNR and sand dune
              encroachment into the reservoir.  They expect to describe a plan of research
              for developing models to utilize satellite data for predicting sand migration
              and deposition in the reservoir.

Scope: The project supports collaboration
              between two experienced teams, with the appropriate instruments, and with
              access to the necessary data and facilities.  The project addresses an
              important topic for Egypt and for other countries with similar reservoir
              conditions.  The large surface area of the lake and the hostile weather
              conditions most of the year, in that area of Egypt, impede the taking of ground
              measurements, and makes the use of remote sensing a very desirable approach. In
              addition to the University of Florida and the Suez Canal University, the
              project will involve investigators from the Ministry of Water Resources and
              Irrigation and from the Ministry of Agriculture in Egypt.  One US graduate
              student will participate in the research.  This project meets the INT objective
              of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual interest. 

