Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Spatial Cognition and Spatial Language in Williams
               Syndrome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0117744

Award Number: 0117744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431576             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Landau landau@vonneumann.cog.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will explore spatial cognition and spatial language in children
              and adults, using evidence from a rare genetic deficit, Williams syndrome, to
              shed light on the nature of normal spatial cognition.  Individuals with
              Williams syndrome typically have a cognitive profile of profoundly impaired
              spatial cognition together with relatively spared language.  This syndrome
              therefore provides a unique opportunity to understand the nature of spatial
              cognition and spatial language, their development, and their interaction.  The
              goal of this research is to determine (a) whether spatial breakdown is
              selective, occurring for only certain spatial capacities but not others, and
              (b) whether spatial language can be acquired and used normally in the absence
              of interaction with normal spatial cognition.  The question of "selectivity"
              will be addressed by experiments in four spatial domains, object
              representation, perception of space vs. visual-manual action in space,
              navigation, and spatial language.  If some aspects of spatial cognition are
              spared, but others are not, this would be consistent with the idea that spatial
              cognition is specialized, and that different kinds of spatial capacities
              develop from different origins.  In contrast, if all aspects of spatial
              cognition are impaired, this would be consistent with the idea that there are
              general principles of development that affect all kinds of spatial cognition
              equally.  The question of "interaction" between spatial language and
              non-linguistic spatial cognition will be addressed by experiments on the
              relationship between the two kinds of spatial knowledge.  If both are equally
              impaired, this would suggest a highly interactive organization of the brain in
              which spatial cognition and spatial language are tightly coupled.  In contrast,
              if spatial language is selectively spared, this would be consistent with a high
              degree of selectivity, and would mean that language development need not be
              affected by certain kinds of cognitive impairment.  As a whole, these studies
              should elucidate the nature of normal spatial cognition by determining whether
              development and its breakdown occur along the lines of normal cognitive
              architecture, which would suggest cognitive specialization.  They should
              elucidate the nature of spatial language by determining whether it can develop
              normally in the absence of normal non-linguistic spatial cognition, which would
              suggest a high degree of independence between the two systems.  And they should
              shed light on developmental processes, by determining whether breakdown in one
              system inevitably forces changes in other systems, or whether developmental
              breakdown can apply selectively across sub-systems of cognition.
