Title       : The Role of Light, Predation and Flow in Structuring Marine Subtidal Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0117839

Award Number: 0117839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ron J. Etter ron.etter@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Marine invertebrate communities on vertical or undercut rock walls often differ
              dramatically from those on horizontal surfaces.  Vertical walls typically
              harbor high-diversity assemblages of sessile suspension-feeding invertebrates,
              while horizontal surfaces tend to be dominated by macroalgae.  Commonly invoked
              explanations for this pattern include: 1) Shading, which may slow algal growth
              and therefore favor invertebrate dominance.  2) Lack of disturbance,
              particularly predation, on vertical surfaces.  3) Lack of sedimentation on
              walls, thus freeing suspension feeders from clogged filtration systems.  4)
              Increased water flow on walls, which may enhance larval recruitment and food
              supply to suspension feeders.  However, the actual roles of these different
              processes in shaping this ubiquitous pattern have yet to be tested
              experimentally.

This project will investigate the relative importance of
              shading, predation, and flow in
creating differences in community structure
              and composition between vertical and horizontal
surfaces. The main predictions
              to be tested are: 
1) Rich invertebrate animal communities develop on walls
              due to reduced light levels.  This hypothesis will be tested by using
              neutral-density tinted acrylic to shade horizontal rock surfaces and using
              mirrors to augment light on vertical surfaces.
2) Predation limits the
              development of invertebrate communities on horizontal surfaces. This hypothesis
              will be tested via two separate treatments: removal of sea urchins
              (major
invertebrate predators) from experimental plots, and caging to exclude
              all predators.
3) Increased water flow facilitates development of invertebrate
              communities.  Flow over horizontal surfaces will be augmented via acrylic
              baffles mounted above the substratum.  Experimental treatments will be executed
              in all possible combinations to detect the relative importance of each of the
              processes examined, as well as interactions among processes. 
All work will be
              conducted at a field site in Nahant, Massachusetts, in the southern Gulf of
              Maine.  

Sessile suspension feeding invertebrates can be very long-lived,
              and may be keystone habitat modifiers for a diverse marine community.  The
              forces maintaining subtidal rock wall communities have yet to be rigorously
              examined.  This study will provide important insight into the processes that
              regulate subtidal community structure, and enable prediction of the impact of
              anthropogenic changes on these processes. The generality of the pattern to be
              investigated suggests that results may apply to subtidal habitats globally.


