Title       : Glutamate-Dependent Regulation of Acetylcholine Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0117603

Award Number: 0117603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei B. Belousov belousov@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Neurons communicate with each other through chemical substances,
              neurotransmitters. Glutamate is the predominant fast excitatory
              neurotransmitter in the central nervous system (CNS) that is secreted by some
              neurons and activates other neurons. A decreased level of glutamate activity
              can be found in the CNS during embryonic development and during some
              pathological conditions. Recent studies indicate that during a long-term
              decrease in glutamate activity, the activity of another less predominant
              excitatory neurotransmitter, acetylcholine (ACh), is dramatically increased. It
              was hypothesized that in the absence of glutamate, ACh plays the role of the
              major excitatory neurotransmitter in some regions of the CNS. However, the
              mechanisms that increase ACh activity when glutamate activity is decreased have
              not yet been studied. They will be studied in the proposed research. Using
              neuronal cultures obtained from the hypothalamic region of the brain, two
              hypotheses will be tested. The first hypothesis is that during a decrease in
              glutamate activity neurons that secrete glutamate change their phenotype and
              begin to secrete ACh. The second hypothesis is that the change in phenotype is
              due to the decrease in Ca2+ influx to the neurons and the inactivation of
              certain intracellular Ca2+ signaling pathways. 
	Since glutamate is a major
              excitatory neurotransmitter in the CNS and is involved in many functions of the
              brain, it is very important to know the mechanisms that regulate the functions
              of neuronal networks when glutamate activity is decreased. Increased ACh
              transmission is likely one of such mechanisms. This project addresses the
              investigation of the fundamental mechanisms of neuronal plasticity and the
              regulation of neuronal activity that can take place in neuronal circuits during
              a decrease in glutamate excitation.

