Title       : Nanoscience and Engineering Center (NSEC) for Directed Assembly of
               Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0117792

Award Number: 0117792
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Siegel rwsiegel@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1675      NANOSCALE: SCIENCE & ENGIN CTR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,1084,1675,9162,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this NSF Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center (NSEC) for
              Directed Assembly of Nanostructures at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI)
              and the University of Illinois at Urbana- Champaign (UIUC) is to address
              fundamental scientific issues underlying the design and synthesis of new
              materials, structures, and devices with dramatically improved capabilities for
              many industrial and biomedical applications.  The work will focus on
              discovering and developing the means to assemble nanoscale building blocks with
              unique properties into functional structures under well-controlled,
              intentionally directed conditions.  Directed assembly is the fundamental
              gateway to the eventual success of nanotechnology.  The Center will integrate
              research, education, and technology dissemination, and will serve as a national
              resource for fundamental knowledge and applications of nanoscale science and
              technology.  Partnering with major industry, with quality undergraduate
              colleges with diverse student populations, and with innovative K-1 2
              educational outreach programs will ensure that the fruits of the Center's
              research, education, and outreach efforts will have a significant impact on
              society.  The integrated research program combines computational design with
              experimentation to focus on the discovery of novel pathways to assemble
              functional multiscale nanostructures with junctions and interfaces between
              structurally, dimensionally, and compositionally different building blocks.  A
              partnership with Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) will enhance
              significantly the theoretical effort.  The Center's core research program
              consists of two interdisciplinary thrusts: Nanoparticle Gels and Polymer
              Nanocomposites and Nanostructured Biomolecule Composite Architectures.  It will
              be supported by crosscutting theory and characterization efforts and
              complemented by a new research effort on socioeconomic impacts of
              nanotechnology in areas of radical innovation pertaining to core competency,
              knowledge management, and globalization.  Thus, the overall vision for the
              Center encompasses research, education, and outreach through interactions with
              students of all ages and members of industry.  The results of this ambitious
              program will lead to new methodologies for assembling novel functional
              materials and devices from nanoscale building blocks, to an interdisciplinary
              cadre of students and researchers trained in nanoscale science and engineering,
              and to novel applications of nanotechnology to spur industry into the 21"
              century.  The Center includes participation of 21 senior investigators at RPI,
              UIUC, and LANL, 6 postdoctoral associates, 18 graduate students, a similar
              number of undergraduates, and administrative and technical support personnel.
              

