Title       : Algebraic and Geometric Constructions of Shannon Limit Approaching Codes and
               Turbo Decoding of Reed-Solomon Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0117891

Award Number: 0117891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shu Lin shulin@ece.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Khaled A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As the demand for error-free data transmission and data storage increases,
              
error control becomes increasingly important in data communication and
              data
storage systems.  It has become an integral part in almost every data
              
communication or storage system design.  Today very sophisticated error
              
control schemes are being used in a broad range of communication and
              data
storage systems to achieve reliable data transmission and storage, such
              as
wireless communication, satellite communication, optical communication,
              
hard disc drives, compact disks and many others.  The objective of this
              
research is to devise methods for constructing good error control codes and
              
to develop efficient error control schemes which have great potential to
              
achieve error-free communication and data storage for the future
              generation
of data communication and storage systems.

Recently, there have
              been dramatic developments in error control codes and
decoding algorithms. 
              Two families of powerful codes, known as turbo and
low density parity check
              (lDPC) codes, have been discovered and rediscovered.
These two families of
              codes with iterative decoding have been shown to 
perform close to Shannon's
              theoretical limits with reasonable implementation
complexity.  As a result of
              their amazing error performance and practical
implementation, it is
              anticipated that these two classes of codes will have
an enormous impact on
              virtually all applications of error control coding over
the next 10 years or
              so.  This research involves in two important aspects
of these two classes of
              Shannon limit approaching codes: construction of LDPC 
codes and turbo
              decoding of Reed-Solomon (RS) codes.  The construction of 
LDPC codes is based
              on combinatoric appraches, such as finite geometries over
finite fields,
              statistical experimental designs, permutation groups and
graphs.  In these
              approaches, points, lines, hyperplanes in finite geometries, 
balanced
              incomplete block designs, affine permutation groups, and paths
and independent
              sets of graphs are used for constructing LDPC codes whose
Tanner graphs do not
              contain short cycles.  All the construction methods
are systematic and codes
              constructed have good structural properties which
simplify encoding and
              decoding implementations.  Turbo decoding of a RS code 
is based on binary
              decomposition of the code into a set of simple binary 
component codes and
              formulating the code as a self concatenated code with the 
RS code itself as
              the outer code and the component codes as inner codes in a 
turbo coding
              arrangement.  The decoding is carried out in two stages, turbo 
inner decoding
              and outer algebraic soft-decision decoding.
