Title       : Control of Cellular Excitability by KCNQ-Like Potassium Channels in C. Elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0117341

Award Number: 0117341
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aguan Wei weia@pcg.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              "Control of Cellular Excitability by KCNQ-like Potassium Channels in C.
              elegans."

Potassium channels are selectively permeable membrane proteins
              critical for shaping the normal electrical properties of neurons, muscles and
              epithelial cells. The availability of whole genomic sequences from a range of
              organisms has revealed a complete set of evolutionarily conserved genes
              underlying most potassium channel diversity. The in vivo functions of one
              particular conserved class of potassium channel genes, forming the KCNQ gene
              family, will be studied in the model organism Caenorhabditis elegans through a
              combination of genetic, electrophysiological and behavioral techniques. This
              gene family is important because members of this family likely form M-type
              potassium channels. These channels are active at subthreshold voltages and
              modulated by activation of neurohormonal receptors, and thus may act as
              long-term determinants of basal excitability. In addition, human members of
              this gene family are responsible for diverse hereditary diseases. Three
              KCNQ-like genes are found in the C. elegans genome (kqt-1, kqt -2, and kqt-3).
              The tissue expression and cellular distribution patterns of these genes will be
              examined using transgenic reporter constructs fusing regulatory sequences of
              each gene with green fluorescent protein (GFP) and by developing gene-specific
              antibodies. The functional properties of channels encoded by these genes will
              be characterized by voltage-clamp recordings from Xenopus oocytes expressing
              each gene, and by in situ recordings from selected C. elegans cells. Genetic
              strains will be created that reduce or eliminate the function of each kqt gene.
              Resulting mutant phenotypes will be characterized by electrophysiological and
              behavioral assays. Preliminary results suggest specific roles for these
              channels in regulating the rhythmicity of pharyngeal muscle contractions and
              the dynamics of intracellular calcium release in intestinal cells. These
              studies may reveal conserved in vivo functions for KCNQ potassium channels, and
              form the basis for forward genetic screens to identify novel genes that
              regulate these channels.            

