Title       : Coordination and Modulation of Motor Programs in Manduca Sexta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0117135

Award Number: 0117135
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291690             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry A. Trimmer btrimmer@emerald.tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The majority of our knowledge about how animals move is based on creatures that
              walk, fly or swim using rigid articulated bones and exoskeletons. However,
              animals without backbones invertebrates are the most numerous animals on the
              planet and nearly all are soft-bodied with hydrostatic skeletons for at least
              part of their life. These crawling creatures do not escape predators by running
              but instead use camouflage, chemical defenses and cryptic behavior. As a
              consequence, crawling has evolved into a highly specialized form of locomotion
              that allows soft bodied animals to move in complex and confined three
              dimensional structures such as tubes and branches. With a soft body, joints do
              not restrict movements. Such animals can crumple, compress and rotate body
              parts with virtually unlimited freedom. Such complex movements are very
              interesting from a neural control perspective because movement coordination by
              the nervous system has co evolved with these biomechanical features. The
              proposed study uses a caterpillar, the tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta, as a
              model system to help understand the neural control of hydrostatic movements.
              Two specific aspects will be examined in detail: first we will determine how
              crawling is controlled by the central nervous system and how it interacts with
              peripheral structures such as muscles and cuticle; secondly, we will examine a
              unique aspect of caterpillar crawling, the ability to climb using curved hooks
              at the tips of the abdominal prolegs.  This gripping is passive but very strong
              like Velcro hooks and can be actively released. We will determine how this
              gripping is controlled and how it is integrated into normal crawling.
Although
              focused on understanding animal locomotion, these studies have potential
              applications in the design and control of a new type of flexible robot. Such
              robots could be used to navigate through pipelines or intricate structures such
              as blood vessels and air tubes. Finally, in examining the mechanism of proleg
              gripping it is possible that new adhesive materials could be developed that
              attach passively but can be released actively to avoid the tearing forces in
              conventional hook and loop fastenings. 

