Title       : Calsequestrin, a Reversible Calcium Conducting Polymer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0117192

Award Number: 0117192
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: ChulHee Kang chkang@wsunix.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. Keith Dunker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Calcium regulation is coupled to critically important cellular processes in such
              complex cellular functions as contraction, secretion,
              fertilization,proliferation, metabolism, heartbeat and memory.  Central to
              these functions is the ability of calcium to act as a powerful trigger of
              protein conformational change. In this process of calcium regulation,
              calsequestrin protein (CSQ), which can bind more than 45 calcium ions,and other
              similar proteins found in the endoplasmic reticulum and sarcoplasmic reticulum
              (SR), serve as calcium storage proteins.  Many physico-chemical studies have
              been conducted to elucidate structure/function relationships regarding calcium
              regulation by these unusual proteins. But those studies were limited by a lack
              of detailed structural information until the molecular structure of CSQ
              was
determined recently.The observed structure is ripe with implications for
              the detailed mechanism
of CSQ function and the structural changes that
              underlie calcium regulation.  According to this new, structure-based
              structure/function model,as the calcium levels increase and monovalent ion
              (H,K,and Na)levels decrease in the SR lumen,there is a concomitant formation of
              CSQ polymers or aggregates and high capacity calcium binding.  The focus of the
              research is to directly test the molecular details using both physical
              chemistry methods and recombinant genetic techniques.Based on the atomic
              resolution structures and
biochemical data,the significance of CSQ folding and
              polymerization with respect to physiological function and the role of
              structural domains within the CSQ and other related proteins will be
              investigated.
