Title       : Documentation of Akawaio (Cariban)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0117619

Award Number: 0117619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94467              (Estimated)
Investigator: Spike Gildea spike@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Spike Gildea and his colleague
              Desrey Fox will conduct three years of linguistic research on Akawaio, an
              indigenous language in Guyana that is a member of the Cariban language family.
              One goal of their research is to create the first comprehensive reference
              grammar of Akawaio. Another is to publish on the web the collection of
              transcribed, translated, and annotated Akawaio texts that Ms. Fox will prepare
              as part of her doctoral dissertation. Preliminary research indicates that
              certain aspects of Akawaio grammar are unlike anything ever documented before,
              so a careful grammatical description supplemented and illustrated by annotated
              texts will benefit linguistic theory. The grammatical description will expand
              Dr. Gildea's reconstruction of the grammar of Proto-Carib, the ancestor
              language for all modern Cariban languages. It is already clear that Akawaio
              forms a group with its closest neighbors (the Pemong Group), but relationships
              between this group and other languages and/or groups in the Cariban family are
              unclear, in large part because there is so little reliable information about
              many of the languages (including Akawaio). The grammar and associated wordlist
              will provide additional bases for connecting the Pemong Group to other Cariban
              languages/groups. The collection of texts will also be of great interest to
              anthropologists, as they address traditional ways of life, oral history,
              Akawaio cosmology, and shamanistic practices. They will be especially valuable
              because they were recorded by Ms. Fox, a native Akawaio with anthropological
              training.

Two important scientific debates motivate the documentation of
              little-known languages. First, each new language tests theories about the human
              capacity for language. Second, each comparative reconstruction provides
              information that can inform hypotheses about early connections among peoples,
              including their migration patterns. The indigenous languages of Guyana are
              virtually unknown, and thus have not contributed significantly to either debate
              until now. Such documentation is urgent because so many languages are in danger
              of disappearing in the near future. In addition, documentation of endangered
              languages like Akawaio is a prerequisite to the creation of educational
              materials that may help prevent language loss.

