Title       : An Adaptive Protocol Suite for The Next Generation Wireless Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0117840

Award Number: 0117840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1355070            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian F. Akyildiz ian@ee.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Faramarz Fekri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yucel Altunbasak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raghupathy Sivakumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The technology and business of wireless communications systems have
              madespectacular progress since the
first systems were introduced fifteen years
              ago. Currently proposed third generation (3G) systems offer roaming, higher
              capacity, and increased exibility for low bandwidth services, such as voice
              calls and messaging. While future wireless systems (fourth generation (4G) and
              higher) are envisioned to provide higher capacity, they are also expected to
              support heterogeneity in the following aspects: (i) physical environments
              (ranging from high-bandwidth low error-rate pico-cells to low-bandwidth high
              error-rate macro-cells); (ii) network architectures (cellular, peer-to-peer, or
              other hybrid network models); and (iii) applications (ranging from low-data
              rate non-real-time applications to high-data rate real-time applications). In
              this project, we will investigate several key elements that are necessary to
              realize a protocol stack for a mobile station in 4G wireless systems. The
              ultimate objective is to develop an adaptive protocol suite that would adapt
              itself to the different aspects of heterogeneity exhibited by the next
              generation wireless systems. In particular we willinvestigate the following
              problems:
1. Application Layer
Error-rate scalability: We propose an adaptive
              multiple description algorithm for error-rate scalability.
Data-rate
              scalability: We introduce an optimal dynamic rate shaping technique to be
              utilized in the case of
congestion or bandwidth variations.
Jointly optimal
              real-time video streaming system: We propose a real-time video streaming system
              integrates the proposed unequal error protection mechanism, the multiple
              description coding technique, and the error-concealment method.
2.
              Security
An adaptive and scalable security protocols: We propose to employ
              finite-field wavelets to develop novel and
innovative public key security
              techniques that address ubiquity, scalability, mobility, and usability.
We
              propose efficient security protocols for mobile devices with limited processing
              power.
3. Transport Layer
Heterogeneous Packet Flows: We proposetoinvestigate
              transport protocols that can support a much richer
set of semantics, adapting
              to the reliability semantics chosen by applications on a per-frame
              basis.
Heterogeneous Network Characteristics: We propose to build a single
              transport protocol that will adapt itself
to the characteristics of a variety
              of wireless network environments.
Heterogeneous Network Architectures: We
              propose to explore transport layer adaptivity to the underlying
network model
              (cellular, peer-to-peer, or hybrid).
4. Network Layer
Application
              Requirements: We will explore network layer constructs that enable
              heterogeneous applications
to implement custom network layer
              policies.
Heterogeneous Network Architectures: We will explore the use of
              novel state propagation schemes and virtual
backbone approaches to enhance
              transport layer performance and help in adapting to heterogeneous
              network
models.
5. Data Link Layer
Rate-compatible error control coding: We
              develop new types of rate-compatible convolutional codes using
finite-field
              wavelet transforms.
     The protocol suite requires a new Protocol Suite
              Integration Plan. The project will consist of four phases. During the first
              phase we will design the details of all the proposed
              components/protocols/methods of the protocol suite.  During the second phase we
              will assess their performance in a simulation testbed. During the third phase
              we will integrate the individual modules into the suite and finally in the
              fourth phase we willprototype the proposed protocol suite and we will assess
              its performance on a physical testbed.
