Title       : Fire and Landscape Change in Northern Patagonia, Argentina: Integrating
               Landscape Heterogeneity, Land Use, and Climatic Variability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0117366

Award Number: 0117366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285924             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas T. Veblen Thomas.Veblen@Colorado.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In the context of global climate change and increased impacts of humans on
              natural landscapes, increased fire occurrence is likely to be a major cause of
              widespread change in forested ecosystems.  Although much is known about how
              short-term weather conditions affect the probability of fire occurrence and its
              intensity, much less is known about how the history of land use and the
              heterogeneity of the landscape affect the ways that fires spread and ecosystem
              responses to fire.  Through a multi-scale study in northern Patagonia,
              Argentina, this project will address the following key questions:  (1) How does
              landscape heterogeneity resulting from fires and other forms of disturbance
              over the last two centuries affect the spread of fire and subsequent post-fire
              vegetation and fuel changes?  (2) What are the effects of climatic conditions
              on post-fire vegetation recovery, especially tree regeneration?  (3) What are
              the effects of livestock and other forms of land use on the critical, early
              phases of post-fire vegetation and fuels recovery?  These three questions will
              be examined by an integrated multi-scale approach to vegetation dynamics and
              landscape ecology across a range of ecosystem types from dry shrublands to wet
              forests.  The researchers will integrate broad-scale spatial analyses of
              vegetation and fire patterns derived from historical aerial photographs and
              satellite images with detailed field studies of disturbance history based on
              tree-ring samples.  These methods will be combined with experimental
              manipulation of moisture availability and herbivory by livestock to simulate
              the effects of climatic variation and land use on vegetation recovery after
              fire.

The proposed research will advance a long-term research program
              initiated in 1985 focusing on the processes through which natural disturbance,
              climatic variability, and human activities have and continue to alter Northern
              Patagonian landscapes.  The expected results will quantify relationships of
              fire behavior and effects to landscape heterogeneity at spatial and temporal
              scales useful for resource managers.  The results will also provide a strong
              empirical basis for realistic application of spatial landscape-models to
              predicting fire behavior and fire effects in this landscape.  The patterns and
              causal mechanisms identified in this study will guide similar approaches to
              understanding and predicting the ecological effects of fire, livestock, and
              climatic variability in other landscapes.

