Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social-Environmental Dynamics of Malaria
               Eradication in Northwest Argentina Since 1900
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0117381

Award Number: 0117381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl S. Zimmerer zimmerer@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 5209,5911,9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Vector-borne infectious disease continues to be a major obstacle to social and
              economic development in less developed countries.  Malaria was once thought to
              be eradicated from areas outside the tropics but it is making a major
              resurgence, possibly due to the impacts of global climate change.  This
              doctoral dissertation research project will quantify changing spatial patterns
              of the incidence of malaria in Northwest Argentina during the 20th century, and
              it will analyze the relationship of these changes to environmental,
              socioeconomic, and land-use variables as well as improve understandings of the
              role of malaria control efforts in the Argentine state's broader political and
              ideological projects.  Although the direct causes of malaria are well
              understood, the relative roles of larger associated causes are uncertain and
              are the subject of scientific and policy debate.  Using statistical and spatial
              analysis, including geographic information systems (GIS), this research will
              determine which factors best explain variation in malaria incidence as well as
              variation in rates of malaria reduction.  Research methods will integrate field
              work, archival sources, and GIS-based spatial and statistical analyses. 
              Historical research will be both quantitative and qualitative in nature. 
              Historical rates of malaria incidence and mortality will be documented through
              the use of publications of public health agencies of the Argentine government. 
              Socioeconomic, environmental, and land-use data will be derived from various
              sources, including decennial census data, remote-sensing images and data,
              aerial photographs, agricultural censuses, property deed registers, cadastral
              maps, topographic maps, land division proceedings, and probate records.  Once
              baseline data has been collected, univariate and multivariate regression
              analysis will be used to assess the relative weight of different variables and
              to analyze the regional and local differences in rates of malaria incidence.  A
              GIS will be used to correlate socioeconomic, environmental, land use, and
              malaria-incidence coverages.  GIS-based spatial statistical analysis and
              mapping output will be used to identify specific land-use practices that
              intensify or ameliorate malaria incidence.  Qualitative archival research will
              focus on interpreting the rhetoric and claims of physicians, public health
              officials, politicians, and bureaucrats involved in the anti-malaria campaigns,
              especially as they pertain to issues of environmental perceptions, economic
              development, and national identity. 

This research will advance knowledge of
              the human-environmental interactions of malaria in the subtropics of developing
              countries in general and in Argentina and southern South America in specific. 
              The related issues of disease ecology and human health and human-environment
              interaction in southern South America has received scant attention from
              geographers and other social scientists.  This research will advance
              interdisciplinary research by developing methodological approaches that combine
              spatial analytical tools involving GIS with historical archival sources, to
              explore the interrelated nature of disease, land-use change, socioeconomic
              development, and national identity formation.  This research will advance
              understanding in the broad themes of the geography of development and global
              environmental change, and it will draw on historical and contemporary
              experiences in Argentina to to determine the importance of land-use change,
              especially through deforestation and expansion of irrigation, in contributing
              to malaria incidence.  Human-environmental and historical geographic studies
              such as this promise to contribute an important perspective on the relationship
              between global environmental change and disease, and to provide lessons for
              present-day control of vector-borne disease.  As a Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
              promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

