Title       : Modulation of Ion Channels by Kinase/Phosphatase Signaling Complexes in CNS
               Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0117026

Award Number: 0117026
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $536626             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhen Yan zhenyan@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     Excitatory and inhibitory transmissions in the central nervous system
              (CNS) are mediated primarily by glutamate and GABAA receptors respectively,
              both of which contain intrinsic ion channels. A group of intracellular enzymes,
              termed as protein kinases and phosphatases, can modify the functional
              properties of these channels by adding or removing phosphates at specific sites
              on these receptors, a process known as protein phosphorylation and
              dephosphorylation. This project is to study how these multifunctional signaling
              enzymes achieve high specificity and efficiency in regulating the activity of
              glutamate and GABAA receptors in central neurons. Dr. Yan's laboratory will
              focus on protein kinase C (PKC) and protein phosphatase 2B (PP2B), both of
              which are fundamental for a broad spectrum of physiological functions in the
              CNS.  The  hypothesis is that the PKC anchoring protein RACK1 and PP2B
              anchoring protein AKAP79 are responsible for targeting and functional coupling
              of these enzymes to GABAA and glutamate receptor channels, thus facilitating
              the precise regulation of these substrates. A combination of physiological,
              anatomical, biochemical, pharmacological and molecular biological approaches
              will be employed to achieve two specific aims: (1) To study the modulation of
              GABAA receptor channels by PKC/RACK1 complex. (2) To study the modulation of
              glutamate channels by PP2B/AKAP79 complex. Experimental methods include patch
              clamp recording with dialysis of peptides, immunocytochemistry, heterologous
              expression, antisense knock-down and analysis of knockout mice.
 
      
              Because glutamate and GABAA receptor channels are key players mediating
              information processing in the CNS, insights gained from this study should
              clarify the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying the dynamic regulation
              of neuronal activity by signaling complexes composed of kinases, phosphatases
              and their anchoring proteins. Integration of the information will not only
              provide potential novel targets for drugs, but also lay a solid foundation for
              understanding the regulation of learning and memory processes.

