Title       : Collaborative Research: Determinants of Male Reproductive Success in Natural
               Spawns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0117357

Award Number: 0117357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda Goad                              
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59716              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Stewart-Savage jssavage@uno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/280-7154

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal OCE 0117623
                      0117357
PI - Paul Rawson,
              University of Maine
        John Stewart-Savage, Univ. of New
              Orleans

Title:  Collaborative Research:  Determinants of male reproductive
              success in natural spawns.

Summary:  This proposal is an extension of
              previous work aimed at understanding the effects of reproductive biology on
              patterns of life history evolution in a colonial marine tunicate, Botryllus
              schlosseri.  The project will test five hypotheses about factors that may
              determine male reproductive success in natural spawns of this colonial
              invertebrate.  The five hypotheses specifically aim to explore the effects of
              timing of sperm release, relatedness of mates, population density, and
              allocation to male function on fertilization success in field and experimental
              populations of Botryllus.  

Previous work has shown that there is a narrow
              temporal window in which fertilization can result in a viable embryo,  and
              there may be a gametic incompatibility system.  Furthermore, fertilizing sperm
              are generally the product of nearby colonies; colonies exhibit variation in
              sperm production, and high levels of sperm production only increase local
              reproductive success when sperm competition occurs.

This preliminary
              information suggests that male reproductive success in natural populations is a
              complex function of timing relative to the reproductive cycles of other
              colonies, gametic compatibility, sperm production, and population
              density.

The proposed research will consist of field and laboratory studies,
              with preliminary work focused to maximize the information yield of a suite of
              nine polymorphic microsatellite loci.  These genetic markers will then be used
              to assay paternity in natural spawns and test the series of five hypotheses
              about the determinants of male reproductive success.

