Title       : Testing the 'Clathrate Gun Hypothesis' with Atmospheric Methane from the
               Greenland Ice Sheet Project Two (GISP II) Ice Core
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2003    
File        : a0117291

Award Number: 0117291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160057             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd A. Sowers sowers@geosc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research will develop a record of the isotopic composition of atmospheric
              methane from the Greenland Ice Sheet Project Two (GISP II) ice core for time
              intervals implicated in the "clathrate gun hypothesis" over the past 40,000
              years spanning the deglaciation sequence, the Bolling warm period, and the
              Younger Dryas cool phase.

The "clathrate gun hypothesis" suggests that the
              primary factor governing abrupt methane increases in the atmosphere is the
              destabilization of marine clathrate in ocean sediments as opposed to increased
              methane emissions from terrestrial wetlands.  Evidence from the geologic
              records suggest that slight ocean temperature increases or oceanic slumping
              events (caused by instabilities in the continental shelf) may have caused
              catastrophic destabilization of clathrate deposits in the past and a consequent
              release of methane into the atmosphere.  For example, throughout the last
              40,000 years, a record of clathrate destabilization events in the Santa Barbara
              basin off the California coast closely resembles the record of abrupt increases
              in atmospheric methane recorded in ice cores.  

The strong similarity
              between these two records has prompted scientists to consider the origin of the
              abrupt methane increases in terms of their impact on climate.  Because methane
              is a potent greenhouse gas, clathrate destabilization events may have
              contributed to abrupt global temperature increases in the past.  This is an
              important idea because it identifies a previously unknown mechanism for abrupt
              warming of the atmosphere over geologic time.

Along many continental margins
              and deep below the Arctic permafrost, methanogenic bacteria produce large
              quantities of methane as a metabolic byproduct.  The liberated methane diffuses
              up towards the surface until it reaches a critical temperature and pressure
              where the gas is concentrated into an icy substance know as a clathrate or gas
              hydrate.  Clathrate deposits are very susceptible to small changes in
              environmental pressure and temperature in that higher temperatures and lower
              pressures tend to melt the clathrate deposits leading to the release of
              methane.  

Fortuitously, marine clathrate methane is isotopically distinct
              from terrestrially derived methane from wetlands, so it should be possible to
              determine whether or not the cause of rapid methane concentration in the
              atmosphere was due to degassing from marine clathrates.

