Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Landscape Response to Holocene Environmental
               Change: The Evolution of the Muskegon River, Michigan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0117612

Award Number: 0117612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan F. Arbogast arbogas2@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Understanding the history of Holocene landscape evolution is critical because
              the range of climate change during this time interval is generally considered
              to be within the realm of foreseeable environmental fluctuations. 
              Reconstructing post-glacial geomorphic events therefore demonstrates the
              potential range of landscape change that may occur in the future.  This
              doctoral dissertation research project will reconstruct the post-glacial
              geomorphic history of the upper Muskegon River system in Michigan in order to
              test the links between fluvial systems and climate fluctuations that apparently
              occurred during the Holocene.  The size and number of preserved paleochannels
              and terraces in the upper Muskegon indicate that substantial changes occurred
              in channel geometry through post-glacial time.  Paleochannels will be measured
              to determine the cross-sectional form and bankfull dimensions.  Several cores
              of sediment from paleochannels and adjacent alluvial deposits will be extracted
              to determine types and amounts of sediment moving through these streams as well
              as to identify discontinuities in the stratigraphic sequence.  A chronology
              based on radiocarbon dating of organic material from alluvial deposits and
              paleochannel peats will determine the sequence of geomorphic events.  Results
              of these analyses are expected to show that significant geomorphic events
              correlate with known climatic fluctuations or are linked to autogenic controls.
               The research also will attempt to determine the impact of 19th century logging
              on the system.  The General Land Office pre-settlement survey records of
              Michigan will be examined for data on the position, size, and streambed
              sediment of the Muskegon River prior to logging.  This will be compared to
              current conditions to determine historic changes in the Muskegon River.

This
              research is part of an ongoing research program that is focusing on
              post-glacial landscape development in Michigan, which lies in the core of the
              Great Lakes basin.  In contrast to the glacial history of the region, very
              little is known about Holocene landscape evolution and associated forcing
              variables.  The results from this study will contribute to understanding
              landscape sensitivity to climate change and human impact in the Great Lakes
              region during the Holocene.  This study will improve understanding of the
              response of streams to climate change and logging as well as to other kinds of
              adjustments.  In addition, it will provide important data that can be used to
              test prehistoric climate models.  Rivers are especially important because they
              are a critical part of the ecosystem and heavily utilized.  This study is of
              particular interest to society considering the economic costs of flooding,
              stream erosion, and increased sediment load, all of which are affected by
              climate change and/or logging.  Proper management should consider future
              responses to climate change and human impact, which can be predicted more
              accurately when the past record is known.  In most cases, management decisions
              are based on very short records (less than 100 years) without considering the
              longer geomorphic history of the stream system.  This is especially true in the
              Great Lakes basin, because very little is known about prehistoric stream
              response.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
              also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
              independent research career.

