Title       : Measurement and Modelling of the Variability of Lake Ice Growth and Decay in
               Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0117645

Award Number: 0117645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250693             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin O. Jeffries   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kim Morris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 
Jefferies
OPP-01-17645

Since 1846, the duration of the ice cover
              on Northern Hemisphere lakes and rivers has decreased by almost 20 days. A
              three week reduction in ice duration on lakes in Ontario, Canada since 1969 has
              caused major limnological and ecological changes. Since the late 1980s/early
              1990s, there has been significant environmental change in the ocean,
              atmosphere, and cryosphere of the Arctic. The recently released third
              assessment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2001 indicates
              that the sensitive and already changing northern high latitude cryosphere faces
              further change as winter temperatures and precipitation increase at high
              northern latitudes.  Lake ice in Alaska may be responding to late twentieth
              century environmental changes and may respond to further climatic
              perturbations. However, the observational record is neither sufficiently long
              and continuous, nor covers the appropriate period to allow for a proper
              assessment of past lake ice variability and the likely magnitude of future
              change. The objective of this study is to use numerical modeling to simulate
              the variability of lake ice growth and decay at the present time and during the
              period of meteorological record in the different climate zones of Alaska, and
              to understand the factors responsible for that variability in order to predict
              the response of the ice to future climate change. 

Lake ice growth and decay
              variables include freezing, ice thickness, modes of thickening [congelation
              ice, snow ice], and break-up.  This is a larger and more comprehensive set of
              variables than has been considered previously and they integrate the effects of
              both temperature and precipitation variability.   Successful completion of this
              study will yield well-validated lake ice growth and decay model that will
              enable us to identify the key factors responsible for the variability of lake
              ice growth and decay. This will fill a major gap in the knowledge and
              understanding of the response of the Arctic and sub-Arctic cryosphere to past
              climate variability and change, and the prediction of future response. This
              will benefit physical, chemical, and biological limnologists, and ecological
              and
water resource managers. Teacher and student participation will give them
              a better appreciation for teaching and learning in the local context, an
              understanding of the scientific process, and interesting and relevant examples
              of the impact of climate variability and change on Alaska physical processes
              and interactions.



