Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: A High Performance, Energy Efficient, Adaptive
               Parallel Architecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0117667

Award Number: 0117667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26400              (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Albonesi albonesi@ece.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : X764      STATE-MOD 6
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 5944,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0117667
Albonesi

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project by Dr. David Albonesi, Department of Electrical and Computer
              Engineering, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York and Dr. Salwa Nassar,
              Computer and Systems Department, Electronics Research Institute, Cairo, Egypt. 
              They plan to investigate novel computing systems, which can be configured into
              one of several different parallel system organizations in order to meet the
              diverse requirements of software programs.  A simulation-based model of the
              hardware will be developed and used to evaluate how diverse multimedia,
              scientific, commercial database, and business programs can be accelerated with
              this architecture.  Key to this effort will be the development of compilers
              that can analyze application software characteristics so as to select the
              optimal hardware configuration for each phase of program execution.

Scope:
              The proposed research will leverage the expertise of the US team in developing
              high performance adaptive architecture, and the Egyptian team in designing
              parallel software and compilers.  This collaboration is expected to
              significantly benefit research in the information technology area in each
              country.  The project will involve a US graduate student who will gain an
              experience in international scientific collaboration.  The proposal meets the
              INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual interest.
               This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which
              provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
              these cooperative activities.
