Title       : Doctoral Dissertaton Research: Public Discourse and Public Opinion, Perspectives
               on Single-Parent Families, Working Wives and Mothers and Family Size
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0117613

Award Number: 0117613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joane Nagel                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara M. McLanahan mclanaha@opr.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project explores public discourse regarding three developments that
              transformed the American family during the twentieth century.  They are the
              rise in single-parent families, the increase in wives and mothers working
              outside the home, and the decline in family size.  Public discourse on these
              topics may differ in popular magazines and scholarly journals, and may change
              with demographic developments and public opinion.  The project therefore
              addresses these central questions:  1) What causes the quantity of media and
              scholarly discourse on these topics to change over time?  2) How important are
              demographic trends, conditions within journalism and academia, competition from
              other social problems, and interaction between scholars and journalists in
              explaining the changing quantity of this discourse?  3) How does the content of
              media and scholarly discourse on these topics compare and relate over time?  4)
              How do changes in the content of media and scholarly discourse relate to
              changes in public opinion on these topics?  Using time-series data to answer
              the first two questions, and content analysis to answer the second two, the
              study examines both the quantity and content of public discourse over an entire
              century.
