Title       : The Mechanisms of Deformation of Pure and Debris-Laden Ice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0117371

Award Number: 0117371
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Cole dmcole@crrel.usace.army.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USACRREL
	      72 Lyme Road
	      Hanover, NH  037551290    /   -

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP-0117371
Cole

This is a collaborative proposal by the Cold
              Regions Engineering and Environmental Laboratory and Dartmouth College. 
              Despite considerable progress in understanding the mechanisms of glacier flow,
              uncertainties still remain in understanding the relationship between stress and
              the resulting flow rate, and the effect of low concentrations of debris or
              particulate inclusions on the flow rate of ice. There are indications that
              power law behavior (n =3 to 4) is not universally observed at low stress
              levels. Laboratory experiments indicate that at low stresses, n1, and a linear
              stress dependence is often required to produce sensible results from
              calculations in ice sheet models. However, the underlying causes for the stress
              dependency of flow are not known and a physically based quantitative model of
              the process is not currently available. In fact,  there is evidence that ice
              with small quantities of debris actually deforms faster than either pure ice or
              sediment-rich ice. Given the importance of the debris-laden layers to overall
              ice sheet movement, there is great interest in understanding the reason for
              this effect and developing a suitable constitutive relationship. Recent
              indications show that both the stress dependence of the flow rate and the
              influence of sediments can be addressed with a dislocation-based constitutive
              model. The application of dislocation-based models to ice has been hampered by
              an inability to quantify dislocation processes in specimens of a meaningful
              size. However, an approach has been developed that overcomes this obstacle, and
              a specimen's effective dislocation density (length of dislocation lines per
              unit volume of material)can now be determined as a function of its physical
              properties.  Moreover, a combination of cyclic loading and creep experiments
              provides a way to track the dislocation density as a function of the specimen's
              stress/strain path and thermal history. Such experiments will be used to
              establish the dislocation density-stress/strain-temperature relationships for
              granular freshwater ice and debris-laden granular ice. Attention will be paid
              to the influence of debris concentration and thermal history on the grown-in
              (pre-deformation)dislocation density and on the dislocation density that
              evolves as a result of deformation. This approach has been successfully applied
              to ice having a variety of microstructures, but most extensively to sea ice,
              and a quantitative dislocation-based model has been developed. This study will
              verify critical aspects of the model for the case of laboratory-prepared
              granular freshwater ice, extend it to the case of ice with low sediment
              concentrations, and provide direct observations of the dislocation-particle
              interactions through the use of synchrotron x-ray topography on static and
              deforming specimens. Subsequent work will examine field cores for verification.
              



