Title       : "Pilgrims of the Vertical": Climbing Technology, Consumerism, and Nature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0117993

Award Number: 0117993
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Taylor III taylorj@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 
SES 01-17993
Joseph E. Taylor III, Department of History, Iowa State
              University 
"Pilgrims of the Vertical:"  Recreational Technology, Consumerism,
              and Nature


This project examines the innovation, production, and uses of
              recreational technology through a history of modern rock climbing in Yosemite
              National Park. Yosemite Valley has been a principal site for developing
              climbing technology and techniques during the 20th century, and locals became
              leading innovators in the sport in order to solve challenges  presented by the
              local environment. Climbers placed a premium on avoiding permanent anchors,
              reducing weight, and minimizing erosion, but these were not necessarily
              mutually compatible demands.  Gear designers (ranging from highly educated
              individuals such as Sierra Club President Dick Leonard and Cal-Tech engineer
              Charles Wilts to vagabond blacksmiths such as John Salathea nd Yvon Chouinard)
              used a wide array of materials from found objects such as construction anchors,
              cast iron stove legs, and car axles, to the newest breakthroughs in nylon,
              metal alloys, and space-age materials such as Kevlar.  Some products became
              standard climbing tools, others were soon forgotten, but all contained social,
              cultural, and environmental consequences that were neither expected nor
              desired. A history of rock climbing in Yosemite will reveal critical lessons
              about recreation, consumerism, and environmentalism in modern society. 

The
              research strategy for this portion of a larger project on the environmental
              history of Yosemite Valley rock climbing focuses on inspecting public archives
              and private collections in California, Oregon, Washington, and Colorado.  The
              PI has already identified many important innovators, including: Leonard, Raffi
              Bedayan, Salathe, Wilts, Frank Tarver, Chouinard, Tom Frost, William Feuerer,
              Edward Leeper, Steve Komito, Jim Bridwell, Jeffrey Lowe, and Raymond Jardine. 
              Relevant archival records for these people exist at the University of
              California, Berkeley; Stanford University; California Institute of Technology;
              the University of Oregon; the University of Washington, Seattle; and the
              University of Colorado, Boulder.   Important business and correspondence
              records for merchants and climbers are located around the western states, and
              owners of some documents will allow access. The research is to be conducted
              during the summer 2002 break.


