Title       : Collaborative Research: Mass Transfer Due to Oscillatory Flow Over Coral Reefs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0117859

Award Number: 0117859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290110             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Monismith monismith@ce.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey R. Koseff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The relationship between new production, organic carbon cycling, and
              nutrient
uptake into coral reef systems is not well understood. Nutrient
              uptake into experimental
coral reef communities has been shown to be
              mass-transfer limited, or limited by the rate at which nutrients can be
              physically delivered to the active surfaces of reef autotrophs. A set of
              simple, mass transfer relationships have been developed to predict uptake of
              dissolved inorganic nutrients. These relationships were derived from
              experiments which were conducted in 10-20 m long flumes and under steady,
              non-oscillatory flow conditions. Drs. Atkinson and Monismith reason that these
              mass transfer equations are inappropriate for understanding nutrient uptake by
              shallow-water reef communities in natural reef environments, where wave-drive
              water motion dominates the surrounding flow field. They have argued with both
              theoretical and empirical evidence that there should be some enhancement of
              mass transfer due to oscillatory flow. They emphasize that there are no mass
              transfer studies with both waves and naturally rough surfaces and that this is
              a problem unique to the study of benthic ecosystems. 
	The project has three
              general goals:
  1) To understand how waves influence rates of mass transfer
              to naturally rough
surfaces;
  2) To determine how waves influence nutrient
              uptake into reef communities
adapted to wave-driven flow environments;
  3)
              To actually demonstrate that waves enhance in situ rates of nutrient uptake
by
              natural reef communities.
To achieve these goals, these scientists propose an
              interlocking set of two lab studies and one field study. The first of these, a
              laboratory experiment on nutrient uptake by a coral community under both steady
              and oscillating flow conditions, will be conducted at the HIMB lab on Coconut
              Island. The second, a detailed study of the fluid mechanics of
stress and mass
              transfer over corals will be carried out at the Environmental Fluid
Mechanics
              Laboratory at Stanford. Finally, to test the application of the lab results,
              a
series of field experiments will be carried out to determine whether rates
              of nutrient
uptake by natural reef communities under wave-driven flow
              conditions are positively
correlated with incident wave energy, and, to
              determine whether these rates scale with
estimates of bottom shear stress
              according to mass transfer correlations derived from
laboratory
              experiments.
	Results of these experiments will give us the quantitative basis
              to determine the
spatial variability in rates of nutrient uptake into reef
              communities, and to promote an
understanding of how the dynamic physical
              environment typical of reef communities
may be defining their metabolism.

