Title       : Science of Nanoscale Systems and their Device Applications NSEC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0117795

Award Number: 0117795
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: C. Denise Caldwell                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10798000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Westervelt westervelt@deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bertrand I. Halperin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1248      PHYSICS-OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1675,1767,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center is to study the
              fundamental properties of nanoscale structures with a view toward their
              possible use in novel electronic and magnetic devices.   The work will
              concentrate on the movement of spins and charges, including their quantum
              behavior.  The following important questions will be addressed at the same
              time:  How can nanoscale structures be grown and fabricated?  How can they be
              images and probed?  What are the fundamental behaviors of charge and
              spin?

The Center addresses these questions through research that encompasses
              four areas:  the Growth of Nanoscale Structures; Scanned Probed Microscopy of
              Charges and Spins; Spin and Charge in Nanocrystals and Nanomagnets; and
              Coherent Electronics.  These interdisciplinary topics bring together sixteen
              participants from three universities, Harvard University, the Massachusetts
              Institute of Technology, and the University of California, Santa Barbara.   The
              Center maintains close collaborations with Sandia, Oak Ridge, and Brookhaven
              National Laboratories, and active international collaborations with the Delft
              University of Technology and the University of Tokyo. 

The Center presents
              the basic concepts and the possible benefits of nanoscale science and
              engineering to the public at all levels.  The Museum of Science in Boston works
              with Center faculty to develop exhibits and workshops for the general public. 
              An early awareness outreach program for the Cambridge public schools brings
              middle school students to Harvard to learn about college education from faculty
              and students, a program that is being expanded to include Boston public
              schools.   These activities are supplemented by active involvement of
              undergraduates and high school teachers in the research activities ongoing at
              the Center.  A Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for Women and Minorities is
              being established to attract outstanding candidates to university research.

