Title       : Collaborative Research: Science, Technology, and Inequalities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2001     
File        : a0117146

Award Number: 0117146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12670              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Nelson snelson@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative research involves a literature review, background paper, and
              preliminary data analysis, to be followed by a planning meeting for extension
              of the concepts to a follow-on international collaborative project, to be
              proposed separately at a later date.  Concern is rising within the United
              States about inequality. Rapid economic growth and low unemployment have not
              translated into equal benefits for all. Some observers have linked the growing
              income gap to technological change and the accompanying shifts in demands for
              skills. The economy is creating new high-paying jobs for the well educated in
              the suburbs, leaving less skilled workers behind in the inner cities, and
              relegating them to minimum-wage service work. Similarly, nations are growing
              further apart in standard of living. The gap in average income between the
              richest and poorest countries is also growing. In developed countries, about
              five percent of the population lives in extreme poverty, while 20 percent do so
              in Latin America and East Asia, and 40 percent in Africa and South Asia. These
              gaps are also linked to development strategies, which in turn depend on a
              nation's skills and technological infrastructure. The research proposed
              separately but collaboratively by Georgia Tech and AAAS will support the
              planning phase of a project to explore the role of science and technology
              policy in the complex dynamics of inequality, and to develop ways to use S&T
              policy to counteract the centrifugal forces inherent in technological change.
              Much of the literature attempts to explain income inequality, both domestically
              and internationally. Income is only a proxy measure, however, for the actual
              quality of people's lives. This project focuses instead directly on outcome
              inequalities. It begins from outcomes in four areas of basic human need:
              health, food/nutrition, environment, peace/security, plus two intermediate
              outcome areas, information technology and education/employment. In each area,
              data on outcomes, nationally and internationally, can be used to analyze the
              effects of and gaps in research agendas that are linked to them through complex
              webs of institutional links. These analyses then provide us with conceptual
              tools to develop options for changes in S&T policy that can help improve
              outcomes for those who are furthest behind in these areas.  Based upon the work
              of the Georgia Tech scholars, AAAS will convene a working meeting of experts
              familiar with research on inequalities and/or science and technology policy, to
              review and critique the work to date and to provide guidance in designing an
              extension of the concepts to an international collaborative project involving
              scholars from several continents.
