Title       : Infanticide and Male-Female 'Friendships' in Savanna Baboons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a0117213

Award Number: 0117213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306455             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ryne A. Palombit palombit@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This project addresses two fundamental questions about primate biology.  First,
              why do adult males and females share enduring bonds?  In the majority of
              mammalian species, the sexes interact affiliatively around the period of female
              estrus or fertility; after that, males and females typically pursue largely
              separate lives.  In primates, however, permanent association between males and
              nonfertile (anestrous) females is not only more common than in mammals
              generally, it is the rule in virtually all monkeys and apes.  The evolutionary
              reasons for the ubiquity and variability of female-male relations in primates
              remain unknown, however.  Second, why is infanticide a reproductive strategy of
              some males, but not others?  Infanticide, the killing of dependent infants
              (usually by males), is widespread but variably expressed in mammals.  These two
              apparently unrelated questions are united in a new theory that proposes that
              males and females form social relationships with one another in order to
              protect young against infanticide.
	The researchers will test this hypothesis
              in a study of two closely related savanna baboons that share similarities as
              well as important differences.  The olive baboons (Papio cynocephalus anubis)
              of Kenya and the chacma baboons (P. cynocephalus ursinus) of Botswana both live
              in large, multi-male, multi-female groups in which lactating females maintain
              close bonds with particular males--popularly known as "friendships". 
              Infanticide by males, however, is common in chacma baboons, but rare in olives
              baboons.  By comparatively studying both populations, the researchers will
              answer the following questions: (1) how do males benefit from friendship
              behavior: are males the genetic fathers of their friends' infants, or, as
              argued for olive baboons, do they care for unrelated infants because mothers
              will then choose them as sires of future offspring?; (2) how do females benefit
              from friendships with males: do they obtain  male anti-infanticide protection
              in chacma baboons, and some other benefit (such as protection from male
              harassment directed at females) in the less infanticidal olive baboon?; (3) do
              bonds between males and females vary in light of the male's paternity of the
              female's infant and due to the different benefits females may derive from
              friendships in the two populations? (4) does infanticide increase the
              reproductive success of male chacma baboons?; (5) why do some (but not all)
              male chacma baboons become infanticidal when reaching alpha status in the
              dominance hierarchy, whereas few male olive baboons ever do?  Ultimately, the
              study of a nonhuman primate may improve our understanding of social
              relationships between the sexes within our own species. 

