Title       : Holocene Fire-Climate-Vegetation Linkages in the Western Mid-latitude Forests of
               North and South America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0117160

Award Number: 0117160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $418634             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cathy L. Whitlock whitlock@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Bartlein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award will help researchers understand the interplay of climate,
              vegetation, and fire dynamics in the mid-latitude forests of western North and
              South America. The two regions offer important comparisons in terms of their
              present climate, vegetation, and fire regime and their environmental history.
              Both regions feature different vegetation types but broadly similar climate
              histories. The varying climate histories arise from distinct responses to
              large-scale climate forcing mechanisms in the Holocene (i.e., variations in
              summer insolation). This research will play each region's similarities and
              differences against each other to provide a set of natural experiments not
              possible in a single region. 

This is important because climate, fire, and
              vegetation are closely related components of forest ecosystems in western North
              and South America. The strength and nature of the linkages among these
              components vary depending on the time scale of interest. On intra-annual time
              scales, weather conditions determine the likelihood of fire events by
              influencing fuel moisture and ignition sources within a given season. On
              inter-annual to decadal time scales, climate variability is important because
              the sequence of wet and dry periods indirectly promotes fire occurrence.
              Vegetation changes on inter-annual and decadal scales also affect fire activity
              by determining the character and distribution of fuels. Fire events, in turn,
              shape forest succession and create landscape patterns that set the stage for
              subsequent disturbance events. On centennial-to-millennial time scales, climate
              governs the long-term variations in fire frequency, size, and severity as well
              as vegetation composition and species distributions. Vegetation characteristics
              on long time scales also exert a positive feedback to fire regimes by
              determining the nature of the fuel biomass.

This research will develop a
              high-resolution fire-history network in western North America and Patagonia
              comparable to existing vegetation-history networks, discern the hierarchy of
              climate controls that either promote or suppress fire, and examine modern
              climate data to determine the large-scale climate anomalies that influence fire
              regimes in the study areas. This approach of developing a fire-history database
              and analyzing climate anomalies associated with fire at present and in the
              past, will allow the researchers to understand climate-fire-vegetation linkages
              on multiple scales.

The researchers will share their data with the larger
              scientific community through shared databases (including the National
              Geophysical Data Center) and publications. In addition, the researchers will
              forge strong collaboration with South American colleagues to enable technology
              transfer between North and South American researchers. This will be
              accomplished, in part, through the support of foreign scientist's travel to the
              United States to share data and analytical techniques.

