Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Phenylpropanoid Pathway Networks: An Integrated Approach to
               Establishing Protein/Enzyme Function in Arabidopsis and their Associated
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0117260

Award Number: 0117260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1650000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman G. Lewis lewisn@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurence B. Davin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent R. Franceschi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1684,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              



The goal of this Arabidopsis 2010 Project is to establish the
              physiological function of 248 Arabidopsis enzymes and proteins presumed to be
              involved in various networks of phenylpropanoid-acetate metabolism.  There are
              two main objectives: identifying networks associated with phenylpropanoid
              coupling/polymerization (e.g. leading to lignins, lignans, suberins,
              sporopollenins, etc.), including how these enzymes/proteins function.  The
              second objective is to precisely identify the different networks that exist in
              Arabidopsis that are involved in the conversion of phenylalanine through to the
              monolignols.  In both objectives, functions will be demonstrated in vitro, and
              we will also establish that this is the true physiological function by
              demonstrating temporal and spatial correlation with the segments of the
              metabolic pathway networks involved.
This work will thus define the
              organization of the various phenylpropanoid radical-radical coupling and
              related metabolic processes in Arabidopsis through its entire life cycle.  The
              benefits to the scientific community will include rapid dissemination of
              results (prior to publication) through a website linked to the Arabidopsis
              sites, and the provision of research materials (genes, constructs, recombinant
              proteins, transgenic and mutant plants) as needed.  Another important benefit
              will be the new knowledge gained on these hitherto difficult systems (e.g.
              coupling/polymerization) involving macromolecular assemblies, and the new
              insights that will be gained.  For enzymes/genes chosen that are ultimately not
              involved in these pathways, it is considered that metabolite profiling will
              provide a clue as to function, and this will then be examined also.
Further,
              in addition to lignification, this study will shed important light on other
              highly regulated radical-radical phenolic coupling systems in vivo including: 
              the construction of seed coats and metabolites therein; in generating the
              (strengthened) matrix of trichomes; in forming suberized tissue and in
              strengthening flower stalks; in biosynthesizing sporopollenin (a remarkably
              stable component of pollen grains); in reinforcing cutinized tissue; in
              cross-linking cell wall carbohydrates through hydroxycinnamic acid (phenolic)
              coupling, in producing a plethora of defense compounds and presumably for other
              purposes awaiting discovery.  
In addition to peerreviewed journals, our
              research findings, information and materials generated by this research will be
              made available to public databases, updated periodically on a (monthly) basis,
              by posting data/information on a dedicated website
              (http://ibc.wsu.edu/lewislab/nsf/index.html) that will be linked up to the
              Arabidopsis network sites relevant to the project.  This information will
              include: recombinant protein expression vectors constructed by our laboratory;
              gene identification and gene function analysis; kinetic data results; gene
              expression profiles; metabolite and lignin analysis; in situ hybridization
              data; and light microscopy documentation.  
  


