Title       : PEET: Taxonomic and Monographic Studies in Neotropical Trichoptera (Insecta)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0117772

Award Number: 0117772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $749149             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph W. Holzenthal holze001@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aysha L. Prather  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger J. Blahnik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              

PEET:  Taxonomic and Monographic Studies in Noetropical
              Trichoptera

NSF-0117772


R.W. Holzenthal, P.I., University of
              Minnesota
R.J. Blahnik, Co-P.I., University of Minnesota
S.C. Harris,
              Co-P.I., University of Minnesota


Non-technical Abstract

	Trichoptera,
              commonly known as caddisflies, constitute the largest order of exclusively
              aquatic insects.  They are well known and studied because of the interesting
              net-spinning and case-making behavior of the larvae.  Most species live in
              rivers and streams, where they are important elements of the ecosystem. They
              consume and recycle leaves and other organic matter and in turn are fed on by
              other aquatic species, including fish. A primary goal of this PEET project is
              to study the taxonomy and biodiversity of several important genera of
              caddisflies from the Neotropics of Central and South America.  Many species in
              this region are undescribed (up to 75% in some places) or poorly known.
              Augmenting the technical taxonomic revisions and monographs will be the
              construction of identification keys to genera of both larval and adult
              caddisflies to be made available over the World Wide Web (WWW).   Much of the
              material for these revisions already exists in collections in Minnesota and at
              the Smithsonian, and other material will be collected by field work in
              Venezuela.  Collectively, as many as 44 genera and 400 described species will
              be revised, and up to 300 new species may be described.  In addition, all
              museum and collection records of the caddisflies treated during the project
              will be bar-coded, databased, and the information made accessible over the WWW.
              
	Caddisflies are important biological monitors of water quality because most
              species are intolerant of most forms of pollution.  Biomonitoring is widely
              used in water quality assessment in North America and Europe because the
              caddisflies there can be easily identified.  In the Neotropics, caddisflies are
              very poorly known, making it difficult to use them as biological monitors. An
              important aspect of this PEET project will be to make the Neotropical caddisfly
              fauna better known and information accessible to Latin American workers.  This
              will lay a foundation for the use of caddisflies in biomonitoring programs in
              the Neotropics. Two doctoral students trained at the University of Minnesota,
              two masters students trained at Clarion University, and a full-time research
              associate will be funded off the project.  At least one of the doctoral
              students will be recruited from Latin America where there are very few
              Trichoptera experts.  It is expected that this project will stimulate and
              facilitate the study of Trichoptera in Latin America and contribute to the
              protection and preservation of the aquatic ecosystems of the region.
	
              
	
	




