Title       : Social Norm Effects on Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0117159

Award Number: 0117159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32004              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Pool gpool@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The concept of social norms is central to social psychology, yet the usefulness
              of social norms to predict and understand human behavior has been limited by
              conceptual and operational problems. One reason for potentially weak
              norm-behavior prediction is that people's motivational goals for conforming to
              norms are likely to vary across situations. Based on earlier social influence
              research, a tripartite model of motivational goals underlying norm effects is
              proposed: informational motives based on accuracy and successful adaptation,
              social motives with implications for the self, and social motives stemming from
              concern with others and the outcomes these others can provide. Furthermore,
              groups establish ideal rules of conduct and acceptable behavior, and they
              provide information about successful, adaptive behavior. Thus, when a
              particular group identity is activated, the social norms associated with that
              group should direct individual behavior, especially when the individual values
              and identifies with the group. This project focuses on the collection of pilot
              data to identify pre-existing norms associated with specific target groups and
              to develop valid measures of the motivations that underlie people's conformity
              to social norms. This research will improve our understanding of when and how
              social norms impact individual behavior, and may help us learn how the norms of
              one important group can override the norms of another important group. 


