Title       : Muscle Fiber Recruitment in Relation to Growth and Swimming Speed in Spadefoot
               Tadpoles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0117536

Award Number: 0117536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2008     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320022             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. Arendt jarendt@citrus.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David N. Reznick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research will examine how patterns of muscle growth and development
              translate into growth and swimming ability in tadpoles of three toad species. 
              Although much is known about the cellular mechanisms of muscle development,
              remarkably little is known about how this translates into performance of the
              individual in the real world.  Recent work in fish and pilot work for this
              proposal already suggest one obvious consequence, namely that fast growing
              individuals are slower swimmers than their slow growing counterparts.  This
              research examines the consequences of a trade-off between growth rate and
              swimming speed at several levels including: a mechanistic level (how
              recruitment and growth of muscle cells influences growth and swimming ability),
              a genetic level (comparing across species), an environmental level (by
              manipulating temperature and food levels), and an ecological level (in terms of
              predator avoidance and escaping pond drying).  One species being studied breeds
              in rain pools which dry within weeks.  Rapid muscle development in this
              situation accelerates metamorphosis allowing toadlets to escape the pond before
              it dries.  Another species breeds in permanent ponds where predators are
              abundant.  Rapid growth allows these tadpoles to outgrow potential predators. 
              The third species breeds in ponds of intermediate duration with intermediate
              predator levels, and is expected to fall mid-way between the other two in terms
              of both growth rate and swimming speed.  Tadpoles are being used because muscle
              structure is relatively simple  and because skeletal development does not
              interfere with muscle development (unlike other vertebrates, including people,
              frogs and toads do not begin to form mineralized bones until metamorphosis). 
              This research will forge bridges among developmental biology, physiology, and
              ecology and has potential applications in agriculture where selection for rapid
              growth is common, often without considering potential costs of rapid growth. 
              This relates most directly to the proposed research where meat quality (muscle
              composition) may be compromised to by selection for rapid growth.
