Title       : An Inter-lab Comparison of Mg/Ca & Sr/Ca Measurements in Foraminifera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a0117569

Award Number: 0117569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard Poore                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22765              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yair Rosenthal rosentha@imcs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This SGER is an outgrowth of a proposal that was reviewed by the MG&G program
              last year.  Reviews of the initial proposal were mixed and the proposal was
              declined because of the mixed reviews.  It is clear that the use of Mg/Ca and
              Sr/Ca ratios in marine carbonate microfossils are emerging techniques that are
              being used more and more in paleoceanography studies.  It is also clear that
              there can be major diferences in results on the same or similar materials
              between laboratories or in some cases seven within laboratories that complicate
              the interpretation of the measurements.  Based on the mixed mail reviews and
              limited panel comments, Program concluded that work was need to determine if
              differences in laboratory procedures and methods were causing the
              discrepancies.  This issue needs to be resolved soon because a number of
              investigators are starting to use this new proxy and data from the new
              laboratories are bein generated at a rapid pace.  Thus Program invited the PI
              to develop a modest SGER proposal to run an inter-laboratory comparison that
              involved a number of workers that existing labs are setting up labs or are
              setting up labw to do Mg/Ca and Sr/Ca measurements for paleoceanography.  The
              current SGER responds to the Program request.  The PI has included a wide range
              of laboratories in the text and has arranged for a neutral investigator to
              evaluate the results of the text.


