Title       : The Factory and the Child Labor Question: A Study in Technology and Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0117867

Award Number: 0117867
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100795             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lindy Biggs biggslb@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Abstract
Lindy Biggs, Auburn University
The Factory and the Child
              Labor Question in Early Industrial Britain: A Study in
Technology and
              Change

This project examines a debate in late 18th and early 19th century
              England concerning, apparently, the labor of children in the nation's cotton
              textile factories. In fact, the aim of this project is to show that, at a
              deeper level, the debate was about the shifting social and moral economy that
              resulted from industrialization.  It is a story of men seeking profit through
              new technology and the conflicts they encountered. It is at the same time about
              fundamental social and cultural change. The project grows from an interest in
              the way technology participates in peoples' lives; how it shapes the way we
              live and think and view the world. The project describes the needs of a new
              technological system and the way they reshaped life in British society. The
              intensity of the conflict over the factory and its technology was possible
              because technology could be questioned at this time, before new technology came
              to be viewed as a panacea and equivalent to progress. This story provides a
              unique look into a society debating its technological future. 

This is a
              book-length study of the early British textile factory and its impact on
              political and social ideologies. It sees the transition to an industrial
              society as social, cultural, and political history rather than economic. It
              seeks to develop a social geography of the factory, describing the factory
              building, its machines and their operations, the work force and the work
              culture, and its impact on local culture. And it explores the wide-ranging
              discourse all levels of British society about the nature of the factory and the
              morality of child factory workers. The discourse has to be examined in the
              context of broad changes in British social and political ideology, particularly
              the laws regarding the treatment of the poor. A cry arose at the end of the
              eighteenth century in England to regulate the employment of children in cotton
              textile mills. Manchester physicians had traced epidemic disease to the cotton
              spinning mill of Robert Peel, where children, who had been purchased as
              isparish apprentices from London orphanages, worked under unhealthful
              conditions. These physicians began the child labor reform movement when they
              wrote letters to Parliament requesting government attention. The concern over
              child labor grew over the next decades until it became a prominent and highly
              emotional reform debate. Many groups had an interest in shaping the laws
              regulating child labor because those laws also regulated the factory and
              manufacturing. The stakes were high indeed, for whoever controlled the use and
              regulation of the factory would have a major role in shaping the future moral
              and economic order of the country. The intensity of debate suggests that the
              stakeholders were aware of the potential consequences of the outcome.

