Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Territorialization of Identity and
               Repatriation Decisions of Mongolian Kazakhs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0117087

Award Number: 0117087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9989               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Kaiser rjkaise1@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 5915,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The relationship between identity and territory has been largely ignored, yet is
              of profound and growing significance in the globalizing world.  With
              international boundaries becoming more porous and an increasing number of
              people residing in locations away from their traditional homelands, a
              fundamental question arises as to the importance of the 'tether' between
              identity and territory.  This question is most readily addressed by examining
              the de- and re-territorialization of identity within a group living in diaspora
              during a period of repatriation.  The Mongolian-Kazakhs represent such a group,
              with a series of additionally salient characteristics.  First, the Kazakhs of
              Mongolia have lived outside of their native homeland for more than 70 years,
              following their ancestors' flight from the collectivization campaigns of the
              Stalinist era.  Second, the Kazakh ethnic group has only recently begun to
              nationalize within the Soviet-constructed homeland of what has become the
              Republic of Kazakhstan.  Third, the sudden independence of Kazakhstan and the
              government's active repatriation campaign provide an historical opportunity to
              investigate the loss and reacquisition of territorial identity through the
              formation of homeland conceptions and their often-controversial consideration
              by Kazakhs within and outside of Kazakhstan.  This doctoral dissertation
              research project will examine those Mongolian-Kazakhs opting for repatriation
              to Kazakhstan, those opting to remain in Mongolia, and those opting to return
              to Mongolia after an attempted repatriation.  This project will combine
              surveys, in-depth interviews, and archival research methods to triangulate data
              on this complex and highly subjective topic.  Fieldwork will be carried out in
              Mongolia and Kazakhstan using local sociological institutes for assistance with
              surveys and in-depth interviews.  This comparative structure will provide a
              clear picture of the ways in which identity and territory are constructed and
              mutually constituted. 

The terms "de-territorialization" and
              "re-territorialization" of identity are employed to extend scholarly
              understanding of the multifaceted relationships between diverse concepts such
              as territoriality, identity formation, place attachment, and homeland
              psychology.  Literature from a wide array of disciplines will be employed in
              the theoretical exploration of the topic.  This exploration of place making as
              integral to identity formation will help advance geographic theory and social
              theory in general.  The fundamental questions addressed in this research of how
              people develop and sustain their attachments to place, and the degree to which
              our conception of 'where we belong' informs our sense of 'who we are' is a
              critical topic that has long been ignored.  By advancing the theoretical
              literature pertaining to the relationship between territory and identity, this
              research will provide a framework with application beyond the specific case. 
              The contemporary international system offers many examples of contested notions
              of homeland and people defined objectively as living 'out of place' but
              potentially holding self-conceptions of 'rootedness' in their current places of
              residence.  In addition, the case study for this project is significant because
              the ethno-demographic landscape of Central Asia, especially Kazakhstan, is
              replete with ethnic diasporas attempting to reassess their 'place in the
              world'.  By elucidating the dynamics of de- and re-territorialization of
              identity, this project will provide insights that can inform policy formation
              among the nationalizing states throughout the world.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

