Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Ion Molecule/Surface Scattering with Emphasis on
               Orientation Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9911858

Award Number: 9911858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18898              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Nordlander nordland@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5921,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9911858
Nordlander

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor Peter Nordlander of Rice University in Texas and
              Professor Mineo Kimura of Yamaguchi  University in Japan.  The researchers will
              be undertaking a study of ion molecule/surface scattering with emphasis on
              orientation effects.   The understanding of inelastic effects in the scattering
              of ions against surfaces represent a challenging interdisciplinary problem of
              importance both in scientific and technological applications.   The objective
              of the research is to increase the understanding of the collision dynamics of
              ions/atoms/molecules with surfaces in the energy range 100 eV to 10 keV.  This
              represents a complex problem where it is essential to employ an accurate
              description of the scattered molecules, the microscopic properties of surfaces,
              the physics and chemistry of chemisorption as well as the physics of
              collisions. 

The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories
              that have complementary expertise and research capabilities.  The U.S.
              researchers' expertise is in the area of surface physics and molecular
              chemistry and the Japanese have expertise in ion-atom scattering in the gas
              phase.  The results of the research will be of considerable importance for a
              large number of experimental groups that use ion-surface scattering as an
              experimental probe of surface electronic and geometric structure.  The theory
              developed can directly be used to interpret experimental data and to deduce
              microscopic information of surfaces.  Also, these scattering phenomena have
              applications in fusion plasma interaction with the walls of confinement,
              surface property measurement technology, and the microelectronic industry.  The
              project advances international human resources through the participation of a
              postdoc.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
              broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.   Results of the research will be published in scientific journals
              and also on their Web site
              (http://juktan.rice.edu).
9911858
Nordlander

This award supports a three
              year collaborative research project between Professor Peter Nordlander of Rice
              University in Texas and Professor Mineo Kimura of Yamaguchi  University in
              Japan.  The researchers will be undertaking a study of ion molecule/surface
              scattering with emphasis on orientation effects.   The understanding of
              inelastic effects in the scattering of ions against surfaces represent a
              challenging interdisciplinary problem of importance both in scientific and
              technological applications.   The objective of the research is to increase the
              understanding of the collision dynamics of ions/atoms/molecules with surfaces
              in the energy range 100 eV to 10 keV.  This represents a complex problem where
              it is essential to employ an accurate description of the scattered molecules,
              the microscopic properties of surfaces, the physics and chemistry of
              chemisorption as well as the physics of collisions. 

The project brings
              together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and
              research capabilities.  The U.S. researchers' expertise is in the area of
              surface physics and molecular chemistry and the Japanese have expertise in
              ion-atom scattering in the gas phase.  The results of the research will be of
              considerable importance for a large number of experimental groups that use
              ion-surface scattering as an experimental probe of surface electronic and
              geometric structure.  The theory developed can directly be used to interpret
              experimental data and to deduce microscopic information of surfaces.  Also,
              these scattering phenomena have applications in fusion plasma interaction with
              the walls of confinement, surface property measurement technology, and the
              microelectronic industry.  The project advances international human resources
              through the participation of a postdoc.  Through the exchange of ideas and
              technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote
              international understanding and cooperation.   Results of the research will be
              published in scientific journals and also on their Web site
              (http://juktan.rice.edu).

