Title       : Topics in Auctions and Contractual Arrangements in Procurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2000       
File        : a9911489

Award Number: 9911489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Feinberg                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick Bajari bajari@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        The goals of this project are twofold.  First, a more realistic
              framework for computa-tion, identification and estimation of bidding models
              that can be applied to studying the workings of the public sector procurement
              system in the United States will be developed.   A framework that allows for
              bidders to be heterogeneous in ways that are understood before the auction
              begins will be used.  Bidder heterogeneity is a key empirical problem in many
              real world applications.  For example, in the construction of public works,
              firms often differ by location, the type of work that they specialize in, their
              current backlog and their managerial efficiency.  As a result, firms will have
              cost advantages or disadvantages on certain projects that are understood by all
              agents before bidding begins.  A second important source of asymmetries is
              collusion.  A cartel will have a different distribution of costs than a
              competitive fringe and this fact may help to empirically identify between
              collusive and competitive bidding.

          Extensions of this project will
              include endogenizing the participation decision of firms since endogenizing
              participation is clearly needed for modeling realism.  Also, since one form of
              collusion is to choose not to bid against another cartel member, modeling
              participation is needed to understand the difference between competitive and
              collusive bidding patterns.  Another extension is to use the result that the
              empirical distribution of bids is exchangeable in the underlying model
              parameters only if the firms are competitive to empirically to distinguish
              between competition and collusion.  Finally, a model of dynamic bidding in
              procurement will be built.  This is an important empirical consideration, since
              in many applications, firms will be capacity constrained.

          A model
              of the costs and benefits of alternative contractual arrangements that are
              commonly used in procurement will also be developed.  In the engineering and
              construction management literature on the costs and benefits of cost-plus and
              fixed price contracting in building construction, the flexibility of the
              contractual form to adjust to changed conditions is a central concern.  The
              centerpiece of the model is a trade-off between providing cost-reducing
              incentives, and saving on transaction costs of two kinds.  The first cost is
              that of providing a comprehensive design that describes the project.  The
              second cost is due to costly renegotiation of the original design.  The model
              is able to replicate some basic stylized facts from the private sector of the
              construction industry.  When total completion time is to be minimized cost plus
              contracting is preferred and planning before contracting begins tends to be
              less complete.  If minimizing total project costs is of the essence, then more
              detailed plans are provided and fixed price contracting is favored.  Also, more
              complex projects are more often governed by cost-plus contracts.

