Title       : The Role of Architect-Engineers in the Development of American Building
               Construction Technology, 1850-1920
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9911093

Award Number: 9911093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara E. Wermiel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1064,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 99-11093 - Sara E. Wermiel (Independent Scholar) -- "The Role of
              Architect-Engineers in the Development of American Building Construction
              Technology, 1850-1920"

In the nineteenth century, America went through a
              revolution in building construction as momentous as the one that transformed
              manufacturing. While American designers did not adopt structural iron until
              roughly the 1850s, in the second half of the century they quickly caught up
              with, and went on to surpass, the Europeans. By 1900, the United States had the
              world's most sophisticated construction technology. American designers had
              created skeleton frame construction, a development that forever changed
              commercial construction and one that made the American icon -- the skyscraper
              -- possible.  

This project suggests that an important factor in this
              development -- and one that has been little explored -- was the distinctive
              technical inclinations of many American architects, who also functioned as
              engineers. The willingness and ability of these architect-engineers to use new
              materials -- e.g., structural iron and hollow tile -- and to solve technical
              problems associated with ever larger structures distinguished them from their
              colleagues in, for example, Great Britain and France.

In the 1890s, with the
              number of technological complex projects increasing, a new engineering field,
              architectural or structural engineering, took shape. Architects began to hire
              engineers to handle structural design, a development that dismayed many of the
              architect engineers. The study will explore the divergent views within the
              profession over the proper role and responsibilities of architects with respect
              to technical matters, as revealed in the debates over licensing and training of
              architects.

Nevertheless, the separation of architecture from engineering
              took hold. The last part of the study will examine the consequences of this
              separation on the pace and nature of development in building construction
              technology in the early twentieth century.

Historians of engineering, on the
              one hand, and of architecture, on the other, are generally unacquainted with
              the cross-discipline work, and contributions to technological development, of
              the nineteenth century architect-engineers. The goal of this project is to
              bring the important work of these men to light. It will also examine the
              reasons for the demise of the type, and consequences of design specialization
              -- the separation of architecture from engineering -- on technological
              development. 


