Title       : Competition and the Vertical Organization of Industries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9911229

Award Number: 9911229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63823              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yongmin Chen Yongmin.Chen@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Models of vertical integration and disintegration are constructed in order to
              understand how competition affects and is affected by the vertical organization
              of industries. The main innovation is to recognize that the vertical structure
              of a firm affects not only its own behavior but also the behavior of its rivals
              in the horizontal competition.

Part I of the project studies competition and
              vertical integration. It starts with the realization that a firm's vertical
              integration changes its downstream rivals' incentive in choosing input
              suppliers. In particular, the rivals may be willing to purchase input at a
              higher price from the integrated firm. This insight leads to the observation
              that some important results in the current theory of vertical foreclosure are
              incorrect. An equilibrium model of vertical integration will then be developed
              that takes into account the strategic behavior of both the integrated firm and
              its rivals. It is expected that this model will provide a framework in which
              the foreclosure (collusive) effect and the efficiency effect of vertical
              mergers can be measured and compared. A linear-demand example is analyzed where
              it is found that a vertical merger will have the effect of market foreclosure
              if and only if it also has efficiency gains; and that situations can be
              identified where the vertical merger increases or decreases consumer welfare.
              These and other results will be explored in the general setting of the
              model.

Part 2 of the project studies a model of vertical disintegration.
              This model has its roots in a classic paper by Stigler, who envisioned that as
              industries grew, the upstream divisions of some initially integrated firms
              would be disintegrated to take advantage of specialization and economies of
              scale. What is not clear in Stigler's theory is why a specialized firm should
              be preferred to a specialized division of an integrated firm in exploring the
              economies of scale and supplying the other firms. The proposed model aims to
              offer an answer to this by considering horizontal competition. The key insight
              is that the downstream rivals, for strategic reasons, may choose not to
              purchase from the integrated firm unless its price is sufficiently lower than
              those offered by unintegrated upstream producers. This insight is obtained
              through the study of a lineardemand example, and its full implications will be
              explored in the model. An equilibrium theory of vertical disintegration is
              expected to emerge through this analysis.

Part 3 of this project aims to
              unify the models of vertical integration and disintegration in a general theory
              of competition and vertical organization. A crucial distinction will be made
              about whether the integrated firm's cost advantage is exogenous or endogenous.
              This difference will explain why the integrated firm's downstream rivals can
              have two opposite behaviors in the input market, and will hence explain the
              different equilibrium outcomes of vertical organization. This theory will also
              incorporate the current theory of vertical foreclosure by clarifying the
              additional assumptions that are needed. The connections between this theory and
              other theories of firms and markets will be established.

All of the research
              envisioned above involves the construction and theoretical analysis of
              mathematical models based on observed features of firms and industries and on
              non-cooperative game theory.

