Title       : Si Cycling and Si Control of New Production and Organic Carbon Export in the
               Southern Ocean and the Sargasso Sea: A JGOFS Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2000      
File        : a9911312

Award Number: 9911312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339149             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Nelson nelsonda@coas.oregonstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Several recent studies in very different systems, such as the Sargasso Sea,
              Equatorial Pacific and Southern Ocean, have shown that diatoms are responsible
              for much of the new and export production in surface waters.  Those
              observations, combined with the diatoms' absolute growth requirement for silica
              (Si), suggest that the availability of dissolved SI may regulate new and export
              production in much of the sea.  Models of carbon and nitrogen cycling in the
              upper ocean must therefore incorporate Si control of diatom prodctivity and
              organic-matter export if their goal is to predict the biological response of
              the oceans to natural and anthropogenic forcing.  That task is currently
              impossible for most of the ocean due to the scarcity of data regarding factors
              regulating Si cycling (e.g. Si production rates, Si dissolution rates and Si
              limitation of diatom productivity).

The PIs will synthesize several large
              data sets obtained during the U.S. and French JGOFS programs and use a newly
              developed physical/biogeochemical model, which explicitly inclues silica
              regulation of diatom productivity, to make the first data-based determination
              of the factors controlling the cycling of Si in the upper 200-500 m of the
              ocean.  They will investigate how changes in the character of the Si cycle
              affect the ability of diatoms to contribute to carbon and nitrogen export from
              surface waters.  Through a combination of data synthesis and numerical modeling
              the PIs will: 

1)  identify those processes that are the strongest
              determinants of the character of the Si cycle in the upper ocean, and

2) 
              assess how the resulting differences in the Si cycle affect the ability of
              diatoms to contribute to new and export production.

The results will
              establish a foundation for the next generation of global biogeochemical models
              of marine carbon cycling, which must explicitly incorporate Si regualtion of
              carbon and nitrogen export in systems where diatom productivity is limited by
              Si. 
