Title       : US-Eritrea Cooperative Research: Paleoecology and Paleoenvironmental Analysis of
               the Miocene Red Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a9911968

Award Number: 9911968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26310              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa E. Park lepark@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin F. Downing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5928,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9911968
Park

This award supports a one-year collaborative research project
              among Dr. Lisa E. Park, of the Department of Geology at the University of
              Akron; Dr. Kevin F. Downing, from DePaul University; and Dr. Beraki
              Woldehaimanot, of the Department of Earth Sciences at the University of Asmara
              in Eritrea.

The middle to late Miocene geologic record for East Africa is
              incomplete, especially for the period spanning 15 - 4 million years ago.  This
              time period is particularly important because it is a pivotal and problematic
              geological interval for hominid origins, and it is also a time of dramatic
              global climate change.  Based on a brief pilot survey, the principal
              investigators (PIs) found that the little-researched series of sedimentary
              deposits, known as the Red Series, in the Danakil Rift contain vertebrate and
              invertebrate fossils from a complex sequence of paleoenvironments, and that
              some of these deposits were made 10 - 4 million years ago.  This field project
              is expected to yield fossils that will establish the sedimentary deposits in
              the Eastern Danakil Depression of Eritrea as an important and unique source of
              information for the study of Miocene paleoecology in East Africa.  The PIs will
              collect and analyze data to enable them to develop a detailed paleoecological
              and biostratigraphic record for invertebrate and vertebrate fossils for the Red
              Series, which they will then use to assess the character of northern Afar
              paleoenvironments during the Late Miocene.  By documenting patterns of faunal
              change through the Red Series deposits, they will seek to determine the
              interrelationship of faunal change and species evolution to local and regional
              environmental shifts or known intervals of significant climate change. The
              study will also provide the initial sedimentologial and stratigraphic data that
              should yield new insights into the relationship between deposition and the
              tectonic history of this geologically critical region of the world. The
              collaboration combines the expertise of Drs. Park and Downing, invertebrate
              paleontology and geological and vertebrate paleontology, respectively, with Dr.
              Woldehaimanot's expertise in structural geology and basin analysis.  The
              research team will also include a sedimentologist, a US graduate student, and
              researchers and students from the University of Asmara.  This investigation is
              expected to provide critical paleoecological information on the habitat of
              early hominids.  The results also have potential applications to aid in
              understanding the tectonics, structural geology, geochronology, climatology,
              and human ecology events that occurred during the mid-Miocene of the northern
              Afar Region in East Africa. 

The Division of International Programs and the
              Division of Earth Sciences are jointly providing funding for this project.

