Title       : Dissertation Research: Thinking About Thinking in Cold War America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a9911006

Award Number: 9911006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Lunbeck lunbeck@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation project is concerned with the cognitive revolution, the post
              WWII decline of behaviorist hegemony in psychology and the emergence of the
              metaphoric linkage of human thought and computer systems. It will contextualize
              the re-emergence of explicit discussion of thought and mind in experimental
              psychology in several ways. First, it will focus closely on Harvard's Center
              for Cognitive Studies, the first organized institutional setting for cognitive
              science. The project will examine the ways in which the Center's
              interdisciplinary research interests produced and relied on its eclectic social
              environment. It will also consider how the Center's interdisciplinary structure
              interacted with the broader academic political situation at Harvard.  Second,
              it will examine how the broader social and cultural milieu contributed to and
              drew from the newly emergent cognitive theories. This project will connect
              psychological research on rationality with the widespread political discourse
              on the equivalence of rationality and American democracy. It will do so by
              showing how government agencies and private foundations justified their support
              for cognitive psychology in the same way that they justified support for other
              cold war programs such as international development. With funding from this
              project, several collections in the Harvard University Archives will be
              consulted. These collections will include the Center's organizational files,
              the papers of university administrators, and faculty associated with the
              Center. In addition, the following archive holdings will be examined: the
              papers at the Jean Piaget Archive in Geneva, Switzerland, the grant files of
              the Ford Foundation and the Carnegie Corporation in New York City, the
              organization files of Yale's Institute of Human Relations, the personal papers
              of Peter Dow, and the papers of the Social Science Research Council at the
              Rockefeller Archive Center.

