Title       : Privately Provided Public Goods: Theoretical, Econometric and Experimental
               Studies of Cooperation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2000  
File        : a9911252

Award Number: 9911252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254638             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Andreoni andreoni@wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project examines altruistic, charitable and cooperative behavior
              using theoretical, experimental and standard econometric analysis. The proposal
              has three parts. Part I consists of four theoretical studies on private giving
              to public goods, such as charities. The first two studies explore institutions
              of fundraising to understand how they may increase charitable contributions.
              Two other studies explore the nature of altruism and "warm glows" to giving.
              Part II provides four econometric studies of charitable giving. These include
              analysis of gifts by married couples, hence exploring models of the provision
              of household public goods and the specialization of tasks within the household.
              These will add to the growing literature on household decisions as well as to
              that on charitable giving.  There is also a study of how government grants to
              charities affect fundraising expenditures of charities as well as donations.
              Part III sketches nine experimental projects on three main topics. The first
              topic is the nature of altruistic preferences.  Several controlled experiments
              uncover what factors produce altruism and fairness by letting subjects reveal
              their preferences in a number of different circumstances. The second
              experimental topic looks at the fundamental game theory models that we use to
              identify fairness. For instance, is subgame perfection a valid way of thinking
              about ultimatum games if fairness were not a concern of subjects? These
              experiments try to shed light on this question. The third experimental topic is
              how institutional choice interacts with preferences for fairness. Are there
              (realistic) features of institutions that may be benign in the absence of
              fairness and other social concerns, but which promote efficiency in light of
              these social preferences?  This question is explored from a number of different
              perspectives. As a whole, the purpose of the projects proposed here is to gain
              a greater understanding of why and how people behave in fair and altruistic
              ways, and to understand how the world has been shaped to take advantage of
              these moral preferences in order to promote efficiency.
