Title       : Bargaining and Power in Ongoing Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9911075

Award Number: 9911075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68083              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Powell rpowell@Socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Within the field of international relations, the subfields of security studies
              and international political economy remain largely isolated from each other. 
              This project develops a more coherent and general way of looking at political
              bargaining in anarchy - be it over issues typically associated with security
              studies or international political economy (or domestic politics).  To achieve
              this end, the investigator produces a series of papers that study the effects
              of relaxing key assumptions that currently define the state-of-the-art in the
              modeling of security studies.

The limitations of the much recent formal work
              in international relations theory is that it generally models the exercise of
              power as a once-and-for-all decision.  Formally, the games used in these
              analyses usually end as soon as any player attempts to exercise power by going
              to war or, more broadly, by imposing a settlement.

A related, but heretofore
              unemphasized limitation is that many bargaining games in both economics and
              international relation's theory also end as soon as one of the players accepts
              an offer.  Thus no bargainer can renege on an offer or an agreement even if it
              would like to, because the game tree does not allow for it.  In a sense then,
              these games violate the assumption of anarchy in that they implicitly allow a
              bargainer to commit itself to honoring its offers.

This research studies the
              effects of relaxing these limitations in two ways.  First, the bargainers are
              able to renege on their offers.  As it happens, this new assumption, which
              grows out of international relations theory, provides a natural answer to a
              central puzzle in modern bargaining theory.  In the late 1980s, bargaining
              theorists expected that the presence of incomplete information would explain
              why there is delay in bargaining, i.e., why bargainers often take a long time
              to reach an agreement.  But, these expectations proved incorrect in the
              standard models.  Even with incomplete information, there was no delay. 
              Surprisingly, delay does seem to be a direct consequence of incomplete
              information once the players can also renege.

Second, this project relaxes
              the assumption that the use of power is a game-ending strategy.  One facet of
              this problem models the exercise of power as a more explicit series of
              interacting decisions.  The focus here is on how the expected outcomes of this
              process shapes the bargaining that occurs before the exercise of power
              begins.

A second facet focuses on the fact that the exercise of power rarely
              eliminates actors.  Strategic interaction often continues after the explicit
              exercise of power has ended.  And, once the use of power is viewed in this way,
              a common strategic problem appears t underlie many problems in security
              affairs, international political economy, and domestic politics.  This research
              characterizes this problem and analyzes the relation between bargaining and
              power in it.

