Title       : Temptation and Self-Control in Dynamic Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9911177

Award Number: 9911177
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159897             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolfgang Pesendorfer pesendor@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The choices that individuals make often depend on when they make the decision. 
              Consider a tradeoff between getting a smaller reward in period t and a larger
              reward in period t+1.  In experiments, subjects routinely behave in a
              dynamically inconsistent fashion when facing such trade-offs:  if the decision
              is made in period t-1 or earlier, the subject opts for the larger, period t+1
              reward; by contrast, if the decision is made in period t, the individual opts
              for the smaller reward that offers immediate consumption instead of choosing to
              wait until t+1 for the larger reward. Similarly, individuals succumb to
              tempting but unhealthy consumption more often when the tempting good can be
              consumed immediately. 

In this project, which will be undertaken jointly
              with Faruk Gul of Princeton University, we develop a new choice-theoretic
              framework to capture this phenomenon. The starting point is a preference
              relation over sets of alternatives. A set represents a menu of choices for the
              agent. To capture the idea that agents may be tempted by ex ante undesirable
              alternatives, we allow preferences to exhibit a desire for commitment, i.e., we
              allow a strict preference for a smaller set of alternatives. In that framework
              we identify temptation and self-control as central determinants of behavior.
              

In this work we propose to extend the two-period model that we have already
              developed to an infinite horizon. The purpose of this extension is to
              facilitate application of our preferences ("self-control preferences") to a
              variety of settings, including standard competitive exchange economies. We will
              explore the implications of self-control preferences for the distribution of
              income, for the risk premia in stochastic representative agent models, and for
              the sustainability of debt contracts. In a model of history-dependent
              preferences, we intend to analyze addiction, a phenomenon closely linked to the
              lack of self-control.  To facilitate comparative statics results, we provide
              and characterize measures of comparative self-control and comparative
              preference for commitment. 


