Title       : Production and Distribution of Polychrome Ceramics in the Casas Grandes Region,
               Chihuahua, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a9911104

Award Number: 9911104
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90708              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniela Triadan dtr@scmre.si.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0200000   Interagency                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Daniela Triadan will analyze a
              series of  late prehistoric ceramics derived from the Casas Grandes region of
              Chihuahua, Mexico. In the centuries just prior to European contact, a complex
              society, centered on the site of Paquime developed in Casas Grandes and its
              influence extended northwards into the Southwestern USA. The presence of
              carefully crafted exotic materials including copper objects indicate widespread
              trade networks and suggest a mercantile society with broad extra-regional
              contacts. Archaeologists have noted similarities between Casas Grandes
              artifacts and counterparts in Central Mexico and it has been argued that the
              site represents a trading outpost which reveals a direct southern presence in
              the region. It has also been argued that late prehistoric cultural development
              is the Southwest is not indigenous but rather owes its presence to an outside
              impetus. For scientists who wish to understand how complex societies develop
              and interact this question is significant. Dr. Triadan's research focuses on
              the organization of Casas Grandes itself and attempts to reconstruct trade
              patterns in the region. She will focus on Paquime which is clearly the largest
              and most complex site and set it into a broader regional pattern through
              comparison with the numerous smaller sites in the Casas Grandes area. Because
              economic, social and political systems are closely linked, her analysis of
              ceramic production and distribution patterns will provide insight into broader
              features of social organization. She wishes to understand how tightly the
              production and distribution of ceramics were centralized and controlled by
              Paquime elites. The greater the degree of centralization the greater the
              probability that Casas Grandes developed and is best understood in local
              indigenous terms rather than as a foreign trading outpost.

To accomplish
              this goal Dr Triadan will map clay deposit distribution in the Casas Grandes
              area and chemically characterize individual occurrences. She will also conduct
              compositional analysis of a large series of shreds, undertake a stylistic
              design analysis of complete vessels and subject these also to compositional
              analysis. Limited petrography characterization will also take place and data
              will be obtained from traditional potters still active in the region. Because
              clay deposits are likely to differ in trace element composition, it should be
              possible to link individual objects to raw material source and thus reconstruct
              movement across the system. The results of this research will be of interest to
              regional archaeologists as well as social scientists interested in the
              mechanisms which underlie the growth of complex societies.

