Title       : Model Institutions for Excellence, Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a9911120

Award Number: 9911120
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9422633            (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Baker gbaker@xula.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deidre D. Labat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Xavier Univ of Louisiana
	      Palmetto & Pine Streets
	      New Orleans, LA  70125    504/486-7411

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In pursuit of the primary objective of increasing the number of Science,
              Engineering and Mathematics (SEM) graduates who enroll in SEM graduate degree
              programs, Xavier University has given considerable attention in Phase I of the
              Model Institutions for Excellence (MIE) Program to the development of capacity 
              building; particularly in the area of physical facilities. This effort has
              resulted in the completion of major portions of the University communications
              and information technology network infrastructure. As a consequence, all
              faculty, students and staff now have electronic mail accounts and access to the
              Internet and the World Wide Web. Additionally, an open student computer lab;
              the Resource and Mentoring Center; with over 70 computing stations and 4 group
              study areas has been established in the University library with extended
              operating hours (of 8:00am to 12 midnight). And, a major undertaking, the
              construction of a 100,000 square foot addition to the Academic Science building
              was completed with occupancy initiated in late 1998. The building houses the
              departments of Biology, Chemistry, Computer Sciences and Computer Engineering,
              and Physics/Engineering.

Moderate success in student outcomes is already
              beginning to be realized as a result of the ever-evolving strategies designed
              to create an environment within the University community to attract increasing
              numbers of SEM students to a "corporate" mindset that leads them to take into
              consideration the pursuit of a graduate degree. There are currently over 75
              more students now (than there were at the beginning of the MIE program in 1995)
              who are actively involved in activities designed to prepare them for graduate
              school.   As a snapshot of SEM student outcomes of those who have been directly
              affected by MIE through the first four years of the program, it is noted that
              the MIE program has financially supported approximately 130 students. Of that
              number, 43 students are still enrolled as SEM undergraduates, 62 have graduated
              with SEM degrees, of which 49 (79%) subsequently enrolled in graduate school.
              The remaining numbers include those who are recent graduates (11), and those
              who have chosen employment (9 in SEM areas) subsequent to graduation. As the
              program progresses, it is expected that student outcomes will become more
              plentiful and apparent as those students who have been exposed to the
              opportunities provided by the MIE program (including access to enhanc
ed
              facilities, and the equally important expanded support for undergraduate
              research) complete their undergraduate training.

Academically, the
              University achieved a major milestone by successfully completing all (including
              Board of Trustees) approvals for initiation of a Bachelor of Science Degree in
              Computer Engineering to begin with the Fall 2000 Semester. This will be the
              only such program at an independent HBCU in the country. This effort is in
              addition to the many activities of curriculum development and enhancement that
              has been performed by over 15 faculty in equally as many courses during the
              past four years.

A major administrative initiative has been the efforts to
              develop the XU Center for Undergraduate Research - which is now in the process
              of being established with the national search in progress for a Center
              Direct
or. In addition, the movement by the University to the SCT Banner 2000
              data management system will ensure that it has an integrated management system
              that is not only year 2000 compliant, but will also support its efforts to
              become a model institution in the use of information technology in the
              administrative processes of the University. A corollary to this development has
              been the establishment of a new University position - Associate Vice President
              for Technology Administration, who, as the Chief Information Officer, is now
              responsible for oversight and implementation of all electronic technology in
              the University. 

The above noted developments clearly establish the resolve
              and commitment of the University to the long-term development and
              institutionalization of MIE initiatives into all aspects of the academic
              process. In so doing, the University expects to achieve the ultimate MIE
              objective of significantly increasing the number of Xavier graduates who enroll
              in SEM related graduate degree programs.
