Title       : Regional Settlement and Economic Organization in Southeastern Shandong, China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9911128

Award Number: 9911128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne P. Underhill auhill@fieldmuseum.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary M. Feinman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Anne Underhill and Gary Feinman
              together with Chinese collaborators will conduct two seasons archaeological
              fieldwork at the site of Liangchengzhen located in the Shandong region of
              China. Anthropological archaeologists regard China as a major area of the world
              where complex societies developed and thus, to elucidate the processes which
              lead to the emergence of civilization, it is important to understand the
              prehistory of this region. However, relatively little systematic research has
              been conducted that investigates the nature of individual complex societies in
              China or the traces their change over time. To date, most work has focused on
              Henan province (where the Xia and Shang civilizations are believed to have
              arisen) and the necessary broad geographic scope has been lacking. Dr.
              Underhill and Feinman's research will help to remedy this situation. Over the
              past four years, the investigators have implemented a regional survey which has
              systematically covered over 300 sq km and identified a distinct settlement
              hierarchy of at least three tiers that is centered around the large Neolithic
              period site of Liangchengzhen. An initial season of test excavation at the site
              has unexpectedly revealed what appear to be houses built on platforms within
              the walled settlement and this suggests the possibility that differences in
              social status may have been in place early in the center's occupational
              history.

The NSF supported research will greatly expand the excavation
              program at the site with a focus on clearing of houses and their surroundings
              in order to examine the nature and extent of diachronic variation in housing,
              subsistence and diet, craft production and patterns of consumption. Through the
              collection of such data one can examine the economic foundations of the
              Liangchengzhen polity through time and compare the economy and organization of
              the late Neolithic and early Bronze Age in Shandong with the emerging record in
              Henan and other areas. In this way it should be possible to obtain a broader
              picture of the emergence of complex societies and the nature of long-term
              cultural development in China.

