Title       : A Continuation of the U.S. Antarctic Data Coordination Center at WDC-A/NSIDC.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a9911934

Award Number: 9911934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joyce A. Jatko                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $451680             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory R. Scharfen scharfen@kryos.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Bauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5140      OPERATIONS SUPPORT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9911934-Scharfen

The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and
              the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) have recognized
              the scientific and economic value of the data obtained from research activities
              in Antarctica and the need to make this information available to the greater
              scientific community.  Out of this recognition, an international effort to
              create a comprehensive electronic directory of Antarctic data set descriptions
              was begun.  As an Antarctic Treaty Party, the United States is participating in
              this effort through the operation of the U.S. Antarctic Data Coordination
              Center.  

This proposal continues the development and functioning of the
              U.S. Antarctic Data Coordination Center (USADCC).  The primary role of the
              USADCC is to facilitate the creation of data descriptions (metadata) and their
              submittal to the Antarctic Master Directory.  Internal to the U.S., the USADCC
              provides a national focal point for this activity, by assisting scientists with
              metadata directory tools, formats, and requirements, and by providing
              assistance to researchers with related data management issues.  Externally, the
              USADCC represents the U.S. in the international discussions related to the
              development of the Antarctic Master Directory.

Continuation of this effort
              will ensure that the usefulness of the scientific data resulting from the U.S.
              Antarctic Program is maximized. This will be accomplished as a result of the
              data's being documented in a common format and by easy access to the
              descriptions through a widely available directory system.  Funding this
              proposal will continue the needed coordination with U.S. scientists and with
              our international counterparts in this effort. 

