Title       : Understanding Crime and Community: Feasibility Proposal for A National
               Neighborhood Crime Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9911902

Award Number: 9911902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15002              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth D. Peterson peterson.5@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lauren J. Krivo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project studies the feasibility of obtaining neighborhood-level (tract)
              crime data from police departments across the U.S.  Currently, there is no
              large representative sample of crime data available at the community level. If
              feasible, the investigators will develop a larger project to collect such crime
              data for multiple U. S. cities (up to 110) for year 2000, and combine these
              crime data with additional information from the U.S. Census and other publicly
              available data sources.  The general purpose of a national neighborhood crime
              project is to more systematically examine how community structures within
              different types of cities are linked to crime in neighborhoods of varying
              racial/ethnic and class composition.  Prior researchers have explored the
              predictors of neighborhood crime patterns within cities, but our understanding
              of neighborhood variation in crime is limited due to the lack of readily
              available crime data at the neighborhood level for cities across the nation. 
              This lack of data has made it impossible to address issues of:  (1) the
              generalizability of previous findings regarding neighborhood crime patterns
              since studies only examine neighborhoods in one or a small number of settings;
              (2) whether the conditions present in different types of cities influence the
              relationships between neighborhood characteristics and crime; and (3) the
              separate effects of racial and class composition of local areas on crime rates.
               In light of these shortcomings in our understanding of neighborhood crime, the
              goal of this research is to compile tract-level crime data for a large sample
              of cities throughout the U.S. that vary substantially in sociodemographic and
              economic structure, including race and class composition, and to link these
              data with a consistent set of neighborhood, city, and metropolitan
              sociodemographic and economic variables for the same time period. These data
              will then be used to address the above questions and related substantive
              issues.  

 To assess the feasibility of acquiring the requisite data on
              neighborhood crime, the investigators will:  (1) make contact with random
              samples of city police departments requesting such data; (2) use the contacts
              made to gain information on the form and nature of available data; (3) make
              site visits to several departments to gain insights into the constraints
              departments in different types of cities face, and to identify appropriate
              strategies for gaining cooperation from different departments; and (4) assess
              the kinds and degrees of problems that will be encountered in trying to use
              data from different departments by attempting to code and construct crime
              variables from data actually acquired, and by having the address-based crime
              data geocoded to census tracts. 

