Title       : Foreign Takeovers of U. S. Establishments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a9911390

Award Number: 9911390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Lipsey rlipsey@gc.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zadia M. Feliciano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Foreign-owned firms and establishments in the United States are different from
              domestically owned ones even though most of them had originally been
              domestically owned. Foreign-owned firms and establishments are larger, pay
              higher wages, have higher labor and multi-factor productivity.  They have been
              steadily increasing their share of the U.S. economy.

It is not known whether
              these foreign-owned firms and establishments are different simply because
              foreign buyers selected larger, higher-skill, and more productive firms to
              purchase or because the foreign owners changed the formerly U.S.-owned firms
              after taking them over by bringing superior management or technology. The
              latter possibility would have more favorable implications for the impact on the
              U.S. economy of the rapid growth that has taken place in foreign direct
              investment in the United States and foreign ownership of U.S.
              production.

The purpose of this study is to answer this question by taking
              advantage of two relatively new statistical opportunities. One of these is the
              linking of the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) data on foreign ownership of
              U.S. firms with the data in the Census Bureau's Economic Censuses and Annual
              Surveys of Manufactures. The second is the merging of these matched data with
              the longitudinal files for individual establishments developed by the Center
              for Economic Studies (CES) of the Bureau of the Census. The longitudinal data
              identify changes in ownership and the BEA-Census match enables a user to
              identify which of the ownership changes were switches to foreign
              ownership.

With this identification of foreign takeovers of U.S.
              establishments, we will ask, first, what characteristics of U.S. establishments
              determined the choice of foreign takeover targets. We will ask, also, what
              characteristics, such as nationality and previous involvement in the U.S.
              market, determined the identity of acquirers, perhaps with different
              explanations for different industries and different purchasing countries. 
              Secondly, we will ask how the establishments changed after takeover, taking
              account of their condition at the time of takeover.  We will compare their
              later evolution to that of plants in the same industries, with similar
              characteristics, that continued in the same ownership and to plants taken over
              by domestic purchasers.

