Title       : Workshops on International Research Collaboration in Law and Social Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a9911507

Award Number: 9911507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82475              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank W. Munger fmunger@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bryant G. Garth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Law & Society Assoc
	      University of Massachusetts
	      Amherst, MA  010030001    413/545-4617

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5915,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
	In response to the growing international interest in the role of law in
              globalization, the Law and Society Association (LSA) proposes to establish
              global Collaborative Research Networks (CRNs) and to hold two Workshops to help
              scholars plan and carry out international research collaborations.  The
              Association believes that international collaboration in research on these
              issues will be more comprehensive and better informed because it will combine
              complementary perspectives and data from different research communities.
              Younger scholars will be targeted because the Workshops will have the greatest
              likelihood of influencing the career trajectories of these scholars, and
              through them, establishing a foundation for a new generation of research on
              global issues.  Scholars in Latin America and Eastern Europe will receive
              particular encouragement in order to take advantage of the workshop sites,
              Miami in the year 2000 and Budapest in 2001.  The Association will create
              internet-based CRNs accessible from all countries in order to promote contact
              and mutual engagement that will heighten awareness of opportunities and
              capacity for collaborative research.  The CRNs will also help identify younger
              scholars from Latin America, Eastern Europe and the US with similar research
              interests and committed to collaboration who can be invited to attend the
              Workshops.  At the Miami Workshop, participants will plan specific
              collaborative research projects.  At the Budapest Workshop, they will present
              and discuss reports on the progress of their research during the first year. 
              Follow up will continue to encourage completion of the planned
              research.



	
