Title       : Further Investigations on Larval Nutrition and its Influence on Juvenile
               Performance of Benthic Invertebrates: Competition, Thermal Stress, and Natural
               Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a9911682

Award Number: 9911682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Garrison                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Emlet   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The nutritional condition of benthic invertebrate larvae and its potential
              influence on juvenile performance (growth and survival in the days and weeks
              after settlement) is an almost unstudied area of marine ecology. Further
              understanding of the connections between oceanic (planktonic) and benthic
              components of the complex life-cycles of many marine invertebrates will require
              exploration of how the nutritional environment of the planktonic larva affects
              the performance of the post-metamorphic, benthic juvenile. In the first 3 years
              of work on this topic, we have shown that larval diet, manipulated in the
              laboratory, resulted in changes in larval organic content and size. Furthermore
              manipulations of larval diet had significant influences on growth and survival
              of newly metamorphosed/batched benthic juveniles under field conditions. This
              research joined lab experiments and field studies on juveniles from three
              different invertebrate phyla (barnacles, sea urchins and snails) and should
              help focus attention on early juvenile biology of marine invertebrates.
              Increased understanding of early juveniles should help clarify the importance
              of larval supply and post-settlement processes in population dynamics such as
              structuring populations and marine communities. It may also reveal whether
              larval nutritional status affects survival of juveniles to adulthood.
In the
              proposed research, investigations will determine how variations in larval
              nutritional history may affect intraspecific and interspecific competitive
              interactions among young juveniles. A number of different barnacle species that
              occur in intertidal and subtidal habitats in coastal and estuarine environments
              will be studied, thereby exploring influences of larval nutrition in habitats
              that vary in types and degrees of stresses (temperature, desiccation, and
              salinity, and types of food). Competitive interactions among juvenile and adult
              barnacles are well documented, but whether larval nutritional history has an
              influence on competitive outcome is unknown. By placing juveniles in
              interactive situations, this work will explore the influence of larval
              nutrition in field conditions that reflect settlement conditions in natural
              populations of many species.
A second part of the work will examine how larval
              nutritional history effects other features of juveniles besides their growth
              and survival. Measurements will be made on the effects of larval nutritional on
              the size of the juvenile feeding apparatus and molt rate and on the biochemical
              response of juveniles to thermal stress. This data will show morphological and
              physiological consequences of larval diet and contribute to our understanding
              of why growth and survival are affected. For the physiological responses to
              thermal stress, the induction of heat shock proteins (lisp 70's & 90's) and
              ubiquitin-conjugates will be quantified, (proteins that reflect reversible and
              irreversible damage to proteins, respectively).
Lastly, examinations of
              natural variation will be made for larval size and energy content and its
              affects on juvenile performance of the same barnacles for which we have
              conducted experimental manipulations, competition studies and physiological
              studies. By measuring size at metamorphosis and following performance of
              naturally settling barnacles we can determine whether the manipulations created
              in the laboratory are reflected among natural populations. Additional measures
              of larval size, organic content, and expression of thermal stress proteins will
              help join the laboratory and field-based studies. Natural settlement will be
              monitored throughout the year to look for seasonal patterns in larval quality
              and whether larval quality consistently influences juvenile performance.
This
              project should provide much needed empirical data on juvenile growth and
              survival, a broader context for understanding the role of larval nutrition, and
              new methodologies for further experimental investigations of juvenile ecology
              of marine invertebrates.

