Title       : Collaborative Research: Extratropical Transition of Atlantic Tropical Cyclones:
               An Examination of the Factors Influencing Transition and Post-Transition
               Intensity Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a9911212

Award Number: 9911212
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sumant Nigam                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160858             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jenni-Louise Evans evans@essc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is being done in collaboration with Dr. Christopher Velden of the
              University of Wisconsin.  

Extratropical transition of tropical cyclones is
              a poorly understood process, yet the resulting systems can have a tremendous
              impact on the weather in the northeastern U.S. and Canada, producing intense
              flooding rains, wind storms and wave damage.  As a tropical storm transitions
              into an extratropical storm, its structure changes from a nearly axisymmetric
              cyclone with maximum winds near the surface to a highly asymmetric cyclone with
              strongest winds aloft.  The transitions often involve interactions with surface
              fronts or upper level troughs or may result from mergers with pre-existing
              extratropical storms.  

The principal investigators will investigate the
              transition process by examining a number of observed cases of transitions to
              document the life cycle and structural changes and by conducting model
              simulations with a state-of-the-art mesoscale model.  As part of this effort,
              they will test a variety of conceptual models of the transition process.  A
              major new resource they will exploit is the availability of AMSU satellite
              data.  These data will be used to derive thermal profiles and wind fields that
              will be incorporated into the model simulations.  

It is hoped that a better
              understanding of the transition process will improve forecasts.



