Title       : A New Medical Image Analysis Approach Integrating Expert Systems and Deformable
               Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9911084

Award Number: 9911084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317148             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hamid SoltanianZadeh hamids@rad.hfh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kost V. Elisevich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Henry Ford Hospital
	      
	      Detroit, MI  48201    /   -

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9911084
SoltanianZadeh
In recent years, deformable models have been proposed
              for a variety of image analysis applications in industry, medicine, and
              computer vision.   However, there does not exist a reliable automated method
              for defining the initial shape of the model for many of the medical image
              analysis  applications, e.g., those dealing with structures with significant
              morphological  variations.  In addition, most of the deformable models used in
              these applications are two dimensional (2D), i.e., do not use the 3D structure
              of  the data, and do not generate accurate results when the desired structure 
              does not have an edge in part of the image.  Finally, they do not utilize 
              multi-parametric gray level information to characterize the desired structure.
              

The goal of this project is to develop a new approach, using an expert
              system  and a 3D deformable model, to overcome the above difficulties. 
              Developments  will be done in the context of an important biomedical
              application, and will  localize, segment, and characterize the hippocampus from
               magnetic resonance  imaging (MRI) studies of the brain.  The methods will be
              tested, evaluated,  and validated, using simulated images and clinical studies
              of epileptic patients.  Electroencephalographic (EEG) results and postsurgery
              outcomes will be used as  ``gold standards'' for evaluation and validation of
              the image analysis methods.  

The proposed research will be a break through
              in the development and application of deformable models, and will advance image
              analysis science in the direction of integrating expert systems and deformable
              models.   To illustrate practical use of the new methods, they will be used for
              establishing more specific and sensitive  means of identifying foci of
              epileptogenicity from MRI.  This will allow for a more contracted EEG
              investigation by focusing attention into the abnormal site.  The end result
              will be reductions in diagnostic cost, painful investigational operations, and
              lengthy hospital stays for a majority of patients.   The proposed approach is
              applicable to the identification, segmentation, and characterization of other
              brain structures (e.g., ventricles, amygdala, red nucleus, substantia nigra,
              globus pallidus, putamen, corpus callosum).  It is also applicable to virtually
              any image analysis task for which deformable models are used.


