Title       : Telemetric and Genetic Analyses of Habitat Use, Philopatry and Natal Homing of a
               Coastal Shark Species in Continental Nursery Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a9911295

Award Number: 9911295
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $351009             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle R. Heupel mheupel@mote.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Heist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Hueter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mote Marine Lab
	      1600 Ken Thompson Parkway
	      Sarasota, FL  342361004    941/388-4441

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9117,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The ocean's migratory vertebrates, including marine fishes, sea turtles, sea
              birds and marine mammals, are tied to the sea's margins in ways that are not
              completely understood. These marine animals often depend on inshore regions for
              reproduction, feeding and other essential activities during critical stages of
              their life histories. What delineates one coastal area from another as
              preferred habitat for these migratory species is poorly known, particularly for
              broad continental regions where suitable habitat appears to be widespread. How
              and why a species selects a specific continental coastal area for reproduction
              and early life stages -and whether the same geographic site is utilized by
              individual animals in an evolutionarily fixed way- remain somewhat of a
              mystery, particularly in the case of sharks, the predominant apex predators in
              the sea. Previous research on shark nursery areas conducted by Mote Marine
              Laboratory since 1991 has shown that at least 14 coastal shark species utilize
              inshore regions of the Gulf of Mexico coast of Florida as pupping and/or
              nursery areas. This research has shown that neonate blacktip sharks
              (Carcharhinus limbatus) are abundant in coastal bays and estuaries of the
              Florida Gulf coast from May through September before migrating south for the
              winter. This project will examine the use of a bay as a nursery area for
              neonate and juvenile C limbatus, attempt to define the ecological role of this
              area in the life history of young sharks and if use of these areas has resulted
              in evolution of philopatry. The research objectives are to: 1) delineate the
              activity patterns, home range and habitat preferences of young C limbatus in a
              nursery area and ascertain how long these animals reside within a specific
              continental nursery area; 2) estimate the return rate (philopatry) of one
              year-old animals to the natal nursery and defiiie their continued use of the
              nursery area; and 3) determine if adult female sharks return fo their natal
              nursery area to give birth (natal homing) through analysis of genetic variation
              within the population. This research will be conducted in Terra Ceia Bay, a
              continental nursery area along the central Gulf coast of Florida. A
              state-of-the-art system of remote acoustic hydrophones will be deployed within
              the nursery area during spring, summer and fall months to continuously monitor
              the location and movement of sharks fitted with ultrasonic transmitters. Data
              collected from hydrophone stations will be used to determine the residence
              time, activity patterns, home range and habitat use of young sharks in the
              nursery area. Once the use of Terra Ceia Bay as a nursery area for neonate C.
              limbatus has been defined it will be important to examine whether specific
              nursery areas continue to be integral in the life history of juvenile sharks.
              The return rate of young sharks to their natal nursery will be examined using
              the hydrophone system and by conducting sampling in three adjacent coastal
              nursery areas (Pine Island Sound, Yankeetown, Ten Thousand Islands). Continued
              monitoring of Terra Ceia Bay will provide information on residence time,
              activity patterns, home range and habitat use for the same individuals as
              non-neonate juveniles. Use of the remote acoustic system will provide the
              primary data to accomplish the first two objectives of this study. Genetic
              analyses will test for the occurrence of philopatry to support hydrophone
              results and test for natal homing by adult females. These analyses will provide
              the data necessary to evaluate the hypothesis of natal homing by female sharks.
              Although philopatry and natal homing are widely known in other animal species,
              this study will provide the first directed effort to elucidate these behaviors
              within an elasmobranch population, particularly one inhabiting a continental
              region where suitable nursery habitat is widespread and not insular. Results of
              this study will present continuous data concerning the habits of young sharks
              without disturbance by scientists during tracking. Overall, this project will
              examine the larger role of the coastal nursery area in the life history of
              shark species inhabiting continental shelf waters.
