Title       : Development and Application of Bromodeoxyuridine Immunochemical Techniques for
               the Molecular Analysis of Actively Growing Bacterioplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9911689

Award Number: 9911689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ena Urbach   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Giovannoni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this study is the development and application of new, molecular
              techniques to identify actively growing bacterioplankton species and estimate
              new cell production by individual bacterioplankton taxa. The work builds upon
              recently published techniques. The motivation for the research is the desire to
              provide a powerful, multifunctional analog to established methods for measuring
              bacterial production. 3H-thymidine (3 H-TdR) incorporation is the most commonly
              used method for inferring bacterial biomass productivity in natural
              populations. Its use is based upon the assumption that all bacteria in subject
              populations can incorporate exogenous TdR into nascent DNA, and that the
              relationship between H-TdR incorporation and productivity is nearly equal among
              species. However, it has not been possible to test these assumptions, and
              thereby validate application of 3 H-TdR incorporation to measurements of marine
              bacterioplankton production. This is because nearly all dominant marine
              bacteria are currently unculturable. We have developed a suite of techniques
              applying bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU), an immunogenic TdR analog, to the analysis
              of microbial growth in natural populations. The main advantage of BrdU
              techniques over 3 H-TdR incorporation is that immunochemical purification of
              BrdU-containing DNA, combined with established methods for the analysis of 16S
              rRNA genes, can be used to identify bacteria incorporating BrdU` in natural
              samples. This provides a means of determining which community members are
              contributing to measurements of bacterial productivity made using BrdU,
              enabling validation of the technique. In addition, with the completion of
              experiments outlined in this proposal, it may be possible to use BrdU to
              estimate biomass production by individual bacterioplankton taxa.

The
              proposed research includes experiments using cultured bacteria and coastal
              bacterioplankton to optimize BrdU` techniques, calibrate BrdU and 3 H-TdR
              incorporation to growth for culturable relatives of unculturable taxa, identify
              BrdU-incorporating taxa in bacterioplankton and estimate their taxon-specific
              growth. For completeness, additional experiments will compare numbers of
              BrdU-positive to 3 H-glucose and 3 H-leucine-incorporating cells in
              bacterioplankton, assess the BrdU-incorporation potential of apparently
              inactive taxa in bacterioplankton, and also determine whether BrdU and H-TdR
              are incorporated by the same bacterioplankton taxa. Finally, BrdU methods will
              be used to determine whether different bacterioplankton taxa synthesize DNA
              during different portions of the diurnal cycle.

The experiments in this
              proposal include analyses of some bacterioplankton samples collected off the
              Oregon coast and address the question of whether different taxa synthesize DNA
              at different times of day in open ocean and coastal environments. However, the
              experimental design does not purport to analyze global patterns of active
              bacterioplankton taxa, their roles in food webs, or biomass production by
              specific taxa. These types of large-scale experiments are a goal for the
              future. Here, we propose an ordered series of experiments to strengthen and
              calibrate BrdU methods so that future experiments can be conducted on sound
              theoretical and technical bases. This research should provide a powerful new
              addition to the oceanographer's molecular biology toolbox.

