Title       : A History of Quality Control: Consumer Power and Technical Change, 1920-1980
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a9911512

Award Number: 9911512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66263              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail A. Cooper gc05@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9149,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 99-11512 - Gail A. Cooper (Lehigh University)
" A History of Quality
              Control:  Consumer Power and Technical Change, 1920-1980"

This analysis of
              quality control from 1923 to 1980 builds on a vibrant literature in the history
              of production methods and systems. From armory practice to mass production to
              flexible production, scholars have argued that how we produce goods is as
              important as what we produce. Though each study focuses on the factory -- an
              important arena for issues about economics, labor, and engineering expertise --
              what happens there has broader implications for a national consensus on the
              proper role of industrial production in a democratic society.

Quality
              control has been picked up again and again in the decades since its beginnings
              at AT&T Bell Laboratories to anchor distinctive production needs: it has been a
              central element in the emergency wartime expansion of production in World War
              II, in the rise of the postwar defense industry, in the new production systems
              in postwar Japan, and in domestic and international trade in general. Each of
              those systems depends upon a network of contracting. Quality control's
              continuing relevance to manufacturing comes not only from its promise of cost
              savings and better products, but also from the way in which it ties businesses
              together. It is the lynch pin of contracting, establishing a new agreement on
              acceptable standards for quality. This study will focus on the role of quality
              control in contracting networks. Such an approach is calculated to not only
              document its technical contributions but it explores the way in which it
              realigns the social relations in manufacturing.

If quality control is
              important to contracting, contracts are a shaping influence on the spread of
              this new technology. Building on the premise that technical change is a
              disruptive element in the established social relations of manufacturing and
              commerce, The PI will examine the use of contractual obligations by buyers to
              force their suppliers to adopt the new technology. Thus this study follows a
              recent trend in the history of technology of examining industrial production
              within the context of the marketplace, yet it breaks new ground in its approach
              to consumerism. Rather than focusing on the buying power of a corpus of
              citizen-shoppers, this history explores the impact of contracting by corporate
              and military purchasers -- a vast economic exchange that rivals traditional
              consumer spending. By appraising the power of these institutional buyers to
              establish standards of quality, the PI hopes to capture the formative
              developments of the decades 1940-1980, when massive public expenditures on
              national defense begun during World War II were continued at heightened levels
              throughout the Cold War. This study will broaden our understanding of Cold War
              technology beyond new weapons systems to include new methods of industrial
              production, and critically examine the policy of promoting technical innovation
              through defense spending.

The PI will conduct summer research in personal
              papers, company records, the archives of professional engineering societies,
              military procurement agencies, and engineering journals with the ultimate
              objective of producing a history of quality control. Such a history should be
              of interest to historians of American technology and business, in particular,
              and to historians of American culture, in general. In addition, it should be
              useful to policymakers who evaluate the role of quality manufacturing in
              international competitiveness, and corporate executives who employ national and
              international quality standards in their transactions with suppliers and
              customers.

