Title       : Continuation of Activities for the Support Office for Aerogeophysical Research
               (SOAR)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a9911617

Award Number: 9911617
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1543878            (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald D. Blankenship blank@ig.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Morse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ian W. Dalziel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9911617
Blankenship

This award, provided jointly by the Antarctic Geology
              and Geophysics Program, the Antarctic Glaciology Program, and the Polar
              Research Support Section of the Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for
              continuation of the Support Office for Aerogeophysical Research (SOAR). From
              July 1994 to July 2000, SOAR served as a facility to accomplish aerogeophysical
              research in Antarctica under an agreement between the University of Texas at
              Austin and the National Science Foundation's Office of Polar Programs
              (NSF/OPP). SOAR operated and maintained an aerogeophysical instrument package
              that consists of an ice-penetrating radar sounder, a laser altimeter, a
              gravimeter and a magnetometer that are tightly integrated with each other as
              well as with the aircraft's avionics and power packages. An array of aircraft
              and ground-based GPS receivers supported kinematic differential positioning
              using carrier-phase observations.  SOAR activities included: developing
              aerogeophysical research projects with NSF/OPP investigators; upgrading of the
              aerogeophysical instrumentation package to accommodate new science projects and
              advances in technology; fielding this instrument package to accomplish
              SOAR-developed projects; and management, reduction, and analysis of the
              acquired aerogeophysical data.  In pursuit of 9 NSF-OPP funded aerogeophysical
              research projects (involving 14 investigators from 9 institutions), SOAR
              carried out six field campaigns over a six-year period and accomplished
              approximately 200,000 line kilometers of aerogeophysical surveying over both
              East and West Antarctica in 377 flights.

This award supports SOAR to
              undertake a one year and 8 month program of aerogeophysical activities that are
              consistent with continuing U.S. support for geophysical research in Antarctica.
              
- SOAR will conduct an aerogeophysical campaign during the 200/01 austral
              summer to accomplish surveys for two SOAR-developed projects: "Understanding
              the Boundary Conditions of the Lake Vostok Environment: A Site Survey for
              Future Studies" (Co-PI's Bell and Studinger, LDEO); and "Collaborative
              Research: Seismic Investigation of the Deep Continental Structure Across the
              East-West Antarctic Boundary" (Co-PI's Weins, Washington U. and Anandakrishnan,
              U. Alabama). After configuration and testing of the survey aircraft in McMurdo,
              SOAR will conduct survey flights from an NSF-supported base adjacent to the
              Russian Station above Lake Vostok and briefly occupy one or two remote bases on
              the East Antarctic ice sheet.
- SOAR will reduce these aerogeophysical data
              and produce profiles and maps of surface elevation, bed elevation, gravity and
              magnetic field intensity. These results will be provided to the respective
              project investigators within nine months of conclusion of field activities. We
              will also submit a technical manuscript that describes these results to a
              refereed scientific journal and distribute these results to appropriate
              national geophysical data centers within approximately 24 months of completion
              of field activities.
- SOAR will standardize all previously reduced SOAR data
              products and transfer them to the appropriate national geophysical data centers
              by the end of this grant.
- SOAR will convene a workshop to establish a
              community consensus for future U.S. Antarctic aerogeophysical research. This
              workshop will be co-convened by Ian Dalziel and Richard Alley and will take
              place during the spring of 2001.
- SOAR will upgrade the existing SOAR
              in-field quality control procedures to serve as a web-based interface for
              efficient browsing of many low-level SOAR data streams.
- SOAR will repair
              and/or refurbish equipment that was used during the 2000/01 field
              campaign.

Support for SOAR is essential for accomplishing major geophysical
              investigations in Antarctica. Following data interpretation by the science
              teams, these data will provide valuable insights to the structure and evolution
              of the Antarctic continent.

