Title       : The Formation and Spread of Status Beliefs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9911331

Award Number: 9911331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joane Nagel                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cecilia L. Ridgeway ridgeway@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


SES 9911331
Cecilia L Ridgeway

	This project supports
              theoretical and experimental work to advance an established theory of the ways
              in which unevaluated personal characteristics can acquire status value. The
              theory is concerned with understanding how a property of an individual-say, eye
              color or handedness-can take on connotations of social worth and performance
              capacities-such as those now possessed by gender and skin color in our society.
              

	In this work, the concern is how certain structural conditions, such as
              differing wealth, can lead to attaching status value to distinguishing
              characteristics of the people involved. The theory proposes that economic
              inequality leads to specific interaction patterns, and it is those patterns
              that can, under conditions specified by the theory, lead to presumptions of
              ability and its lack. The inferred ability differences then spread, according
              to patterns specified in the theory, to create general understandings regarding
              the social value of individuals possessing differentiating characteristics. The
              status creation process can be blocked if an interactant challenges the
              presumed status valuation while it is being created. 

In other words, the
              theory argues that interaction patterns can create local realities where
              categorical difference becomes consensually evaluated. The experiment will test
              that argument. Participants in four-person teams will overhear a teammate treat
              another teammate in ways the theory claims should lead to inferences about
              status difference. A third teammate will either support or challenge the
              influence hierarchy. If the theory is correct, social support will lead to
              status creation, and challenge will block it. Results will be used to modify
              the theory of status construction that the PI and her students have been
              developing over the past decade. 

