Title       : Processes Mediating Judgements of Likelihood
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9911245

Award Number: 9911245
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178664             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul D. Windschitl paul-windschitl@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Likelihood judgment plays a critical role in decisions that are made in
almost
              all of life's domains.  Often, people must judge the likelihood of
one event
              when more than one alternative event is known to be possible
(e.g., the
              likelihood that a patient has condition A rather than condition
B, C, or D;
              the likelihood that a contract for a construction project will
be awarded to
              bidder F rather than G or H; the likelihood that a friend is
arriving on
              airline K rather than M or L).  The proposed research will
examine fundamental
              processes underlying such likelihood judgments.  Recent
research by the
              primary investigator suggests that judgments of likelihood
are often mediated
              by a distinct comparison heuristic; such judgments are
largely dependent upon
              a comparison between the strength of the evidence
for the focal event and the
              strongest alternative event, rather than a
weighing of the evidence for the
              focal event versus the aggregate of the
evidence for all alternative events. 
              The comparison heuristic is very
efficient and generally produces reasonable
              judgments of likelihood.
However, the heuristic can also underlie patterns of
              perceived likelihood
that are not consistent with the normative dictates of
              standard probability
theory.  Nine experiments will investigate the nature,
              strength, and scope
of the comparison heuristic.  They will also examine how
              task conditions
that vary under everyday judgment situations--time pressure,
              the type of
response being solicited, and the quantifiability of the
              available
evidence--influence likelihood judgments.  The experiments will
              involve a
wide range of paradigms and judgment types.  Various methodological
              tools
(e.g., manipulations to the distributions of alternative outcomes,
              process
tracing) will allow for an assessment of the relative influence
              of
deliberative versus heuristic processes within manipulated conditions
              of
the experiments.  This research should substantially advance
              the
understanding of processes mediating judgments of likelihood as well
              as
enhance researchers' abilities to predict judgments (and decisions
              and
behaviors) that are based on perceptions of focal events that have
              multiple
alternatives.

