Title       : A Biography of Dmitrii Ivanovich Mendeleev (1834-1907)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a9911014

Award Number: 9911014
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73538              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan M. Brooks nbrooks@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 99-11014 - Nathan M. Brooks (New Mexico State University) 
"A Biography of
              Dmitrii Ivanovich Mendeleev (1834-1907)"

This award supports research for a
              book manuscript examining the life and career of Dmitrii Ivanovich Mendeleev
              (1834-1907), who is best known as the originator and developer of the Periodic
              System of the Chemical Elements. One of the high points of nineteenth-century
              science, the Periodic System had a profound impact on the development of
              chemistry and physics.

Mendeleev was the most important scientist in
              pre-revolutionary Russia and a leading figure in nineteenth-century European
              chemistry. He also conducted extensive research in many other fields of
              science, including work on the boundaries of chemistry and physics,
              meteorology, geology, geophysics, technology, metrology, the physics of gases,
              solution theory, and many others. In Russia, Mendeleev's influence spread far
              beyond science. He acted as a consultant and took an active role in a wide
              variety of areas, including agriculture, industry, economic policies, and many
              others. He also served as an informal "science advisor" to many important
              officials in the Russian government and headed the Russian Central Bureau of
              Weights and Measures for the last 15 years of his life. In addition, he worked
              assiduously to promote the authority of science and to create the conditions
              necessary for the development of a civil society in Russia. In sum, Mendeleev
              was an important cultural figure who, in various ways, bridged the worlds of
              science and the wider society in Imperial Russia.

However, despite
              Mendeleev's evident importance to both Russian and world science, there exists
              no satisfactory biography of Mendeleev in any language, including Russian. The
              aim of this project is to produce a thorough, archive-based biography of
              Mendeleev that will bring together the many diverse strands of his work and
              activities. The biography will situate Mendeleev in the contexts of both
              Russian history and the history of sciences, based on up-to-date scholarship
              and original research. Mendeleev's efforts to modernize Russia will be used as
              a general framework to link together many of the various threads of his life
              and work, and in turn they will help show the relationship between these
              threads and the development of science in Russia. The biography will argue that
              Mendeleev's many cultural, bureaucratic, and scientific activities were
              grounded in his desire to create a "civil society" in Russia that would replace
              the crumbling autocratic structure of society. This project will be of interest
              to a wide audience, including historians of science, Russian historians,
              natural scientists, and others.

