Title       : Power and Pollution: The Social History of Lead, Silica and Plastics in Post War
               America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a9911127

Award Number: 9911127
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160569             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Rosner dr289@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Markowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1094,9187,9196,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 99-11127 - David Rosner (Columbia University) & Gerald Markowitz (John Jay
              College, CUNY)
"Power and Pollution:  The Social History of Lead, Silica, and
              Plastics in Post War America"

This award supports the PIs as they study the
              cultural, political, and scientific relationships that "frame" our
              understanding of occupational and environmental health through an analysis of
              the recent history of three industrial substances -- silica, polyvinyl chloride
              (a plastic) and lead. These materials are ubiquitous in the American
              environment and are often presented as essential to the creation of modern
              American affluence.  Yet, public health officials, scientists, government
              regulators, insurance companies, industry, labor, environmental activists,
              economists, political scientists and historians all have different perspectives
              about how to measure the "value" of these basic ingredients, especially when
              their role as causes of disease are factored in. A close examination of the
              social, regulatory, scientific and political histories of these substances will
              clarify the interplay among the philosophical ideas, political power and
              economic realities that underlie the conflicts over policy.

Together, the
              PIs argue, these three substances encapsulate important aspects of the history
              of the relationship between occupational and environmental health in the
              post-war period. During this period, we have seen conservatives and liberals,
              environmentalists and union activists, economists and political scientists
              contend over the best ways to address the impact of underground and air
              pollution, water quality, smokestack emissions, smog, and the like. This study
              explores these different groups' perspectives as they have shaped, through
              negotiation and contention, the medical, scientific and technical definitions
              of disease and responsibility for risk. While clearly an immense and complex
              history, the PIs argue that by focusing on these three substances, they will be
              better able to understand the broad scope of the relationship between
              environmental and occupational history. By looking at their political, public
              health, and regulatory histories, it is possible to begin to understand the
              complex relationship between traditional definitions of environmental and
              occupational danger. Such an approach also challenges traditional conceptions
              that there are defined "boundaries" between occupational and environmental
              concerns. They maintain that it is critical for scientists, engineers, and
              scholars to understand the specific historical circumstances that led to new
              conceptualizations of the intersections of occupational and environmental
              hazards and the ways that American culture defined, categorized, and negotiated
              illnesses created by industrial production. The PIS plan to complete a book for
              the University of California Press that will attract the attention of
              historians of public policy, historians of public health, labor historians, and
              policy makers.

