Title       : Collaborative Research: Incorporation of Sensors into Autonomous Gliders for 4-D
               Measurement of Bio-Optical and Chemical Parameters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a9911036

Award Number: 9911036
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500536            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles C. Eriksen charlie@ocean.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              T.James Osse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Winn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0200000   Interagency                             
              0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
9911036
Eriksen

This research project is conducted under the auspices of
              the National Oceanographic Partnership Program (NOPP).  Partners include the
              Univ. of Maine, Univ. of Washington, several commercial instrument
              manufacturers, and two local government agencies.  The project addresses an
              ocean sciences requirement for new ocean observational capabilities for
              continuous, high-resolution measure-ments of oceanic processes that include
              characterization of distributions, mechanisms, and rates of processes involving
              chemical and biological variables together with physical variables in the
              ocean. The overall objective is to add new capabilities to a small (1.8 m, 52
              kg) autonomous underwater glider that moves horizontally and vertically using
              variable buoyancy control and wings. It can perform hundreds of cycles per
              launch from surface to 2,000 m or less, report data back (including GPS
              location) in real time upon each surfacing, and be reprogrammed from shore. New
              sensors will be developed and integrated into the system for dissolved oxygen
              and various inherent optical properties of seawater, all measured at the same
              time and space scales as physical properties. The project encompasses
              development of new sensors, miniaturization of several extant sensors and
              extensive field tests.  The research team includes industrial partners, local
              governments working on practical societal/scientific issues; biological,
              physical and optical oceanographers; and an education effort from 8th grade
              through graduate school. 

The specific goals of this project are:
- to
              extend development of an autonomous, underwater glider to be capable of
              measuring biological, optical, physical and chemical variables on the same time
              and space sales, in real time, and in diverse environments;
- to develop
              small, light-weight, low-power sensors for measuring dissolved oxygen, inherent
              optical   properties (IOPs) of seawater, chlorophyll a fluorescence (the
              primary surrogate for phytoplankton   biomass), and other fluorescing
              compounds;
- to verify with ground-truth measurements the high quality data
              collected by the glider;
- to demonstrate the glider's capabilities for
              real-time, data-adaptive sampling;
- to enhance understanding of the dynamics
              of key physical and biological parameters in Puget Sound that are essential to
              assessing human impacts on water quality;
- to demonstrate the glider's
              ability to significantly improve validation of satellite ocean color data by
              sampling at the appropriate scales; and 
- to engage undergraduates and
              graduate students in engineering tests and research applications.

The newly
              developed optical sensors for IOPs and chlorophyll a fluorescence would be
              easily adaptable to other platforms, and hence be easily and rapidly available
              to the general oceanographic community. Also, the glider will be able to
              operate in areas beyond Puget Sound including both coastal and open-ocean
              environments.


