Title       : Expanded Measures of Price and Quantity Structures Over Space and Time
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9911377

Award Number: 9911377
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359257             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Heston aheston@ssc.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project continues the development of a Space-Time System of National
              Accounts (STSNA) covering virtually all of the countries of the world. Our
              STSNA, The Penn World Table (PWT) ) is still far from a perfected data source
              but it is fast approaching that end. The very large number of citations to PWT
              publications in the Social Science Citation Index makes clear that already PWT
              is satisfying a substantial need in the community of social science empirical
              researchers.
The standard System of National Accounts (SNA) contains
              invaluable country time series of quantities and prices that make possible a
              variety of intertemporal comparisons within countries. However except in very
              special cases, the SNA entries cannot effectively be used in making comparisons
              across countries. The inadequacy of SNA entries for quantity comparisons
              between countries -- that is interspatial comparisons - is apparent immediately
              when it is seen that quantities, represented by expenditure outlays, are
              expressed in different currency units in different countries.  The interspatial
              comparison difficulty is not simply a matter of differences in currency units.
              Price parities, at the heart of an STSNA, are needed to make the expenditures
              commensurable across countries. Even comparisons of descriptive ratios that are
              units-free are likely to depend on relative price ratios in the countries. For
              example, a country's Investment to GDP ratio derived from the SNA will reflect
              not only relative quantities but also the price of its investment goods
              relative to the prices of all other goods. Even here, price parties -- absent
              from the SNA -- are needed to make comparisons of the real descriptive ratio,
              Investment /GDP.
The Penn World Table is an integration of the entries of the
              SNA and the prices that have been collected in many countries every five years
              in the benchmark studies of the International Comparison Programme.  The
              general methodology for combining these quite different data sets is reasonably
              well-established, but the implementation requires constant attention. From the
              standpoint of the researchers and policymakers who draw on the Penn World
              Table, the constant updating and revising is routine but essential. The
              development of estimates of interesting new variables is critical, and
              improving the accessibility of the Table's data is important. Past National
              Science Foundation support made possible the expansion of the scope of the PWT
              from the 1980 Mark 1 version of PWT (119 countries, 10 variables, and the years
              1950 and 1960-77) to the most recent Mark 5.6 version (152 countries, 29
              variables and years 1950-92). This expansion of scope probably accounts for the
              widespread use of PWT, but primary emphasis has been put on improving the
              quality of the estimates.
Dissemination of the Penn World Table and the full
              output of the 197O, 1975, 1980, 1985, and 1990 benchmark studies is at the
              state of the art through the Penn web site. The Table can also be extracted
              from a number of other web sites, one of which provides significant graphical
              support. Now quantity and price estimates are also available for over 900
              sub-national units (states, provinces, etc.) for about 30 major countries in
              1990.


