Title       : Towards and Understanding of the Existence of Small Oceanic Planktonic Copepods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a9911513

Award Number: 9911513
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gustav-Adolf Paffenhofer cmp@skio.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter G. Verity  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Large areas of our planet are covered by subtropical and tropical oceans which
              contain in excess of 200 species of copepods of which the most abundant are
              small. Attempts to conduct in-depth studies to understand the function of
              epileptic communities in these waters have been limited. The largest effort to
              date was conducted by Soviet scientists in 1974 in the equatorial Pacific, but
              yielded limited rate quantifications due to methodological shortcomings.
              Process studies of epipelagic environments included quantifications of major
              groups such as microzooplankton (collected by 20 to 200 mm mesh),
              mesozooplankton (200 to 2,000 mm mesh), and macrozooplankton (> 2,000 mm mesh).
              The microzooplankton, which is usually not collected quantitatively by
              traditional zooplankton sampling, includes juveniles of larger copepods and the
              vast majority of all stages of small copepods, as well as numerous protozoa. To
              understand the true contribution of microzooplankton to processes in the ocean
              requires a separation of proto- and metazooplankton.  Numerous studies have
              quantified consumption and growth rates of various groups of protozooplankton,
              but direct quantifications of some of the rates of the metazooplankton
              component of the microplankton have been rare.

The overall goal of this
              proposed work is to increase our understanding of the mechanisms governing
              persistence and existence of highly abundant species of subtropical-tropical
              oceanic planktonic copepods. We propose to conduct field and laboratory studies
              of three abundant species of oceanic copepods (Oithona plumifera,
              Clausocalanusfurcalus, Paracalanus aculeatus) which occur circumglobally, with
              the general objective of enhancing our understanding of the existence and
              persistence of small copepod species in environments of extraordinarily low
              abundances of potential food organisms. Specifically, field studies are
              expected to provide information on (1) vertical distribution of juveniles and
              adults of these three species; (2) their potential food organisms and major
              hydrographic variables; and (3) quantifications of feeding and reproduction
              rates plus estimates of mortality rates. Experimental studies will provide
              information on feeding and growth of juveniles, respiration and reproduction of
              adult females, motion of juveniles and adults, and sensor distribution on these
              copepods' sensory structures. The latter information will contribute to
              understanding the physiological constraints on feeding that are imposed by the
              functional morphology of the copepods' sensory structures. We hypothesize that
              differences in each species' energy budget, estimated mortality rate and
              perceptive ability will explain mechanisms contributing to these species'
              abundance in tropical/subtropical oceans.

The significance of the proposed
              research is to obtain, through concerted field and laboratory studies, an
              understanding how these three abundant circumglobally occurring copepod species
              can persist, and through that improve our understanding of the functioning of
              an epiplanktonic oceanic community under the present climatic conditions.
              Combining information from field and laboratory data, we expect to reveal
              mechanisms by or through which each of the 3 species can persist in their
              environment. Once we understand how organisms are adapted to their respective
              environment, and know their requirements for living and reproduction, then we
              should be in a good position to be predictive about the way pelagic ecosystems
              might respond to climate variability and change.


