Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Multimedia Data Over Wireless Networks with
               Virtual Reality Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2000     
File        : a9911123

Award Number: 9911123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77916              (Estimated)
Investigator: Herman D. Hughes hughes@cps.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles B. Owen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Biocca  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shakil Akhtar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2890,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-9911123
Herman Hughes
Michigan State University

CISE Research
              Instrumentation: Multimedia Data over Wireless Networks with Virtual Reality
              Applications

The Computer Science and Engineering and Telecommunication
              Department at Michigan State University (MSU) will purchase equipment for
              upgrading three existing research laboratories: High Speed Networking &
              Performance Lab (HSNP), Media and Entertainment Technologies Lab (MET), and
              Media Interface and Network Design Lab (MIND).  HSPN supports a testbed that
              consists of an assortment of ATM equipment and the research focus has been on
              ATM technology issues, including wireless ATM networks.  MET has workstations
              equipped with video capture and presentation facilities and the research
              emphasis has been on ubiquitous access to multimedia databases.  The MIND Lab
              has an array of virtual reality facilities and the current research examines
              communication and human-computer interaction in virtual environments.  These
              three labs will conduct collaborative interdisciplinary research, with the
              primary emphasis on the support of multimedia data streams over both wireless
              and hybrid networks, with the multimedia data being generated/displayed by the
              research activities to take place in the MET and MIND Labs. 

These three
              labs will conduct collaborative interdisciplinary research, with the primary
              emphasis on the support of multimedia data streams over both wireless and
              hybrid networks, with the multimedia data being generated/displayed by the
              research activities to take place in the MET and MIND Labs.  To carry out the
              proposed research MSU will purchase the following equipment: (1) t multimedia
              lap-tops, (2) 10Mbps WaveLan products, 2 video-on-demand servers, 2 head
              centered: 2 head's up status displays: info hemisphere, body centered data
              sphere, virtual tool belt, sensor array, lipstick camera, and microphones.

