Title       : Reducing Contextual Bias In Performance Appraisal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2000      
File        : a9911132

Award Number: 9911132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190487             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas H. Wedell wedell@garnet.cla.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
***
0011132
Douglas H. Wedell

There is widespread use of
              assessment tools in our society.  Performance
appraisal is one such tool that
              serves as a basis for important personnel
decisions, such as allocation of
              raises or recommendation for promotion or
termination.  Because performance
              appraisal strongly relies on subjective
judgment, it is susceptible to
              systematic biases or distortions.  One such
bias that has been repeatedly
              demonstrated in performance appraisal is
contextual contrast.  This bias
              consists of the tendency to rate a person's
work performance higher after
              assessing other employees with poorer work
records than after assessing those
              with better work records. Such contextual
dependency represents a serious
              source of error in assessment, threatening its
reliability and
              validity.

This project explores different procedures designed to reduce or
              eliminate
contextual contrast in performance appraisal and thereby create more
              reliable
and valid assessment techniques. Materials consist of performance
              profiles of
hypothetical employees that include information on several facets
              of their
work records.  In each experiment, the contrast bias is induced by
              having
participants evaluate different sets of materials prior to assessing a
              core
set of materials.  The aim of the research is to develop assessment
              procedures
that will produce the same judgments of core materials across
              different
contexts. These procedures include manipulating category labels,
              types of
judgments, and training methods. Experiments will test the degree to
              which
including clear examples for the different category levels will
              reduce
contextual bias.  Additional experiments will test the efficacy of
              two
alternative judgment tasks, comparative and similarity judgment,
              for
eliminating contrast effects.  Finally, another series of experiments
              explores
the potential for different training regimens to eliminate contextual
              bias.
The aim of this research is to develop procedures that could be
              implemented in
business, education, and government to produce more reliable
              and valid
assessments.
***


