Title       : Quantile Regression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a9911184

Award Number: 9911184
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184919             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Koenker Rkoenker@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Quantile regression is a statistical technique designed to estimate, and conduct
              inference about, conditional quartile functions. Classical linear regression
              methods based on minimizing sums of squared residuals enable researchers to
              estimate models for conditional mean functions, quartile regression methods
              offer a mechanism for estimating models for the conditional median function,
              and the full range of other conditional quartile functions. Quantile regression
              has been used in a broad range of application settings. Reference growth curves
              for quartiles of childrens' height and weight have a long history in pediatric
              medicine. Quantile regression methods may be used to estimate upper and lower
              quartile reference curves as a function of age, sex, and other covariates
              without imposing stringent parametric assumptions on the relationships among
              these curves. Quantile regression methods have been widely used in economics to
              study determinants of wages, discrimination effects, and trends in income
              inequality. In ecology, theory often suggests how observable covariates affect
              limiting sustainable population sizes, and quartile regression has been used to
              directly estimate models for upper quartiles of the conditional distribution
              rather than inferring such relationships from models based on conditional
              central tendency. In survival analysis, and event history analysis more
              generally, there is often also a desire to focus attention on particular
              segments of the conditional distribution, for example survival prospects of the
              oldest-old, without the imposition of global distributional assumptions,
              suggesting that quartile regression may be appropriate.
This project will
              focus primarily on problems of statistical inference in quartile regression.
              The approach is based on an ingenious suggestion by Khmaladze for dealing with
              problems of testing composite null hypotheses involving unknown nuisance
              parameters based on the empirical distribution function. Khmaladze's martingale
              transformation approach provides a general strategy for purging the effect of
              the estimated nuisance parameters from the first order asymptotic
              representation of the empirical process and thereby restores the feasibility of
              "asymptotically distribution free" tests. The approach seems especially
              attractive in quantile regression settings and should be capable of greatly
              expanding the scope of inference currently described in the econometrics
              literature.


