Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Impact of Expectations
               of Legislative Processes on Legitimacy Perceptions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9911620

Award Number: 9911620
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Sullivan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Representation, for the most part, works.  Public opinion drives policy output
              and change most of the time.  Yet, many citizens believe that representatives
              cannot be trusted to respond to public needs and interests.  This dissertation
              examines the sources and content of people's expectations of the legislative
              process to help reconcile this apparent contradiction.  A theory of public
              opinion is developed; this theory is based on mounting evidence that people's
              overall evaluations of the legitimacy of decision-making authorities are
              influenced by their perceptions of procedural fairness.  Most American today do
              not believe that the legislative process is impartial.  Instead, many citizens
              believe that the process is susceptible to pressure from interest groups and
              business organizations, and, thus, it creates a discrepancy between how people
              want government towork and how they perceive that it does work.  Although it is
              part of the story, this discordance by itself cannot explain fully why so many
              Americans are skeptical of the legitimacy of the legislative process.  I
              content that underlying widespread condemnation of government is an increasing
              conflict of expectations of the market with those of poliitics.  People, in
              this theory, increasingly expect from the legislative process the same degree
              of efficiency, accountability, and equality of opportunity that the perceive
              the market offers, even though pluralist mechanisms of government cannot match
              these economic ideals.  Thus, the goal of this project is to demonstrate that
              underlying broad antipathy toward government is a fundamental inconsistency
              between citizens' expectations of legislative processes and what is possible
              within the institutional requirements of a pluralist democracy.  This thesis is
              tested in two ways.  First, I use a survey that includes questions from
              McClosky and Zaller's Opinions and Values of Americans Scale for Capitalist and
              Democratic Values.  The survey also includes items from the standard
              cross-sections of the National Election Studies as well as questions of my own
              design.  Finally, the postulated psychological mechanism derived from Tyler's
              work on procedural justice is isolated using an original experiment.
