Title       : Synoptic Climatology of Factors Contributing to Precipitation Over the Eastern
               United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2000       
File        : a9911315

Award Number: 9911315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107432             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Konrad cek@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1325,1579,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Atmospheric research on precipitation tends to focus on the investigation of the
              heaviest events.  As a result, studies have not yet been able to identify those
              factors that lead to precipitation (e.g., moisture ridging, jet streaks, and
              instability) as well as combinations of those factors that effectively
              discriminate extreme precipitation events from ordinary ones.  Generalized
              relationships have been identified between atmospheric fields and heavy
              precipitation amounts, but these relationships typically are weak and mediated
              strongly by other factors (e.g. geography and synoptic regimes).  Furthermore,
              these relationships do not account for the spatial characteristics of the
              precipitation event.  This project will explore the synoptic climatology of
              precipitation, with explicit attention given to links between different factors
              that lead to precipitation and different types of precipitation events. 
              Sub-synoptic-scale atmospheric features associated with precipitation in the
              literature will be identified in the vicinity of all precipitation events
              occurring over 30 warm seasons across the eastern two-thirds of the U.S.  Among
              the features that will be computed are the strength, presence, or absence of
              ridging features, the propagation speed and persistence of events, and
              locational relationships among different features.  Statistical analyses will
              be conducted to categorize precipitation events according to the
              characteristics of the associated contributing factors and to combinations of
              characteristics associated with different types of precipitation events.  The
              climatological analyses developed through this project will be used to
              establish a climatological context for case studies of extreme precipitation
              events reported in the literature.  This project will provide a climatological
              basis for assessing the relative roles of various sub-synoptic-scale features
              in different types of precipitation events.  It will determine the extent to
              which extreme events are associated with unusual contributing factors or
              unlikely combinations of factors.  This project will provide fundamental
              insights into relationships between atmospheric patterns and the occurrence of
              different types of precipitation events, thereby contributing to the
              enhancement of precipitation forecasting as well as to understandings of a
              broad range of other issues associated atmospheric dynamics.

