Title       : A Regional Perspective on the Archaeology of Global Encounters, Banda, Ghana AD
               1300-1825
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2001  
File        : a9911690

Award Number: 9911690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219299             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann B. Stahl ASTAHL@BINGHAMTON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation Dr. Ann Stahl and her
              collaborators will continue a program of archaeological research in the Banda
              region of Ghana. While anthropologists have generally conceptualized such rural
              regions as relatively self contained units, largely understandable through
              examination of local context, it has become increasingly clear that changes on
              broader regional and international levels have direct affects on daily life and
              social organization. In her past work, Dr. Stahl has focused on two village
              sites which span the period from ca. 1,300 to 1825 AD and related changes in
              pattern to larger external factors. During this ca. 500 year span, the region
              was affected first by trans-Saharan trade, then incorporation into the larger
              Asante empire and finally contact with British colonialists. Changes in
              settlement pattern, village abandonment, centralization and control of craft
              production, subsistence and exchange all show the influence of this broader
              political and economic context. Dr. Stahl and her team will conduct additional
              work at one previously tested site to increase artifact sample sizes and then
              excavate at a number of previously identified locales to establish a broader
              regional picture. She wishes to determine whether chronological patterns
              observed to date reflect a broader pattern. A range of standard and specialized
              laboratory analyses will be conducted. Ceramics will be studied macroscopically
              to refine the chronological sequence and also at a trace element level to match
              finished product with clay source to determine patterns of manufacture and
              trade. Metallurgical analysis will permit reconstruction of both copper and
              iron smelting techniques while a range of faunal and floral analyses will
              provide insight into changing subsistence practice.

This research will
              contribute to understanding of social development and change in West Africa.
              Equally important, it will help to develop methodologies which integrate
              ethnographic, archaeological and textual data  and facilitate understanding of
              how regional and extra-regional forces combine to affect change in traditional
              rural societies.

