Title       : Evolutive Economic Dynamics and Social Interactions: Theory and Econometrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a9911251

Award Number: 9911251
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193316             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Brock wbrock@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We propose research on three analytically related topics: 1. Dynamics of
              Expectational Diversity: Theory and Econometrics; 2. Dynamics of Social
              Interactions: Theory and Econometrics; 3. Management of Dynamical Systems in
              Ecology. All three are unified by dynamical complexities raised by a hierarchy
              of spatial and temporal scales where measures of spatial size of an activity
              relate to how fast the particular activity reaches a steady state with slower
              "relaxation times" associated with larger spatial ranges. 
The forces that
              determine the dynamics of expectational diversity on, for example, future
              values of assets and future paths of inflation, across time and across
              different groups are poorly understood. Yet the impact of policy initiatives in
              regulation of trading in asset markets and management of inflation policy,
              depend upon the dynamics of the formation of expectations across time and
              across different groups in the economy. 
Temporal/spatial hierarchies of
              dynamics easily lead to partial irreversibilities, abrupt changes, alternative
              stable states, and other complicated phenomena.  These challenge conventional
              attitudes concerning burden of proof in government policy formation on managing
              such complicated dynamical systems. For example, in managing a problem like
              potential global warming, the optimal placement of the burden of proof on
              strength of evidence depends upon the degree of irreversibility of potential
              climate damage.  So, the degree of potential irreversibility must be measured. 
              Similar issues arise in many less dramatic management problems. For this reason
              my research will stress development of econometric and statistical inference
              methods appropriate to systems with hierarchical time/spatial scales.
Our
              research also hopes to contribute to policy formation in the management of
              dynamic systems by building training models to assist economists and other
              policy makers so that they may be trained to work with such systems in much the
              same way that a flight simulator trains airplane pilots.
In summary, my
              proposed research is to develop basic theory and statistical inference tools
              designed to confront issues raised by complexity caused by temporal/spatial
              dynamical connections and apply the findings to policy.


