Title       : Southern Ocean Experiment (SOFeX): Primary/Bacterial Production and
               Taxon-Specific Growth and Photosynthetic Responses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a9911441

Award Number: 9911441
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard T. Barber   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This is part of a project -  the Southern Ocean Iron Experiment (SOFeX) -  to
              seed a small area within the Antarctic Circumpolar Current with iron, to follow
              this patch of water by measuring the distribution of an inert tracer (SF6)
              added with the iron, and to assess the chemical and biological responses to
              this addition. Recent observations have indicated that iron plays a controlling
              role in the production and export of organic matter in all regions of the
              Southern Ocean. Furthermore, because the Southern Ocean contains the largest
              pool of inorganic macronutrients of the world ocean, it has the greatest
              potential to influence the concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide by
              acting as a sink for C02- In order to predict the impact of natural variations
              in iron supply on carbon partitioning, it is imperative that we understand the
              complex biological interactions that occur upon iron enrichment. 
This
              investigation will  measure primary productivity within and outside the
              iron-enriched patch of water to quantify the direct response of iron to the in
              situ phytoplankton assemblage on time scales of days. Productivity of three
              size fractions will be measured: < 5gm, > 5 but < 20 gm, and > 20 ~tm. The
              quantitative taxonomic composition of the three size fractions will be directly
              determined by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). The photosynthesis
              versus irradiance (P vs E) responses of the same fractions also will be
              measured for two reasons. First, the P vs E response is a sensitive measure of
              iron limitation. Secondly, the data will be used to investigate iron/irradiance
              interactions because it has been hypothesized that phytoplankton adapted to low
              light require more iron than do those adapted to higher iffadiances (a
              condition especially important in the Southern Ocean).  The taxon-specific
              growth rates of phytoplankton will also be measured directly using a
              pigment-labeling technique. Finally, the project will use a new Fast Repetition
              Rate (FRR) fluorescence technique that will provide P vs E responses in near
              real-time, allowing the investigators to assess the spatial (both horizontal
              and vertical) responses of quantum efficiency and bulk photosynthesis along
              gradients across the enriched patch. Resolving the responses of diatoms
              relative to other taxa is critical for accurate modeling of the phytoplankton
              response to varying iron supply because diatom blooms play a pivotal role in
              the export of carbon to the deep sea.

