Title       : How does a Norm Break down? Explaining the Collapse of the Norm of Premarital
               Abstinence and the Emergence of Cohabitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2001     
File        : a9911382

Award Number: 9911382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Reeve D. Vanneman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chien Liu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wagner College
	      Staten Island
	      New York-Richmond, NY  10301    212/390-3100

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

SES 9911382
Chien Liu


This research develops and tests through
              simulations a model of formation and decay of social norms. Building on ideas
              in rational choice and economic behavior, the model explicates an idea that
              negative externalities-costs borne by a group-tend to create proscriptive norms
              against behavior causing the externalities. When externalities decrease or
              disappear, a proscriptive norm tends to disappear. 

Essentially, the model
              will specify precisely a mechanism often suggested in sociological and economic
              literature. The model will include multiple iteration with feedback. While
              certain features of the model's overall structure may be evaluated logically,
              the iterative aspects would be cumbersome or impossible to assess except by
              computer simulation. Much of the cost of this project is to develop computer
              programs for simulating the model's processes. 

While this project is purely
              theoretical, it is possible to think of natural analogues of the process
              described. For instance, norms against many sorts of white-collar crimes, from
              bribery to embezzlement, can be construed as attempts to reduce group costs. On
              the other hand, positive norms such as patriotism and self-sacrifice in war may
              be seen as resulting from a need to avoid potential group externalities. The
              general topic of how norms arise, are maintained, and sometimes decay has
              recently attracted considerable attention of sociologists, working from several
              theoretical perspectives. This work adds to those views. The model in this
              research uses well-accepted ideas of reward and cost to explain norm formation,
              a promising approach. To the extent it is successful, this work will expand
              understanding of how culture gets built up and sometimes disintegrates.

