Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Camaraderie, Conflict, and the Construction of
               Knowledge at International Scientific Congresses, 1878-1914
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2000    
File        : a9911408

Award Number: 9911408
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6412               (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria de Grazia vd19@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy L. Stepan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              "Internationalism" in science is often asserted but rarely defined or examined
              thoroughly. It is can be understood variously as cooperation, neutrality, or
              equality within scientific practice, perhaps more often as a phantom ideal of
              how science ought to function. This dissertation research project intends to
              address some of the questions, ambiguities, and possibilities of scientific
              internationalism by examining a specific site of activity: the international
              scientific congress. The researcher will examine the development of three
              series of such congresses in zoology, geology, and criminal anthropology in an
              attempt to understand (1) the nature of their internationalism as perceived by
              participants and as revealed in epistemological foundations and justifications,
              membership, procedure, ideological and practical goals, professional concerns,
              organizational structure, rituals, and symbols; (2) the struggles (both social
              and scientific) which threatened to and often did undermine the congresses'
              internationalist efforts and effectiveness; and (3) the effect of the
              international congress format on and the role of consensus in the construction
              of knowledge and the consolidation of scientific disciplines. By looking beyond
              superficial claims of international scientific fraternity and objectivity, her
              comparative analysis attempts to understand how a specific set of international
              projects were conceptualized and organized, how effective they were and why,
              and how scientists negotiated between internationalist and more localized
              concerns. The research incorporates four types of sources: 1) proceedings and
              documents published by the congresses themselves, 2) contemporary periodical
              literature written by congress participants and observers, 3) records and
              correspondence of government bodies and important national institutions, and 4)
              personal diaries and correspondence. By reflecting different perspectives,
              concerns, and degrees of direct involvement, these documents help present a
              more complex picture of the congresses and their participants' relations to
              them and investment in them. This project reflects and adds to recent shifts
              within the history of science (as well as within history in general) away from
              strictly national or one-to-one comparative studies, toward explorations of
              more international and transnational sites, such as collaborative research
              projects and the development of new supranational communities. 



