Title       : Phase Equilibria for Natural-Gas Production. Calculation of Multicomponent
               Thermodynamic Properties Near-to and Far-From Critical
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9911744

Award Number: 9911744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82565              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Prausnitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9911744
J. Prausnitz
U. of California @ Berkeley

The
              natural-gas industry in the US is a multibillion-dollar per year industry. 
              Small increases in efficiency in natural-gas production can bring very large
              financial advantages and appreciable conservation of a finite natural
              resource.

Efficient production from natural-gas wells requires a
              quantitative understanding of mixed-hydrocarbon vapor-liquid equilibria over a
              fair range of temperature and a wide range of composition and pressure,
              including the critical region.  Because experimental data are available for
              limited variety of synthetic an natural gas mixtures, there is a good
              phenomenological picture of phase behavior; but, for calculating these
              equilibria, we do not have a satisfactory molecular-thermodynamics method that
              is reliable in all regions of practical interest, that is, near-to and far-from
              the (vapor-liquid) critical region.  This research is directed at producing
              such a method using recent results from applied statistical mechanics: 
              Wertheim's theory for (short) chain fluids as developed by Chapman, Radocz and
              others, coupled with renormalized-group (RG) theory of White recently developed
              and extended top mixtures by Lue and Prausnitz.

The essence of RG theory is
              to include in a "classical" equation of state corrections for density
              fluctuations that are not important at conditions remote from critical but
              become very important near the critical point.  White's method (as extended by
              Lue and Prausnitz) does that in a relatively simple way, thereby much improving
              the ability to calculate phase equilibria near to and far from the critical
              region.

The ultimate goal of this work is to present a theoretically based,
              engineering-oriented computerized procedure for direct use by design engineers
              in the fossil-fuel industries.  This research will produce new
              engineering-science knowledge.  It will extend, modify and synthesized recent
              advances in statistical mechanics toward significant application.

