Title       : Presidents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9911589

Award Number: 9911589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159143             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lyn Ragsdale   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Major presidential decisions are at the heart of the American presidency, yet
              they remain one of its least studied features.  What a major decision is and
              how it is made remain elusive in presidential scholarship.  This investigation
              offers the first attempt to conceptualize and empirically analyze major
              presidential decisions from Truman to Bush (1945-1992).  Conceptually, the
              project defines a major decision as a novel initiative which pertains to one or
              more basic values of the decision makers, involves high levels of uncertainty,
              risk, and conflict, and is notable in its scope and effect at the time it is
              made.  

To explain the decision process, the research advances a theory of
              successive updating describing decision makers as intuitive, experienced
              problem solvers who successively update their estimates of the problem,
              options, and actions needed to move the decision process to completion. 
              Empirically, it develops the first exhaustive data set of presidential
              decisions, distinguishing between major decisions and other newsworthy, yet
              less extraordinary, ones.  It constructs a narrative for each decision based on
              a collection of material from primary and secondary sources.  These narratives
              substitute for more encyclopedic case studies, while still capturing necessary
              information about the means, goals, players, and events, which comprise the
              decisions as they unfold over time.  The narratives provide the material to
              systematically code various aspects of the decisions, such as the length of the
              decision process, its phases, the players who are present and absent, the
              involvement of the president, media visibility, and types of policies involved.
               

The project offers two models of presidential decisions.  One employs
              sequential analysis to capture the decision process as it unfolds over time. 
              The other offers a multi-level model of  major presidential decisions which
              estimates the effects of factors in three interrelated levels of decison-making
              presidents' immediate decision group, the presidential institution, and the
              political environments.  Thus, the project advances understanding of what are
              among the most significant outcomes of a presidential term - - major
              decisions.

