Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Restoration and Preservation of Ancient Buildings
               and Monuments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9911964

Award Number: 9911964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: R I. Malek RQM@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Della M. Roy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 5944,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9911964
Malek 

Description: This award is to support a cooperative project
              by Dr. R.I. Malek, Materials Research Laboratory and Dr. Della Roy, Professor
              (Emeritus) of Materials Science at Pennsylvania State University, and Dr. Essam
              El-Rafey, Head, Materials Science Department, Institute of Graduate Study and
              Research, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt. These scientists propose to
              study the mechanisms of deterioration of ancient buildings and monuments, and
              to find scientific basis for restoration.  The US and Egyptian investigators
              plan to collect, with appropriate supervision, samples of damaged monuments in
              Egypt.  They plan to diagnose the deterioration mechanism of these samples and
              compare them to other non-damaged samples under the same conditions.  The
              diagnosis methods will include X-ray diffraction, solid state Magic Angle
              Spinning Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MAS NMR), Raman and Infrared
              Spectroscopy, as well as more conventional methods such as color, porosity,
              water sorption, bulk specific gravity, hardness, compressive strength, modulus
              of elasticity, and thermal expansion and conductivity.  They will attempt to
              determine appropriate repair mechanisms for these samples with several binders
              including cement grout, geopolymers, cementic polymer blends, and phosphate
              binders.  The compatibility of these binders with the masonry, longevity,
              adhesion, and color will be tested.

Scope: The proposal addresses an
              important area, that of study of the mechanisms of deterioration of ancient
              buildings and monuments and means of their restoration.  The project brings
              basic scientific knowledge to practice with actual field data for
              verifications. The two US PIs are experts in materials research,
              characterization, and analysis of material properties.  They have excellent
              research facilities at their institute. The Egyptian collaborating scientist is
              at one of that country's most respected research units in Egyptian
              universities. The international collaboration is well conceived and the
              expectation is that they will proceed to mutual benefit and will produce useful
              results. This project meets INT criteria for support of mutually beneficial
              cooperative research projects.  Funding for this project is provided by the
              Division of International Programs and the Division of Civil and Mechanical
              Systems.

