Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Host-Guest Chemistry in Polyoxometalates (V and
               Mo): Synthesis, Structure, Electrochemical and Magnetic Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9911983

Award Number: 9911983
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20814              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Stanley Whittingham STANWHIT@BINGHAMTON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              INT-9911983
Whittingham
Description:  This award is for the US-India
              Collaborative Research: Host-Guest Chemistry in Polyoxometalates (V and Mo):
              Synthesis, Structure, Electrochemical and Magnetic Properties.  Collaborators
              Stanley Whittingham, State University of New York at Binghamton and Indian
              chemist Arunachalam Ramanan, Indian Institute of Technology will undertake
              research in solid state chemistry leading to an understanding of the parameters
              involved in hydrothermal synthesis of transition metal oxides and framework
              materials.  Structure control is critical for an intelligent design of battery
              and sensor materials.  The major emphasis of this project will be placed on
              vanadium and molybdenum oxides.  These host materials will be characterized for
              their ability to be intercalated by a variety of guest ions and molecules, and
              their chemical and physical properties will be determined using x-ray,
              electrochemical, and magnetic/electrical measurements as well as the standard
              analytical techniques.  
Scope:  This collaboration adds an international
              component to research currently supported by the Division of Materials Research
              (DMR-9810198).  Whittingham has made important contributions in the areas of
              hydrothermal synthesis, structural solid state chemistry, and battery
              materials; Ramanan has made major contributions in the areas of polyoxometalate
              chemistry, hydrothermal chemistry and chemistry involving intercalation
              compounds.  The PIs have established a record of high quality joint research. 
              This project will accelerate the research programs at both institutions and
              will impact graduate and undergraduate students.  This research has high
              potential to impact the development of batteries and sensors.  

