Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Human Interest Frames and
               Political Policy Attitudes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9911371

Award Number: 9911371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7964               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley Feldman stanley.feldman@ccmail.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Media often frame stories about public policies in a dramatic fashion.  One
              popular form is the human-interest frame--a narrative of a situated actor.  How
              these frames influence one's comprehension of public policies is explored
              through a series of experimental designs.  The use of a set of novel cpolicies
              chosen from state ballot initiatives allows influences to be isolated in the
              laboratory while preserving validity.  Content analysis gauges the prominence
              of human-interest frames in print media and interviews with journalists explore
              the logic behind their use.
	The general hypotheses are that, as we focus on
              the person in the story -- a person who carries no political cue, ultimate
              understanding of the policy may be compromised.  First, the person may distract
              our attention and, thus, lead to poor comprehension.  Second,  one's feelings
              about the person may shape opinon about the policy and, thus, lead to bias. 
              The bases for these expectations lie in cognitive psychology and evolutionary
              theory.
	The findings are considered in terms of democratic theory --
              specifically, liberal theories of representation.  The project provides a
              critical comment on the current role of media in American politics and the
              advisability of using human-interest dramas to frame public policies. 

