Title       : SGER: Purification of the Yeast Synaptonemal Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1999  
File        : a9911233

Award Number: 9911233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Kaback kaback@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Med&Dent of NJ/Newark
	      100 Bergen Street
	      Newark, NJ  071032407    973/972-4400

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              During meiosis reciprocal recombination between homologues appears to be
              required for proper meiosis I segregation of chromosomes.  Interference is the
              crossover-induced inhibition of additional meiotic recombination and was
              proposed to be helpful in ensuring that crossovers are evenly distributed over
              the genome.  The mechanism of interference is not known, but the synaptonemal
              complex (SC) has been proposed to be involved in mediating interference.  A
              better understanding of the molecular mechanism of interference might be gained
              by investigating the structure of the SC.  The only known integral component
              that is found over the entire length of the SC is the ZIP1 protein.  This
              protein may provide a scaffold for other SC proteins that have not yet been
              identified. Identification of these components is essential for understanding
              the mechanisms of interference and other aspects of the meiotic pairing
              process.  This Small Grant for Exploratory Research is aimed at constructing
              several recombinant ZIP1 constructs that will enable the visualization of the
              SC as well as the affinity purification of the protein complexes contained in
              this structure.  An existing construct will be modified that is fully
              functional yet contains green fluorescent protein and affinity tags that will
              enable the rapid isolation of protein complexes that form with the ZIP1
              protein.  The identity of any ZIP1 associated proteins will be determined by
              tandem mass spectroscopy.  These studies should enable the identification of
              the genes corresponding to each protein and provide the groundwork for testing
              their role in SC complex formation, crossover interference, and other aspects
              of meiotic recombination and pairing.
