Title       : Effects of Surface Wetness and Snow Cover on Frontal Evolution and Precipitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2002   
File        : a9911417

Award Number: 9911417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251173             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond W. Arritt rwarritt@bruce.agron.iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Moti Segal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Understanding the impact of local and regional phyical forcing on frontal
              systems is important to improving prediction of the weather associated with
              these fronts.  Under this award, the Principal Investigator will evaluate the
              impact of surface forcing on the evolution of cold fronts and precipitation
              over the central U.S.  The research will focus on the influence of surface
              wetness on cold frontal structure and precipitation during spring-summer, and
              the influence of snow cover during late winter-spring.  The project will use
              observed case studies to provide a basis for three-dimensional simulations that
              will evaluate the modification of thermodynamical and dynamical processes by
              changes in surface conditions. 

Mechanisms responsible for modifications in
              the frontal structure and precipitation will be evaluated through diagnosis of
              frontogenesis terms and other parameters.  The impact of surface conditions on
              conditional symmetric instability in the frontal environment also will be
              examined.  Using the observed conditions as control experiments, the Principal
              Investigator will perform numerical model sensitivity simulations to assess the
              impacts of altered surface characteristics on fronts and precipitation for a
              representative sample of cases.  Although prior studies have evaluated specific
              cases or have performed idealized two-dimensional sensitivity studies,
              evaluations of frontal response to surface conditions using real-world cases
              and three-dimensional modeling have received little attention in the research
              literature. 

Accomplishment of the research will improve understanding of
              the effects of surface-atmosphere interactions on cold fronts and
              precipitation.

