Title       : Evolutionary Foundations of Economic Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9911219

Award Number: 9911219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200876             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry W. Samuelson larrysam@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Evolutionary ideas have long been invoked by economists to defend the central
              concepts of optimization and equilibrium. The research described in this
              proposal is motivated by the belief that evolutionary ideas have much more to
              tell us about economic behavior.

The proposed work will proceed in two
              parts. The first is theoretical, and will combine insights from evolutionary
              psychology and biology with economic techniques to construct evo-lutionary
              models of economic behavior. This research will view Nature as a principal who
              must equip her agents (people) with rules and procedures for making decisions,
              while contending with differences in information and constraints on agents'
              reasoning resources. The research begins with a model in which people economize
              on their cognitive resources by using analogies to orga-nize their thinking.
              Extensions of the model will address the division of decision-making between
              Nature and her agent (raising issues of self control), the agent's choice of
              which information to exploit and which to ignore, and the circumstances under
              which Nature will endow her agents with a concern for relative
              well-being.

These theoretical results will serve as the basis for
              experimental and applied work. Ex-periments will investigate the role of
              analogies and backward induction in explaining behavior in bargaining games.
              Applied models will address issues of communication and information transfer in
              the presence of related but conflicting interests, issues of reputation
              building, and the welfare implications of relative evaluations of
              well-being.

The proposed research builds on existing work in evolutionary
              game theory. The work will seek foundations for aspects of individual behavior
              that are not easily accommodated by standard choice theory, and will use these
              foundations to address important aspects of economic interactions

