Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: How Civic Journalism
               Influences Political Learning and Deliberation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2000        
File        : a9911336

Award Number: 9911336
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7867               (Estimated)
Investigator: Marco R. Steenbergen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Democratic theorists argue that two of the hallmarks of good citizenship are an
              informed citizenry and rational, critical public discourse about policy issues.
               While these normative ideals have fueled considerable research in political
              science, journalists also have begun to draw on democratic theory to justify a
              dramatic change in coverage in of politics.  This approach is called civic
              journalism and one of its defining features is an emphasis on issues and the
              abandonment of "horse-race" coverage in reporting on politics.

Survey
              research aimed at evaluating the effect of civic journalism on learning has
              yielded conflicting results, and scholars have yet to measure the movement's
              influence on deliberation.  Using experiments and experimental focus groups,
              this research project will assess the effects of civic journalism and
              horse-race coverage on political  learning and deliberation.  These are the
              central research questions:  First, do individuals learn more from the issue
              coverage that is characteristic of civic journalism, horse race coverage or a
              combination of the two frames?  Second, at the individual level, how does the
              use of this information vary by frame when readers discuss the material they
              have read?  Third, at the group level, is issue information more likely to
              generate the wide-ranging, consensus-seeking deliberation prized by democratic
              theorists?

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support award advances the
              study of media effects on political learning and discourse in four ways: 
              First, drawing on the social psychological and political science literatures,
              this research articulates and tests a cognitive and affective framework for a
              catalyst theory of media effects.  Second, the research extends the literature
              on framing.  Third, through the use of an experiment, this project further
              isolates the effects of the issue coverage that forms the core of civic
              journalism.  Fourth, this project uses experimental focus groups to extend the
              application of theories of opinion formation and democratic
              deliberation.

The research should enhance substantially our understanding of
              the topic.

