Title       : Analyzing Developmental Trajectories with Mixture Models: A Second Generation of
               Models and Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a9911370

Award Number: 9911370
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249945             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel S. Nagin DN03@Andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn Roeder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Tremblay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A developmental trajectory describes the course of a behavior over age or time. 
              This project builds upon prior NSF funded research (SES-9511412) that developed
              a semi-parametric, group-based approach for identifying distinctive groups of
              individual trajectories within the population of interest, and also produced
              "canned" SAS-based software for estimation of the trajectory models.  This
              project will extend the research in several important ways.  First, the
              univariate trajectory models and software will be extended to include a random
              effect component.  The software also will be expanded to incorporate a
              previously developed non-parametric trajectory model.  Second, a next
              generation of joint trajectory models will be developed.  Work to date has
              focused on developing group-based models appropriate for analyzing the
              developmental course of a single behavior.  A key goal of this research is to
              generalize univariate trajectory models to allow the joint estimation of
              trajectories of two distinct but related behaviors, for example, physical
              aggression in childhood and violent delinquency in adolescence.  Here again the
              capacity for joint trajectory estimation will be incorporated into the already
              available software package.  Third, alternative measures for evaluating model
              goodness of fit will be explored.  Such measures are intended to complement the
              Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) as a basis for model selection.

This
              methodological research program is motivated by substantive problems from
              criminology, developmental psychology, and psychiatry, such as co-morbidity and
              heterotypic continuity.  Co-morbidity refers to the contemporaneous occurrence
              of two or more undesirable conditions such as physical aggression and
              hyperactivity during childhood.  Heterotypic continuity refers to the
              inter-temporal manifestation of a latent individual trait in different but
              analogous behavioral forms.  For example, a latent propensity for violence may
              reveal itself as kicking and biting siblings during early childhood, gang
              fighting during adolescence, and spouse abuse during adulthood.  The form and
              target of the aggression is different but the constant is physical violence.
              Because of the changing form of the manifestation, use of the same measurement
              scale at different stages of life is inappropriate for capturing such a
              tendency.  The themes of co-morbidity and heterotypic continuity will be
              explored in analyses of major prospective longitudinal data sets from around
              the world.


