Title       : Dissertation Research: Social Experiments in Regulation: Pollution Prevention in
               the US, Germany and Britain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a9911409

Award Number: 9911409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheila S. Jasanoff sheila_jasanoff@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation investigates social learning in environmental regulation, via
              a case study of pollution prevention in the organic chemical industry in
              Britain, Germany, and the United States. Most theories of learning still
              reflect instrumentally rational ideas of top-down, measurable learning by
              technical experts and policy-makers. This project builds on existing learning
              approaches, and applies an interpretive viewpoint, informed by Science and
              Technology Studies and comparative policy scholarship, to explore how other
              agents participate in learning. A learning approach based on social experiments
              may better describe, and eventually theorize, the bottom-up and decentralized
              nature of much activity that occurs in the environmental arena. This
              dissertation defines social experiments as activities by which social actors,
              not simply policy-makers and regulators, develop, test, adapt, and ensure
              uptake of ideas, institutions, and practices of environmental protection,
              through experience with practical applications in their settings. To evaluate
              the viability of this approach, the researcher will develop and apply four
              indicators: frames of interpretation; agents; transparency; and uptake of
              results. To strengthen the conclusions, the researcher will carry out a
              cross-national comparative study to explore the relationships between whether
              or not, and what kinds of, pollution prevention experiments take place in each
              country, and that country's regulatory and socio-political characteristics.
