Title       : Teaching Reflectively: Extending and Sustaining Use of Reforms in the
               Mathematics Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a9911849

Award Number: 9911849
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monica B. Mitchell                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1561500            (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda R. Califano lcalifano@msd38.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kay Coleman  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kristine K. Morris  (Principal Investigator former)
              Alfinio Flores  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Middleton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Madison School District #3
	      5601 N. 16th Street
	      Phoenix, AZ  85016    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9911849
COLEMAN

This four-year Local Systemic Change project is designed to
              lead all teachers of mathematics in the Madison School District to use
              reflective teaching strategies and to sustain these instructional changes over
              time.  The Madison District, in collaboration with Arizona State University,
              will provide professional development for all K-8 teachers over the life of the
              project.  The TREASURmath project will assist teachers in implementing the
              NSF-funded curricula (Connected Mathematics Project and Investigations in
              Number, Data and Space) adopted in the district.  

During the project each
              participant will take either an algebra or geometry course provided by Arizona
              State University.  This content course will broaden and deepen participants'
              understanding of mathematics.  All participants will also take part in a
              weeklong curriculum-specific summer institute, which will help them develop the
              content, pedagogical, technological, and research knowledge to teach
              reflectively.  The institute will be offered at three levels to accommodate
              teachers who have had differing levels of experience and participation in prior
              professional development.  Also, all teachers will take part in grade level
              meetings one half-day every two weeks. Thirteen Mathematics Teacher Leaders
              (MTL) will be released half time to provide ongoing support and direction to
              the teachers in their schools.  

The impact of this project will be on 347
              teachers in seven schools who serve over 5,000 students. 

