Title       : Collaborative Research on the Basal Motion of Glaciers: Field Studies of
               Debris/Bed Friction and Bed Deformation, Engabreen, Norway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a9911559

Award Number: 9911559
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178837             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal R. Iverson niverson@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP-99-11559
Iverson - Iowa State University
OPP-00-02230
Cohen -
              Yale University


This is a collaborative proposal with Iowa State, Yale
              University, and Svartisen Glaciological Observatory in Norway.  The influence
              rates of basal motion are believed to affect the speed of ice masses, but the
              mechanism is very poorly understood.  The sediment, which is entrained in basal
              ice and sometimes separates glaciers from rock, may be an important factor by
              causing local friction between basal ice and rock, but the magnitude of this
              friction or the factors that control it are unknown. Till, in contrast, may
              lubricate the bed, but its mechanism of flow is also uncertain.  This
              uncertainty looms because there have been few field interpretations.

Two
              types of experiments will be conducted at Engabreen, a hard-bedded, outlet
              glacier in Norway, where the Svartisen Glaciological Observatory provides
              access to the bed beneath 210 m of temperate ice.  These experiments will be
              extensions of  the Principal Investigators' earlier subglacial work on hardbed
              sliding at Engabreen, borehole work on soft-bedded glaciers elsewhere, and
              laboratory studies of till deformation.

The first experiment will test
              contrasting models of debris[bed friction.  A panel that contains a smooth rock
              tablet will be installed flush with the bed surface.  Friction between the
              tablet and sliding dirty ice will be studied by measuring the shear stress on
              the tablet, sliding speed, basal melt rate, ice pressure on the bed, and local
              basal water pressure.  The basal melt rate will be independently varied over a
              wide range.  These experiments will provide a complete characterization of the
              factors that control local debris/bed friction and rates of glacial
              abrasion.

In the second experiment, a prism of till will be placed at the
              icelbed interface.  To evaluate the factors that control the motion
              distribution in the till, instruments will record the till shear strain,
              dilation and contraction, and pore-water pressure, while the basal water
              pressure is varied independently.  The final position and orientation of
              sensors and strain indicators will be measured by dissecting the till prism at
              the ends of tests.  Also, clast fabric development and mixing between tills of
              contrasting lithology will be studied to develop sedimentological criteria for
              evaluating bed shear strain.  These experiments will be more comprehensive and
              less ambiguous than borehole studies conducted from the surfaces of glaciers.

