Title       : Collaborative Research: Individual-Level Analysis of Supreme Court Justices: A
               Modification to the United States Supreme Court Judicial Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2000  
File        : a9911054

Award Number: 9911054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30230              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara C. Benesh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/280-7154

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Much is to be said for judicial databases that treat a court's decision as the
              unit of analysis-as is evidenced by the widespread use over the past twelve
              years of the two NSF-Supported U.S. Supreme Court Judicial Databases. Indeed,
              almost no empirical studies fail to avail themselves of the data contained in
              these two databases. However, neither allows for research pertaining to the
              behavior of the individual justices, as distinct from the aggregate analysis of
              the Court's decisions/outcomes. This shortcoming is a major limitation to
              understanding the behavior of the justices.  Empirical studies of the behavior
              of the individual justices arguably provide the most fruitful route to
              understanding judicial behavior. 

With the databases so transformed,
              scholars will be able to efficiently investigate such theoretically important
              matters as individual-level analysis of voting behavior, models predicting and
              explaining dissent or concurrence, opinion assignment, as well as any other
              question that requires choice among several options using independent variables
              that vary both by justice and by case -- i.e., those amenable to the use of
              conditional logit analysis or hierarchical models.

Recently formulated
              procedures allow the two databases to be "flipped" so that their focus becomes
              the justice rather than the case.  Such transformations require systematic
              coding of the individual justice's voting and opinion behavior that does not
              pertain to the Court's decisions; i.e., the 4500 special opinions (dissents and
              concurrences) and the 11,000 votes represented by the opinions that the
              justices wrote and cast between 1946 and 1999.  The result will be two
              complementary user-friendly databases, paralleling the existing ones, but
              increased in size by a factor of approximately ten, extending across a period
              from 1946 to the end of the currently existing Rehnquist Court. 


	

