Title       : A New Measure of Monetary Policy Shocks: Derivation and Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a9911443

Award Number: 9911443
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263613             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christina D. Romer cromer@econ.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Romer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Understanding the effects of monetary policy on the economy is important for
              both basic academic research in macroeconomics and the practical conduct of
              monetary policy. The proposed research will develop a new measure of monetary
              policy shocks and use it to study the impact of policy.
Existing measures of
              monetary policy such as the change in the federal funds rate, include changes
              stemming from sources other than deliberate policy moves. They also include
              policy changes the Federal Reserve made in response to information about likely
              economic developments. Because of these features, estimates of the effects of
              policy that rely on existing measures may be misleading. For example, if the
              Federal Reserve typically reduces interest rates when it has information that
              other forces are acting to reduce future output, estimates of the effects of
              policy that rely on measures of interest rates are likely to understate the
              impact of policy on output.
The proposed research will address these
              limitations of the existing policy measures in two steps. First, a series for
              changes in the Federal Reserve's intended federal funds rate around meeting
              times of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) will be derived frown the
              narrative records of the FOMC and the quantitative reports of the open market
              desk of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. In periods when the FOMC was
              targeting the funds rate closely, this series will correspond to changes in the
              target rate made in connection win FOMC meetings. In other periods, the series
              will reflect the FOMC's beliefs about the expected consequences for the funds
              rate of its policy actions. Second, and crucially, the Federal Reserve's
              economic forecasts made shortly before FOMC meetings will be used to eliminate
              the component of changes in the Federal Reserve's intended federal funds rate
              that represents responses to information about likely economic developments.
              Thus, the resulting series for monetary policy shocks will reflect changes in
              the intended funds rate around FOMC meetings that were not taken in response to
              information about the expected path of the economy.
The research will proceed
              to use the new measure of policy shocks to examine the impact of policy on the
              economy. The basic issues that will be investigated are the speed, magnitude,
              and time pattern of the responses of real activity and inflation to policy. In
              addition, the research will compare the responses estimated using the new
              policy measure with responses estimated using broader measures, such as the
              actual funds rate, to address the question of whether the broader measures
              yield biased estimates of the effects of policy.
Additional portions of the
              research will use the new measure of monetary policy shocks to study the
              monetary transmission mechanism and use alternative statistical methods to
              examine the implications of the new policy measure for the impact of policy on
              output and inflation.


