Title       : Collaborative Research: Cenozoic Evolution of the Aleutian-Kamchatka Junction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a9911925

Award Number: 9911925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167654             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark T. Brandon mark.brandon@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP-9911925
Brandon
OPP-9911910
Garver

This is a collaborative
              proposal with Principal Investigators from Yale University and Union College. 
              This proposal is receiving joint funding from the Baltic States, Bulgaria,
              Poland, Independent States of the Former Soviet Union, International Programs. 
              The Kamchatka region contains a detailed, well-exposed record of the plate
              tectonic evolution of the north Pacific basin, essential for resolving the
              origin of the Aleutian volcanic arc and major geologic features beneath the
              Bering Sea.  The Kamchatka is underlain by at least two exotic island arcs,
              which formed at low latitudes during the late Cretaceous and early Tertiary,
              90-60 million years ago (Ma), and then moved north, colliding with the
              northeast Russian continental margin.  The first to collide was the Olyutorsky
              island arc which overrode the Russian margin along the Vatyna thrust about 45
              Ma. The Cape Kamchatka arc collided next.  The collision is poorly resolved,
              but may have started in late Miocene (1 5 Ma) and appears to be presently
              active at the Aleutian-Kamchatka junction.  This collision event is complicated
              because the pieces of the collided arc are isolated along the prominent capes
              on the east side of the Kamchatka Peninsula and may also include the
              Komandorsky Islands and western Aleutian Islands.

The tectonic zones that
              presently border these exotic arcs contain a valuable record of the timing and
              kinematics of the collisions.  The Principal Investigators have studied the age
              and kinematics of part of the Vatyna thrust and will continue to study both
              collision zones in the southern transect across the Kamchatka Isthmus to Cape
              Kamchatka to establish the ages for the collisional history of the Olyutorsky
              and Cape Kamchatka arcs.  They have selected three target areas: 1) southern
              continuation of the Vatyna thrust in the Lesnovsk Highland of the Kamchatka
              Isthmus; 2) the east side of Karaginsky Island which exposes the Vetiovsky
              complex, a poorly dated subduction complex that formed outboard of the
              Olyutorsky arc; and 3) west of Cape Kamchatka where the Vetiovsky subduction
              complex has been pinched between the Olyutorsky arc and the more outboard Cape
              Kamchatka arc.  They will date the continuation of the Vetlovsky complex from
              Karaginsky Island to determine how and when the Eocene to Miocene Tyushev basin
              began to overlap the older tectonic units in this area.  This information
              should provide a record of the first arrival of the Cape Kamchatka arc at the
              Kamchatka margin.

They will use fission-track dating of detrital zircons
              from continental-derived sandstones.  Dating of individual zircons will allow
              them to statistically isolate the youngest fraction of grain ages. The dating
              method is precise (relative standard error - 3.5%) and will provide age
              information about a tectonically important group of rocks. The method will also
              be used to date volcanic rocks and plutons that crosscut and seal the Vatyna
              thrust in the Lesnovsk highlands.  Some ages will be supplemented by more
              expensive high precision uranium/lead zircon ages.




