Title       : AAAS Forum 2000, Reforming Science and Mathematics Education for Urban Students:
               Progress and Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2000    
File        : a9911039

Award Number: 9911039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Betty J. Calinger bcalinger@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 7365      EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Forum for School Science, "Reforming Science and Mathematics in Urban
              Schools," will review the positive results of efforts to improve science and
              mathematics in urban schools.  The discussions will move to persistent
              problems, those difficult issues (outlined in proposal) that urban districts
              face as they attempt to accomplish true systemwide reform that advances all
              students.  Strategies to deal with these issues will be identified through
              presentations by individuals currently engaged in system-wide reform programs
              in urban districts and facilitated discussions among Forum participants.
              

Funding from the NSF will allow AAAS to give 150 educators the opportunity
              to attend the Forum and AAAS Annual Meeting.  This includes travel grants to at
              least 20 teams from around the U.S. and meeting registration for people in the
              Washington, DC area.  We will encourage those local systems to send teams of
              educators and community members. Each team or individual applying for a grant
              must complete an appliation that includes demographic and some statistical
              information about their district and describes its plan to improve science and
              mathematics education for all students.  The guidelines for the Urban Systemic
              Program outlined on the NSF web site will inform this part of the application. 
              Each group or individual receiving support must sign a memorandum of
              understanding with AAAS agreeing to submit a report six months after the
              meeting that describes progress to achieve the goals outlined in its
              application or a refinement of the plan and indicates how the
              information/contacts from the Forum have informed this process.  A year after
              the meeting, districts will submit another progress report that also presents
              plans/goals for the next year.  In addition, AAAS staff will contact a
              representative from each team at least twice during the year to answer
              questions, provide information, etc.  Team members will be encouraged to
              contact us at any time.

AAAS will also award research grants of $1,050 each
              to ten districts to chronicle and analyze/reflect on their efforts to bring
              about change in their system.  We will encourage participants to choose only
              one of the issues discussed at the Forum--professional development, getting all
              students to learn science and mathematics, partnerships, and restructuring--to
              center on for their analysis/actionr research.  We will provide general
              guidelines for the research.  Teams will apply for the research grants shortly
              after the Forum.  It is important that they have time to consider what topic
              they would like to pursue and if they have the time and resources to do it.  To
              apply for a research grant, a district team must describe the focus of the
              research and how it will be carried out.  A simple budget should be included. 
              There will be regular contact with AAAS.  A paper that details the results of
              their research will be submitted at the end of the 2000-2001 school year. 
              These paper will be shared with NSF and disseminated on the AAAS web site.  We
              will provide NSF with periodic updates about the progress of teams.

