Title       : An Edition, Translation, and Commentary of Two Medieval Persian Astronomical
               Texts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9911005

Award Number: 9911005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78000              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Jamil Ragep   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 99-11005 - F. Jamil Ragep (University of Oklahoma) 
"An Edition,
              Translation, and Commentary of Two Medieval Persian Astronomical
              Texts"


One of the more interesting genres of medieval Islamic scientific
              literature is a type of theoretical
astronomical work known as hay'a, whose
              primary purpose was to provide a summary, usually without computational
              details, of Ptolemaic astronomy. The more elementary hay 'a works became an
              important vehicle for establishing a widely accepted rational, scientific
              cosmology in premodern times.  (This latter point is especially important when
              we attempt to assess the relationship of science and religion in Islam.) In its
              more advanced forms, this genre, which thrived in Islam for well over
              800-years, provided a locus for criticisms of Ptolemy, detailed discussions of
              mathematical models and their relations to physics, and alternative,
              non-Ptolemaic astronomical models. These models almost certainly influenced a
              number of early modern European scientists including Copernicus, and the genre
              itself was instrumental in the development of an analogous astronomical
              tradition (theorica) in Europe.
       
This grant supports the completion of
              an edition, translation, and commentary of two representatives of this
              tradition, namely the Risalah-i Muniyya and its "appendix," the Hall-i
              Mushkilat-i Muiniyya, both written by the Persian polymath Nasir al-Din al-Tusi
              (1201-1274 A.D.). They are particularly significant since in them Tusi first
              announced and presented his new devices (the Tusi couples) and non-Ptolemaic
              planetary models, which modern scholars had previously thought were associated
              with the later Maragha observatory of the Mongols. These treatises also provide
              insight into the Persian court culture that patronized Tusi at the time.
              Preliminary editions and translations of both texts, which are in medieval
              Persian, were completed some years ago by Professors Jamil Ragep of the
              University of Oklahoma and Wheeler Thackston of Harvard University. This grant
              provides the support required to allow the PI to collate the preliminary
              editions with eight additional manuscripts that he recently obtained from
              Middle Eastern and European libraries, and to enable him to continue to support
              three assistants (two of whom are native speakers of Persian) who have long
              contributed to his scholarship.

