Title       : Collaborative Research: Bayesian and Likelihood Based Multilevel Models for
               Small Area Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a9911466

Award Number: 9911466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45069              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tapabrata Maiti tmaiti@math.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project focuses on Bayesian and likelihood based multilevel models
              for small area estimation.  These methods will be compared and contrasted
              against some of the existing methods, such as the pseudo maximum likelihood,
              penalized quasilikelihood, etc.  Some of the novel features of this research
              will be the use of stratum varying regression coefficients, new priors for the
              variance-covariance matrix rather than the standard Wishart prior, development
              of small area estimation models allowing measurement errors for covariates, use
              of hierarchical likelihood in the context of small area estimation, and the use
              of survey weights for small area estimation.  One of the major applications of
              this project will be the estimation of income and poverty for states and
              counties, and possibly even for lower levels of geography such as census tracts
              and school districts (when data become available) between decennnial censuses. 
              However, the methods are fairly general, and can be applied to other studies as
              well.  Among others, these methods will be applied to study youth unemployment
              for small areas based on the Scottish School Leavears Survey, effectiveness of
              schools and student character in an education survey conducted by the Inner
              London Education Authority, and a British Social Attitudes Survey.

The terms
              "small area'' or "local area" are commonly used to denote a small geographical
              area, such as a county, a municipality, or a census division.  They may also
              describe a "small domain;" that is, a small subpopulation such as a specific
              age-sex-race group of people within a large geographical area.  In these days,
              there is a global need for reliable small area statistics both from the private
              and public sectors.  There are increasing government concerns with issues of
              distribution, equity, and disparity.  For example, there may exist geographical
              subgroups within a given population that are handicapped in many respects, and
              need definite upgrading.  Before taking remedial action, there is a need to
              identify such regions, and accordingly, one must have statistical data at the
              relevant geographical levels.  Small area statistics also are needed in the
              apportionment of government funds, and in regional and city planning.  In
              addition, there are demands from the private sector since the policy-making of
              many businesses and industries relies on local socio-economic conditions. 
              Thus, small area estimation techniques have global applicability, and are
              useful for diverse applications.

