Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Perceiving Discrimination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9911013

Award Number: 9911013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143856             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Stangor Stangor@psyc.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research has shown that members of stigmatized groups will be particularly
              vigilant to cues that they or other members of their group are the victims of
              prejudice and discrimination. At the same time, however, it has also been shown
              that members of stigmatized groups are frequently unwilling to indicate that
              they have personally been the target of prejudice or discrimination, except
              when that discrimination is blatant. It has also been found that members of
              minority groups are particularly sensitive to discrimination directed at other
              members of their social group, but do not generally perceive that
              discrimination has occurred to them personally. Taken together, these findings
              suggest that stigmatized group members are both highly concerned about the
              occurrence of discrimination at large, and yet at the same time, when such
              discrimination actually occurs to them, they do not notice it, interpret it as
              due to some factor other than discrimination, or simply deny it.

Such
              paradoxical findings have both empirical and practical interest from a social
              psychological perspective. Understanding how and when individuals perceive
              discrimination has important implications for both the psychological health of
              the affected individuals, as well as the quality of cross-category social
              interactions and behavior. If individuals from stigmatized groups misperceive
              (either by over- or under-estimating) that events that occur to them are
              discriminatory, they may inappropriately avoid situations or individuals who
              are not in fact biased toward them, or may be unprepared to cope with or
              respond to true discrimination. Either error may have profound consequences for
              their well being, because perceptions of discrimination are associated with
              negative health outcomes. Furthermore, disagreements in perceptions of
              discrimination between or among individuals may lead to potential
              misunderstandings in intergroup relationships, and understanding these
              disagreements could help relieve some of this tension.

This project tests a
              3-stage social-cognitive model of the perceptions of discrimination that can be
              used to understand the perceptions (or misperceptions) of discrimination on the
              part of stigmatized and non-stigmatized group members. The model proposes that
              individuals may or may not initially become suspicious that a behavior might be
              discriminatory, and secondarily they may or may not interpret the event as
              being caused by discrimination. Finally, they may choose either to report or
              not to report the discrimination publicly. Furthermore, it is proposed that the
              same contextual factors that increase perceptions of discrimination at one
              stage (for instance, initial perceptions), may simultaneously decrease its
              later interpretation or reporting. Unlike prior explanations, which only
              predict main effects of contextual variables on perceptions, the current
              approach predicts that different contexts will have different influences on
              sensitivity to discrimination, depending upon the stage being considered.

