Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Verb in Chisukwa: Aspect, Tense and Time
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1999  
File        : a9911583

Award Number: 9911583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Botne botner@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Bantu languages are of interest to linguists because of their extensive
verbal
              morphology and their complex tense/aspect systems. The goal of this
project is
              to produce a detailed description and analysis of the verb
system of Chisukwa,
              an endangered Bantu language spoken in Malawi.
Evidence from Bantu languages
              suggests that different societies
conceptualize, organize, and talk about
              events in different ways. This is
most clear when observing the interaction of
              tense/aspect markers with
different verb types. Through fieldwork in Malawi,
              the student will
identify the various verb types in Chisukwa, define the
              aspectual/temporal
properties of the verb types, differentiate tense/aspect
              markers, and
determine how these markers interact with different verb types.
              Project
work will involve up to eighteen months of study in Malawi, working
              with
native speaker consultants using both direct and
              contextualized
elicitation sessions to gather  data in Chisukwa. Other
              methods
include the recording, transcribing and translating of oral
              narratives
such as stories, personal histories, and folktales, as well as
              the
recording of daily conversations. The data will be recorded both
              in
notebooks and in a computer database. Analysis will be ongoing
              throughout
the duration of the project both in the field and in close
              collaboration
with linguists at the Centre for Language Studies at the
              University of
Malawi in Zomba. The dissertation research will accomplish three
              goals:
(1) contribute to the theoretical understanding of the role of
              temporal
relations in the conceptual organization of human experience, (2)
              document
and preserve aspects of an endangered and undocumented Malawian
              language,
and (3) contribute a comprehensive analysis to the growing pool
              of
knowledge about Bantu tense/aspect systems. This project will benefit
              not
only the academic community of the United States, but also the
              academic
community in Malawi and the Sukwa community itself. Copies of
              all
materials produced will be deposited at the Centre for Language Studies
              in
Malawi and  institutions within the Sukwa community. In addition,
              the
materials will be used as a basis for eventually producing a
              Chisukwa
grammar and other pedagogical materials for the community.
