Title       : The Infrastructure of the Internet: Telecommunications Facilities and Uneven
               Access
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2000        
File        : a9911222

Award Number: 9911222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121752             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Malecki   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Internet may be available to anyone with a telephone line, but the speed at
              which Web pages come to residential and small business computers depends on the
              links that connect each user to the Internet.  This research examines the
              geography of the Internet, specifically its three layers and the
              interconnections between those layers.  The three layers, or scales of
              analysis, of the Internet's infrastructure include: the backbone layer, the
              point of presence (POP) layer, and the central office switch level.  The
              project organizes and analyzes these layers using a geographic information
              system (GIS) to address three questions.  (1) What is the degree of variation
              in access to the infrastructure of the Internet, including broadband
              (high-speed) access?  (2) To what degree is that access dependent on the
              national, regional, and local layers of telecommunications infrastructure?  (3)
              Why does access vary over space?

The research first analyzes Internet
              backbones to determine the Internet accessibility of urban areas across the USA
              via fiber-optic lines, which vary in their bandwidth, or speed.  The backbone
              networks link with the local telephone networks and their central office
              switches, which households and small businesses must use dial-up service, but
              which vary in digital capability.  This project identifies the types of
              customers - office-based businesses, such as producer services and call
              centers, and high-density, high-income residential areas - that have been
              targeted for broadband.  Taken together, the research identifies micro-to-macro
              "paths" to the Internet, differentiated by infrastructure quality or bandwidth.
              By analyzing historical data, the project analyzes the diffusion of Internet
              and particularly its broadband technology.  The results from this project will
              generate basic understanding on Internet access or uneven access on a national
              basis and will contribute to the current issue of "digital divide". 


