Title       : Dissertation: Core and Periphery Relations in the South Central Andes: The
               Impact of the Tiwanaku State on the Central Valley, Cochabamba, Bolivia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9911579

Award Number: 9911579
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharina J. Schreiber kschreiber@anth.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Katharina Schreiber, MS Karen Anderson will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation. The goal of her research is to understand
              how early state-level societies extended their power and integrated outlying
              areas with the administrative and political core. To gain insight into the
              processes which gave rise to such entities from it is extremely difficult to
              use historic data because road systems, developed forms of writing and other
              technologies which facilitate rapid and efficient communication and
              transportation of goods were lacking. Therefore one is forced to rely on the
              archaeological record. Although the Andean region is best known for the Inca
              empire which was observed and later destroyed by the Spanish, this in fact was
              the last in a series of such entities. Between AD 400 and 1100 AD a Tiwanaku
              predecessor was based in highland Bolivia and extended its influence into both
              the Pacific coastal lowlands and the flanks of the Amazon to the East.
              Archaeologists wish to understand how these hinterland regions were integrated
              into the Tiwanaku core and research to date suggests that no one single model
              applies. MS. Anderson will examine this question in the fertile Cochabamba
              Valley which is located at a mid-altitude level to the East. She has posited a
              series of models which may explain the relationship between periphery and core
              and these range from direct control through no control at all. She has also
              specified the expected archaeological correlates for each. Based on prior
              exploratory work in the Valley MS Anderson shall now conduct a total survey of
              ca. 200 sq. km. to locate sites, map them and collect diagnostic ceramic
              material. She will also conduct small scale excavations.

This research is
              important for several reasons. It will provide insight into the processes which
              led to the rise of the state and the integrating mechanisms which early states
              employed. Because Tiwanaku has been treated by many archaeologists as a test
              case, the data she collects will be a interest to many researchers. Finally
              this project will assist in training a promising young archaeologist.

