Title       : Theory for the Dynamics of Coral Reef Fishes with Applications to Hypothesis
               Testing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9911386

Award Number: 9911386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177857             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter L. Chesson plchesson@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Recent syntheses of coral reef fish ecology encourage a pluralistic view of
              mechanisms of population and community dynamics where variation in larval
              supply and density dependent interactions at or after settlement are both
              expected to have important effects. Theoretical models used to develop the
              concepts of the scale transition and the storage effect imply that variation in
              larval supply and density dependence should have interactive effects on
              population and community dynamics leading, for example, to stabilization of
              population dynamics and maintenance of diversity on large spatial scales in
              ways that would not be predicted from the separate effects of variation in
              larval supply and density dependence. Such interactions also have important
              consequences for the ability of experimental and observational data to (1)
              detect density dependence, (2) identify the scales and mechanisms of population
              regulation, and (3) offer meaningful explanations for the high biological
              diversity of coral reef systems.

This project will development a
              metapopulation model of reef fish systems that incorporates stochastic
              variation in demographic rates, spatio-temporal variation in recruitment,
              stage-structure within local populations, and multispecies density-dependent
              interactions. This model will provide a general theoretical framework useful
              for developing hypotheses about the combined effects of the multiple processes
              and scales inherent to reef-fish systems. These effects will be studied in
              relation to important outcomes such as population density, population
              regulation and diversity maintenance. Specific predictions will be developed as
              diagnostic tools for understanding how observable patterns in reef fish systems
              are related to the underlying processes on both local and metapopulation
              scales. Significant effort will be expended on formulating specific
              experimental hypotheses that can be tested in the field.

