Title       : Female Entrepreneurship: A Comparative Study of Gender and Work in the
               Caribbean.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a9911743

Award Number: 9911743
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225154             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine E. Browne kbrowne@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carla Freeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Browne/Freeman  (9911743)
This comparative study of Puerto Rico, Martinique,
              and Barbados will investigate how female entrepreneurship is patterned
              according to social and household-level constraints. The three islands differ
              significantly in the incidence of female self-employment, in local patterns of
              gender roles, and in female workforce participation. The key factors that
              constrain women's entrepreneurial interests are both institutional and
              ideological and are located in the domestic realm, the workplace, and the
              state. The research will document and explain the differences in women's
              participation across islands, as well as the factors that lead to successful
              versus unsuccessful entrepreneurship.  Variation in workplace and state level
              policies across the three islands will also be taken into consideration. A
              number of hypotheses will be tested including relationships between types of
              occupational segregation (by gender), weak/strong patriarchal gender relations,
              and variable rates of female entrepreneurship. The relationship between
              welfare-oriented, state policies and women's economic risk aversion will also
              be investigated.  Methods include household censuses of samples from the three
              islands, extensive interviewing of subsamples of male and female entrepreneurs,
              and life history analysis. This research will contribute to anthropological
              theories of gender and economic entrepreneurship, as well as to state level
              development planning that seeks to strengthen the "informal" sector of
              developing economies.


