Title       : Risk Management in the First Emerging Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9911270

Award Number: 9911270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann M. Carlos ann.carlos@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We examine in detail the responses of stock market participants before, during,
              and after the first great financial crisis of modern capitalism - the South Sea
              Bubble of 1720. We exploit data we have collected and will collect on the
              holdings and transfers of the major financial assets available in the London
              market among all individuals who held these assets before, during, and after
              the crisis of 1720. Our analysis of the changes that took place in the
              distribution of these assets, especially in the period 1721 to 1730, will be an
              intensive examination of the reallocation of financial risk by participants
              during the first crisis of financial capitalism. Additional data on the tax
              assessments of London residents and their voting behavior in the Parliamentary
              election of 1722 will be utilized to compare how different types of investors
              shifted their financial portfolios after the bubble's collapse.  This will
              allow us to explore the factors that enabled the underlying structures of the
              English financial system to absorb the shock of a stock market collapse and
              then rebound, based largely on the private initiatives of these
              participants.
The conjunction of financial innovations, new participants in
              the markets for financial assets, and experimental political regimes in the
              first quarter of the 18th century provides a natural laboratory in which many
              of the alternative approaches now being attempted in today's emerging markets
              can be examined. Alone among the first emerging stock markets of the time, the
              London market was able to survive the shock of the collapse of stock prices,
              which gives special significance to our study of individual behavior during
              this episode. Further, it is our working hypothesis that the development of
              this market, especially focused on the liquidity of financial instruments
              congenial to the needs of the market participants for managing their individual
              exposures to risk, may have given the impetus to private investment that
              eventually made Britain the first industrial nation and the dominant economy of
              the world by the end of the nineteenth century.

