Title       : US-West Africa Workshop: Validation of TRMM Rainfall Data over West Africa,
               Tallahassee, Florida, February 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2000  
File        : a9911918

Award Number: 9911918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16863              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon E. Nicholson sen@met.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1303,5928,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9911918

This award supports four African participants in the US-West Africa
              Workshop on Validation of TRMM Rainfall Data over West Africa, to be held in
              Tallahassee, Florida, February 2000.  Additional participants include seven
              from the United States, and six other meteorologists from West Africa.  (The
              National Air and Space Administration and Florida State University are
              providing support for the additional African participants.)  The co-organizers
              are Professor Sharon Nicholson, of the Department of Meteorology at Florida
              State University and Mr. Bonaventure Some, with the Climatological Data Bank at
              the African Center of Meteorological Applications for Development, in Niger. 
              The workshop will include meteorologists from the Ivory Coast, Ghana, Benin,
              Togo, Mali, Senegal, Burkina Faso, Guinea, Gambia, and Niger. 

Africa has
              experienced dramatic fluctuations of precipitation on interannual and
              interdecadal time scales.  Severe droughts are common, and three-quarters of
              Africa is arid or semi-arid.  Precipitation monitoring is of great importance
              throughout Africa since many of its peoples are still engaged in agricultural
              pursuits.  But for many areas, precipitation data is either unavailable or too
              unreliable to be used for monitoring.  The key to long-term monitoring of
              Africa's environment lies in the development of satellite methods for rainfall
              assessment.  Measurements from the TRMM satellite can provide good spatial
              coverage, but the results obtained from the algorithms used in satellite
              calibration need to be validated by ground measurements.  The main purposes of
              this workshop are to facilitate the acquisition and quality control of gauge
              data, and to involve West African countries in the validation process.  The
              African participants will bring their in-situ station data on monthly
              precipitation for 1998.  The participants will use these data in the validation
              process to determine how TRMM values compare with their gridded,
              quality-controlled station data.  Additionally, intercomparisons will be made
              with other satellite estimates in order to validate those data as well.  This
              validation process can reduce the high cost of purchasing data from some
              countries, and also minimize difficulties related to the use of such data. 
              Plans will also be made for the acquisition of similar data for 1999, and for
              the eventual acquisition of daily data to validate five-day estimates.  The
              African participants will also become acquainted with data collected from
              American meteorological satellites.  The results of this workshop should
              increase the current knowledge about climate variability of the Sahel region on
              interannual and interdecadal time scales.  The workshop will also foster
              interactions among and between the US and African participants, which are
              expected to lead to future collaborative research activities.  The Division of
              International Programs and the Division of Atmospheric Sciences are jointly
              supporting this workshop.     

