Title       : Assessing Diversity in SMET Educational Projects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1999 
File        : a9911810

Award Number: 9911810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marilyn J. Suiter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9880               (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Vernon-Gerstenfeld svg@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project provides information on the methods used to address issues of
              demographic diversity in recently funded SMET education projects
              (post-secondary). Undergraduate students (3) from Worcester Polytechnic
              Institute (WPI) work on this research from late October to mid-December. They
              receive academic credit for the research endeavor. The program is supervised by
              WPI faculty, with consultation from NSF. The study is based in a program
              previously established at WPI, which is being adapted to target an analysis of
              effective mechanisms to improve demographic diversity in higher education in
              SMET.

Prior to engaging in the research activity, the students participate
              in a research methods course that prepares the students for the diversity
              study, including the development of a formal research plan. The plan includes a
              formal literature review, hypotheses, and a planned methodology for testing the
              hypotheses (qualitative and quantitative analysis). This package is reviewed by
              WPI faculty, with consultation from NSF. The students then proceed to pursue
              the research program.

At the conclusion of the study, the students present
              their research outcomes in a formal research defense for NSF personnel, WPI
              faculty, and other representatives of WPI. They also provide a final project
              report. The project report is to include a revised literature review and
              methodology, the data gathered with the associated qualitative and quantitative
              analyses, and the resulting conclusions and recommendations.

The students
              will benefit from the substantive learning opportunities in research
              development and application, as well as exposure to policy development,
              interaction with diverse science education professionals.

