Title       : Enhancing Regional Capabilities and Partnerships to Conduct Global Change
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9911055

Award Number: 9911055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1140000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland J. Fuchs rfuchs@agu.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. Frederick Spilhaus, Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Geophysical Union
	      2000 Florida Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200091231    202/462-6900

NSF Program : 5421      REGIO INST-GLOBAL CHANGE, OCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The SysTem for Analysis, Research and Training (START) will enhance regional
              capabilities and partnerships to conduct global change research on a regional
              and sub-regional basis.  The proposed activities have a special focus on
              regional cooperation in Temperate East Asia, Southeast Asia, South Asia,
              Africa, the Mediterranean, and Oceania.  These activities are intended to
              develop networks in these regions which would support pilot-scale research
              activities related to global change and related regional data and information
              system capabilities.  Specific activities are expected to be directed towards: 
              enhancement of regional resarch capacities and networking capabilities;
              formulation of coherent regional research agendas; identificationof potential
              collaborating scientists,  institutions, and related organizations; and
              development, planning and implementation of standard research technologies,
              methodologies, and protocols.  These projects will focus on planning and
              scoping workshops:  syntheses and analysis of existing knowledge and databases;
              capacity building and networks; and developpment of databases and other
              information intensive products which may provide useful input for national and
              regional policy processes.  Specific activities/topics likely to be of special
              interest to U.S. scientists include studies of land use change in East Asia;
              impacts of El Nino and La Nina on SOutheast Asia; regional modeling of monsoon
              systems; effects of carbon dioxide enrichment on rice production; modeling of
              river inputs to coastal zones of Southeast Asia; industrial transformation in
              South and East Asia; studies of land use and degradation; global change and
              sustainability of rangelands; globalchange and freshwater resources; and
              capacity-building.  Additional broad areas of emphasis are expected to include
              climate variability and change with emphasis on seasonal-to decadal variability
              on a regional basis  and the resulting applications of information on climate
              variability; land use and biodiversity; and the carbon cycle and its influence
              inthe Mediterranean and Africa.
