Title       : JGOFS/SMP: Data-Based Models of Food Web Structure and Export Flux
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2000     
File        : a9911765

Award Number: 9911765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275774             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Landry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,1389,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Data-Based Models of Plankton Community Structure and Export Flux


Intensive
              JGOFS investigations over the past decade have indicated strong links among
              physical-chemical environmental forcing, plankton community structure, and the
              fate of carbon production (remineralization or export).  However, these
              relationships are crudely portrayed in existing plankton food web models.  It
              is presently unclear how much information on size and taxonomic composition is
              needed for adequate model predictions and to what extent community dynamics and
              biogeochemical fluxes in different water masses are linked by common
              organizational principles and quantitative relationships.

The overall goal
              of the proposed research is to contribute to the mechanistic understanding of
              the factors that regulate "euphotic zone production and export of carbon and
              related biologically active substances".  To accomplish this, the PIs will
              develop and evaluate data-based models of plankton community structure and
              export flux for tropical/subtropical open-ocean ecosystems.  This project will
              focus on the tropical and subtropical oceans, areas most strongly represented
              in JGOFS Process and Time-series studies (EqPac, Arabian Sea, HOT, BATS) and
              presently most developed in terms of mature databases and supporting
              experimental studies.  The specific objectives are: 1) to develop
              data-constrained representations of planktonic community structure and trophic
              interactions; 2) to construct models of temporal plankton community dynamics
              and associated biogeochemical fluxes at the Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT) site
              and following iron perturbation in the equatorial Pacific (IronEx II); 3) to
              compare and test simple parameterizations, for lower trophic level interactions
              and export fluxes for use in 3-D coupled models; 4) to develop a general
              tropical ocean model that includes appropriate responses to nutrient supply
              (Arabian Sea) and iron-limitation (Equatorial Pacific); and 5) to examine model
              structures and strategies for predicting biologically realistic responses in
              computationally intensive Global Circulation Models (GCMs).  Based on observed
              similarities in the stocks and process rates in diverse tropical oceanic
              ecosystems, the PIs hypothesize that the data will lend themselves to
              representation in a general tropical ocean model with common structure and
              parameters.  To investigate the minimum level of complexity required to capture
              essential biological realities in global models, they will statistically
              examine an interrelated spectrum of models, all calibrated to common data sets
              but differing in structural complexity.  


