Title       : Principles for Micro-scale Chemical Process Systems Based on Redox-Active
               Surfactants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a9911863

Award Number: 9911863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas L. Abbott abbott@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9911863
Abbott, N./ Graham, Michael G.
U. of Wisconsin @
              Madison

The research described in this proposal consists of a hierarchical
              set of three broad goals, with each subsequent goal building on the results of
              the previous goal.  The first broad goal is to explore, using both experiment
              and modeling, the use of redox-active surfactants to promote the controlled,
              surface-driven motion of liquids on spatial and temporal scales that represent
              the future of microreactor engineering and micro-scale total analysis systems. 
              The second goal of the proposed research aims to exploit this surface-driven
              flow (using water-insoluble redox-active surfactants) to accelerate slow rates
              of mixing that result from diffusive transport of reagents when performing
              reactions in millimeter-sized droplets of liquids (which presently limits the
              usefulness of microdroplets as microdroplets as microreactors). It is estimated
              that gradients in surface tension can induce motion within the microdroplets so
              as to transport chemical species on time-scales that are at least two to three
              orders of magnitude faster than diffusive time-scales.  The third goal is to
              combine surface-driven convection (induced by water-soluble redox-active
              surfactants) and mixing with the capability to reversibly assemble and
              disassemble micelles formed by the redox-active surfactants within bulk of the
              microdroplets.  It is aimed to demonstrate selective extraction, transportation
              and deposition of sparingly water-soluble organics within millimeter-sized
              volumes of liquids in ways that may find use, for example, in micro-scale
              separations processes and total analysis systems.  

Through the above three
              goals, it is sought  to demonstrate the broad and general applicability of
              redox-active surfactants to microscale chemical process systems by exploring
              water-insoluble redox-active surfactants  - so as to permit surface in the bulk
              of the solution - as well as water-soluble  redox-active surfactants - so as to
              permit surface-driven mixing as  reversible processes for solubilization (based
              on reversible assembly and disassembly of micelles) in the bulk of the solution
              suitable for microscale extraction, separations and analyses.  


