Title       : Topics in the Organization of Markets and Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2001  
File        : a9911761

Award Number: 9911761
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Asher Wolinsky a-wolinsky@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to advance the understanding of a class of
              fundamental situations in which decision makers have to act on the basis of
              information obtained from better informed experts. The basic tension is that
              the experts' advice and information acquisition are affected by their own
              interests that need not coincide with those of the decision makers. The
              proposal outlines three directions within this larger problem. One direction
              deals with the interaction between an uninformed decision maker and potentially
              more informed experts in the context of a market setting. The underlying
              problem is that experts have to make an unobservable effort to acquire the
              information needed by the decision maker. The market setting enters the picture
              in that there are many competing experts from whom the decision maker can
              solicit opinions, and that fees are determined endogenously in competition. 
              Repair services and perhaps certain medical services provide examples for this
              sort of situation. The objective is to understand the functioning of such
              markets with respect to prices, the nature of contracts and welfare.

The
              second direction concerns situations in which a decision maker faces multiple
              experts who share similar biases. The main insights obtained in preliminary
              work in this direction concern the organization of the communication within a
              group of such experts in situations in which the decision maker cannot
              perfectly commit to a mechanism. It turns out that certain patterns of
              communication among the experts mitigate to some extent the negative effect of
              the lack of commitment and that partial communication might achieve more
              information revelation than either no communication or full
              communication.

The third direction proposes to explore further the problem
              of information gathering in situations where the decision maker cannot
              perfectly commit to a mechanism. The intention here is to identify some of the
              main forms that the inability to commit takes and to explore what can be
              achieved by mechanisms that respect the additional constraints imposed by the
              lack of commitment.

