Title       : A Social Cognitive and Contextual Analysis of Peer Victimization Across the
               Middle School Years
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a9911525

Award Number: 9911525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $546000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra Graham shgraham@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jaana Juvonen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to examine peer victimization during the middle
              school years.  Victimization is defined as the kind of bullying, terrorizing,
              or intimidation of targeted students that takes place in and around school
              where adult supervision is minimal.  A longitudinal study is proposed that
              follows  approximately 2000 6th graders as they enter one of nine middle
              schools in metropolitan Los Angeles.  The schools will be selected to vary
              according to ethnic composition, but to be similar in terms of socioeconomic
              class of students, size, and overall achievement level.  Data will be gathered
              twice yearly over the three middle school years on students' experiences with
              victimization, the perceived causes of such harassment, and indicators of
              psychological, social, and school adjustment. Statistical analyses will
              investigate change in all of these variables over time.  The specific aims of
              the project are to : (1) examine the individual and contextual antecedents of
              victimization that are particularly salient during early adolescence such as
              ethnicity, pubertal timing, and one's position in the peer group; (2)
              investigate the consequences of victimization, including subjective well-being,
              rejection by peers, and school performance and attitudes; (3) test a model of
              the relations between victimization and adjustment that views self-blaming
              attributions as a key variables; and (4) explore the adjustment patterns of
              subtypes of victimized young adolescents who may be most at risk for
              psychological, social, and school dysfunction.  

Findings of the project
              will provide new insights into the dynamics of peer victimization and advance
              the field in several ways.  First, the focus on early adolescence and the
              transition to middle school calls attention to the key developmental milestones
              of this age period, such as the onset of puberty, increasing salience of ethnic
              identity, and heightened concern about peer approval, that may have important
              implications for how one copes with victimization.  Second, the concern with
              models that view antecedents  and consequences of victimization as sets of
              interrelated variables provides a useful conceptual framework for organizing
              the growing literature on peer harassment.  And thirdly, by examining growth
              and change in a longitudinal design, the study can shed light on the stability
              of victimization as well as both continuous and discontinous pathways to
              successful adaptation during the critical middle school years. 

