Title       : Upgrading of the X-Ray Diffraction and Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer
               (FTIR) Facilities for Mineralogical Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9911501

Award Number: 9911501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41392              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Schroeder schroe@uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9911501
Schroeder

This grant provides partial support for the costs of
              upgrading the X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Fourier transform infrared
              spectrometer (FTIR) facilities for mineralogical research in the Geology
              Department at the University of Georgia (UGA). Equal matching funds have been
              provided by the University of Georgia Research Foundation.  The PI, Dr.  Paul
              A. Schroeder will oversee the installation of new data acquisition hardware,
              X-ray tube and software upgrades for the XRD system. He will also oversee the
              installation of a new FTIR bench, detector and data analysis system. Unique to
              the FTIR will be the ability to conduct mineral studies in the far-IR region. 
              These upgrades at UGA will allow continued analytical support to a robust
              geological research and teaching program. Approximately 50 geology students per
              year receive practical training and/or theoretical familiarization with these
              analytical methods. XRD and FTIR labs are generally considered cost-effective
              analytical facilities and are commonly used by geological industries. For this
              reason, students who receive training are placed at a competitive advantage in
              the job market.
Examples of research programs at UGA that will benefit
              include: (1) Dr. Paul A. Schroeder's program on carbon sequestration in
              soil/saprolite minerals and its application to estimating long-term rates of
              silicate weathering and soil respiration, (2) Dr. Sandra J. Wyld's program on
              the Cretaceous-age crustal discontinuity in the Black Rock Desert region of
              northwest Nevada and the kinematic link between the Mojave-Snow Lake fault and
              the Salmon River-Idaho suture, and her program for unraveling spatial patterns
              of deformation, regional metamorphism and exhumation within a Mesozoic
              fold-thrust belt, central Nevada, (3) Dr. Alberto Patino Douce's program on
              ultra-high pressure metamorphism, (4) Dr. Valentine A. Nzengung program on the
              preparation of organoclays and determination of their sorption effectiveness,
              and (5) Drs. Schroeder and Patino Douce's idea to study the far-IR vibration
              modes of sheet silicates. Data generated by the XRD and FTIR facilities over
              the past 10 years have helped produce 85 publications (books, articles plus
              theses) by UGA faculty and students.
***

