Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Mechanisms of Perceptual Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a9911801

Award Number: 9911801
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152397             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhong-Lin Lu zhonglin@rcf.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Collaborative Research:  Mechanisms of Perceptual Learning

Adult humans can
              show large improvements in the performance of even the simplest perceptual
              tasks as the result of training and/or practice.  These improvements have been
              observed in tasks in virtually every sensory modality.  This project
              investigates the brain mechanisms of perceptual learning and the circumstances
              under which perceptual learning occurs.  The findings will help us understand
              the adaptive nature of human behavior,  and may generate new computational and
              training principles for performance optimization in particular task
              environments.  Our research applies a powerful method for identifying and
              characterizing the mechanism of perceptual learning in visual tasks.   The
              method adds systematically increasing amounts of external noise - random visual
              noise (similar to random TV noise) to the visual stimulus and observes the
              effect on a perceptual task as perceptual learning takes place under different
              training protocols.  Performance in clear and in noisy visual task environments
              can be modeled quantitatively to identify three mechanisms of perceptual
              learning. Each mechanism has a "signature".  (E.g., modification of the
              observer's perceptual template through training only affects performance at
              high levels of external visual noise, where the external noise is large enough
              to be the limiting factor.  Experts can eliminate external noise more
              efficiently.)  We investigate the mechanisms of perceptual learning in a wide
              variety of perceptual tasks including discrimination and identification or
              classification of both simple and complex visual patterns.  Combining our
              methods with transfer manipulations that test for critical properties of
              learning will validate the measurements and provide information about the level
              of learning.  The proposed work will improve our empirical and theoretical
              understanding of the nature of perceptual learning.  Characterization of
              perceptual learning mechanisms is necessary to a full understanding of the
              adaptive nature of the adult human brain.  Our theory and methods provide a
              basis for developing adaptive models of the human brain and may contribute to
              the development of efficient training procedures in applied settings.

