Title       : Collaborative Research: The Role of Commitment in Dynamic Contracts: Evidence
               from Life Insurance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a9911496

Award Number: 9911496
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84410              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alessandro S. Lizzeri   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project presents an empirical and theoretical analysis of the role of
              commitment in dynamic contracts. We consider an environment where payoff
              relevant information symmetrically evolves over time. Long term insurance is an
              example of this where the ability of parties to commit to long term contracts
              can have a profound effect on the design of contracts. When bilateral
              commitment is impossible, short term insurance is still provided but consumers
              may be left to suffer classification risk: the risk that future information
              about the agent's type will prove unfavorable hence increasing future premiums.
              This issue has important welfare and policy implications.

Contract theory
              has received little empirical attention. Models are difficult to test. They
              tend to be very stylized, and the nature of the question involves relations
              between non-observables, making measurement very difficult.

The goal of the
              project is to look at the life insurance industry which is an ideal environment
              for testing models of optimal dynamic learning under one-sided commitment.
              First, life insurance is a prototypical example of an environment in which
              agents receive information sequentially about their health state that may
              render previous actions (contracts) suboptimal for one or both parties. Second,
              contractual data is available. Third, life insurance contracts are offered in
              several varieties ideally suited to analyze of the effects of commitment and
              renegotiation. This variety of contracts is used to test the implications of
              the model. To our knowledge no previous work on the dynamics of contracts has
              used direct contract information.

The existing models on one-sided
              commitment are adapted to obtain empirical predictions on the design of life
              insurance contracts. A preliminary empirical analysis of the observed contracts
              is then presented. This has the following purposes: (i) testing the theory,
              (ii) evaluating the potential inefficiencies arising from lack of commitment,
              and (iii) studying the way the industry copes with the problem.

The
              predictions of the model are supported in the data. First, as predicted by the
              model, virtually every offered contract involves some degree of front-loading.
              This finding is in sharp contrast with what would be expected under competition
              and lack of commitment (and in light of the health insurance experience), i.e.,
              a sequence of short term contracts that leave the insured subject to
              reclassification risk. Second, in line with the predictions of the model,
              front-loading (lock-in) is associated with lower lapsation, and in turn with
              better risk pools. Finally, according to our numbers, the long-term level
              contracts capture a good part of the gains from long term insurance. It is
              worth noting that the industry achieved this partial solution to the problem of
              reclassification risk without need of regulation (e.g., no imposition of
              guaranteed renewability).

Lack of renewability and the absence of insurance
              of classification risk are some of the concerns raised about health insurance.
              Understanding the life insurance experience may contribute to the policy debate
              over health insurance and help in understanding some aspects of the
              (mis)functioning of the health insurance market. The health care market suffers
              from a variety of other problems. The analysis of this project may isolate
              those problems that are solely due to the lack of bilateral commitment and
              hence to understand better the source of inefficiency in health insurance.

