Title       : Sorting, Education, and Inequality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a9911675

Award Number: 9911675
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195345             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raquel Fernandez Raquel.Fernandez@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Many social commentators have expressed concern that increased sorting (or
              assortative matching) in the US may lead to undesirable outcomes.  Although the
              evidence favoring increased sorting is mixed, increased sorting can
              theoretically take place in many spheres. Communities, for example, will be
              more stratified along educational and income lines if individuals increasingly
              choose to live in neighborhoods with others of more similar levels of education
              or income. Workplaces will be more homogeneous if the organization of
              production leads to grouping high-skilled workers with others like them rather
              than with low-skilled workers. Marriages will have a higher degree of
              assortative matching if individuals are increasingly prone to marry others
              similar to themselves in income and education. Lastly, increased tracking in
              schools (and the potentially increased homogeneity of neighborhoods) may lead
              to less heterogeneity in the classroom.  This project examines both
              theoretically and quantitatively diverse relationships that exist among
              education, sorting, inequality and economic development.  A benchmark model is
              developed that allows the study of the interplay among these variables. In
              particular, the model analyzes the relationship between marital sorting and
              education and wage inequality.  The model is extended to make it more useful to
              take to the data.  These extensions include: an increase in the feasible levels
              of education; families of the same type with different numbers of children;
              different matching assumptions; and cross-country comparisons.  Alternative
              models are pursued that focus on borrowing constraints; endogenous fertility;
              endogenous sorting; and physical as well as human capital accumulation.

Why
              may increased sorting matter? Some individuals worry that less interaction
              among different types of individuals will lead to a decrease in empathy and
              result in less redistribution. Others have argued that greater stratification
              or decreased peer effects or in schooling, neighborhoods or workplaces can lead
              to efficiency losses. Alternatively, increased sorting in marriages is likely
              to increase inequality in the distribution of income or education to the extent
              that there is an intergenerational family link in these variables.   Is
              increased marital or residential sorting likely to have quantitatively
              significant effects on the distribution of income and education? This is a
              question that has received relatively little attention. A recent and very
              provocative paper by Michael Kremer (1997), however, claims that even very
              large increases in sorting-whether marital or residential-are unlikely to have
              important effects on inequality. This is an important challenge to many
              people's beliefs and some of the work in this proposal is an attempt to meet
              this challenge.

