Title       : Osteological Analysis of Heel Spurs and Subtalar Variation in Prehistoric
               Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9911273

Award Number: 9911273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6442               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Bruckner Janice.Bruckner@mail.tju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thomas Jefferson Univ
	      1020 Locust Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19107    215/503-6976

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines heel spurs and subtalar joint (STJ) variations as a new
              way of interpreting the lives of people in the past. The objectives are: 1) to
              establish the association of heel spurs with occupational stress, age, and STJ
              configurations; and 2) to demonstrate that spur patterns reflect habitual
              activities and can be used to distinguish prehistoric hunter-gatherer groups
              from agriculturalists.  In previous work from Illinois sites, Middle Woodland
              hunters and gatherers had fewer heel spurs than their agriculturalist
              descendants of the Late Woodland-Mississippian Period. In the Middle Woodland
              sample, age was a factor: older individuals had heel spurs and younger people
              did not. In the Late Woodland-Mississippian sample, the combination of age and
              STJ configurations that restricted joint motion ("rigid STJ configurations")
              was associated with heel spurs. Aged individuals with rigid STJ configurations
              had a higher incidence of heel spurs while aged individuals with mobile STJ
              configurations did not. A second area of investigation is spur patterns. In the
              Middle Woodland sample, spurs tended to be bilaterally symmetric reflecting the
              bilaterally symmetric activities of hunters and gatherers. In the Late
              Woodland-Mississippian sample, spur patterns were asymmetric reflecting the
              asymmetric activities that agriculturalists engage in when using hand tools.
              The researcher will analyze STJ configurations and heel spurs of the
              collections of the Alabama Museum of Natural History, including the remains of
              1500 individuals from the Mississippian site of Moundville and approximately
              1500 individuals from the Perry site's Archaic and Mississippian periods. The
              potential impact of this project is the development of a new way to assess
              occupational stress and to distinguish prehistoric samples of hunter-gatherer
              populations from agriculturalist populations by examining tarsal bones. 
