Title       : Calanus Finmarchicus in Icelandic Waters: Population Genetics and Ecology at the
               Norwegian Sea/N. Atlantic Ocean Boundary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2000     
File        : a9911415

Award Number: 9911415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131467             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann C. Bucklin acb@cisunix.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Large-scale circulation patterns in the N. Atlantic may partition the ocean
              basin into three semi-distinct gyre systems: the Norwegian Sea, the northern N.
              Atlantic, and the western N. Atlantic. Zooplankton entrained in these gyres may
              be ecologically, reproductively, and (perhaps) genetically distinct due to
              geographic isolation in different circulation systems and/or to isolation by
              distance. Previous studies have demonstrated that populations of the copepod
              Calanus finmarchicus in the eastern and western N. Atlantic differ
              significantly in haplotype frequencies of the mitochondrial 16S rRNA. This
              project will provide a further examination of ocean basin-scale genetic
              structuring of C. finmarchicus, and especially examination of the boundary
              between the N. Atlantic and the Norwegian Sea, through collaboration with
              Icelandic oceanographers.  Field collections will be made in waters surrounding
              Iceland, which lies at the boundary between the gyres of the N. Atlantic Ocean
              and the Norwegian Sea, during the annual Marine Research Institute Spring
              Survey in May/June, 2000. Calanus finmarchicus will be identified and removed
              from selected samples at the MRI in Reykjavik, Iceland, and shipped to the
              University of New Hampshire for molecular analysis. Three different gene
              portions will be evaluated as population genetic characters for the examination
              of ocean-basin scale population structure and the differentiation of gyre
              populations: the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase I (COI); the nuclear gene
              encoding phosphoglucose isomerase (PGI), including both coding regions and
              introns; and a putative nuclear pseudogene of COL Molecular variation will be
              evaluated by direct DNA sequencing and possibly by the rapid and less expensive
              assay, Single-Stranded Conformational Polymorphism. (SSCP), which can detect
              variability of the amplified DNA and confirm allelic identities. A suite of
              population genetic and statistical tests will be used to quantify the genetic
              distinctiveness of populations and characterize population genetic structuring
              at the targeted scales. The distribution, abundance, and genetic variation of
              C. finmarchicus will be placed in a realistic ocean setting, including water
              mass structure and ocean circulation patterns, using contour mapping and data
              visualization.
