Title       : Migration Under Crisis and Recovery: Social Safety Nets in Two Indonesian
               Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a9911510

Award Number: 9911510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133646             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel M. Silvey silvey@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1092,5927,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rapid economic development in Indonesia and other developing nations has enticed
              many rural residents to migrate to cities, where industrial and service-sector
              jobs have been more numerous and remunerative.  In the face of rapid economic
              downturns, however, many of these migrants are forced to return to the villages
              and households from which they came.  Relatively little scholarly attention has
              been given to these return migrants and to the ways that they interact with
              their families and communities.  The central goal of this research project is
              to examine the effects of changing migration patterns on household structures
              and both household-level and community-level "safety nets" during Indonesia's
              economic collapse in the late 1990s.  Through a comparative case study in
              villages in western Java and southern Sulawesi, in-depth qualitative fieldwork
              and quantitative survey methods will be used to investigate which household
              members are more or less effectively supported by crisis-driven mobility and
              the associated changes in household composition.  The research will aim to
              clarify how changing household composition as a result of increased
              rural-return migration is influencing the burdens and benefits of rural safety
              nets for particular groups of individuals in low-income households, including
              men, women, children, and the elderly.  This research will contribute to
              understanding the dynamics of migration as well as the roles of both household-
              and community-level safety nets during economic crises like the one recently
              afflicting Indonesia.  The project will provide in-depth empirical information
              regarding different forms of safety nets, and it will examine gender and age
              hierarchies within households.  The theoretical contributions of the project
              will focus on conceptualizing the interplay among household structures, age and
              sex hierarchies, and village-scale crisis survival strategies, with an emphasis
              on labor and resource allocation between and within households.  Through the
              two-village comparison, the project will also investigate the role of place in
              shaping these interactions.  In practical terms, the project aims to contribute
              to understanding not only the coping strategies of households during the
              crisis, but also which survival mechanisms are most successful for recovery and
              for whom.

