Title       : Collaborative Research: On the Electoral Link Between Presidents and Assemblies:
               Presidential Coattails Comparative Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a9911140

Award Number: 9911140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark P. Jones Mark.Jones@ssc.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This project assesses the institutional sources of presidential coattail
              effects in the world's presidential democracies.  Although coattail effects are
              studied extensively in the United States, virtually no comparative work exists
              on the subject.  Scholars of American politics agree that presidential
              coattails can affect the balance of seats in the legislature and, consequently,
              can influence executive-legislative relations more generally.  We propose to
              explore this dynamic in comparative perspective.
	Prominent comparativists,
              such as Arend Lijphart, Juan Linz and Arturo Valenzuela, argue that
              presidentialism is inferior to parliamentarism because the necessity of
              inter-branch negotiations opens the possibility of executive-legislative
              deadlock.  Deadlock figures prominently in recent crises in countries such as
              Brazil, Peru and Russia and lends credence to these views.  In its mildest
              form, scholars argue that deadlock can prevent governments from responding to
              immediate crises, such as needed fiscal adjustment following international
              shocks.  In its more moderate form, deadlock can prevent governments from
              implementing deeper political changes, such as social security reform or
              privatization, and, in its most extreme form, executive-legislative deadlock
              even can lead to democratic breakdown.  Although scholars have explored some of
              the institutional sources of deadlock, and also have argued that executive
              elections can affect legislative elections, none have gathered the requisite
              data and developed hypotheses to explain the absence or presence of coattail
              effects in presidential democracies.
	National Science Foundation support is
              requested to gather constituency-level data on election results, electoral laws
              and political parties in 31 presidential democracies.  A database is
              constructed, and the degree of presidential coattails -- operationalized as the
              degree of straight-ticket voting -- is determined.  Statistical analysis is
              employed to test hypotheses about the salient institutional variables
              associated with stronger or weaker presidential coattails.  The following
              institutional variables are hypothesized to affect the strength of presidential
              coattails:  ballot structure, district magnitude, the timing of elections for
              different offices, the presence and timing of subnational executive elections,
              the degree of party institutionalization, the extent of control by the central
              party over the nomination procedure for legislative office, and the level of
              central party control over campaign finance and media access.
	This research
              is vital for students of presidentialism and democratic governance generally,
              because in contrast to existing work, it identifies the institutional
              configurations that foster or impede strong electoral links between the
              incumbent president and members of the legislature, as opposed to purely
              institutional links such as decree and veto powers.  This, in turn, informs
              future work about the conditions under which executive-legislative deadlock
              emerges and when democratic presidential systems are more or less likely to
              function smoothly, break down, or consolidate.  In short, this research
              provides a substantial addition to the literature on democratic governance in
              presidential systems.
	The database that emerges from this research project
              also represents a unique resource for students of elections, electoral systems,
              and legislative behavior.  As Gary Cox notes in Making Votes Count, the future
              of electoral systems research lies in the analysis of district-level data, data
              which unfortunately have not been collected in a systematic manner for more
              than a handful of countries.  The book that results from this project, as well
              as the future work by scholars using our data, will lead to a substantial
              improvement in scholarly understanding of the consequences of political
              institutions for democratic governance.            

