Title       : Rocky Mountain Mathematics Leadership Collaborative (RMMLC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a9911936

Award Number: 9911936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karen D. King                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1640892            (Estimated)
Investigator: Cathy Martin cathy_martin@ceo.cudenver.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Loats  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean Klanica  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lew Romagnano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joellen Killion  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rocky MT Sch for Exped Lea
	      1700S.HollyStreet
	      Denver, CO  80222    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9911936
MARTIN

The thirty-seven-month "Rocky Mountain Mathematics Leadership
              Collaborative (RMMLC)" is designed to support and sustain the professional
              development of mathematics teacher leaders in the Rocky Mountain Region
              (Colorado, New Mexico, and Wyoming).  This Teacher Enhancement project creates
              school mathematics leadership teams in 30 high schools and 30 middle schools to
              support implementation of high quality, comprehensive mathematics instructional
              materials.  Each school-based leadership team consists of the
              principal/administrator, a parent, a guidance counselor, the mathematics
              department chair (if the position exists) and mathematics teacher leaders. 
              Each of the 210 teacher leaders in RMMLC participates in 210 - 462 hours of
              professional development over the life of the project.  In addition, the
              project provides 140- 252 hours of professional development to another 110
              mathematics teachers/colleagues in project schools.  

The summer
              professional development activities are comprised of a two-day Leadership
              Summit and a one-week Leadership Academy.  During the school year, school
              leadership teams meet monthly at the building site and attend fall and spring
              Summit meetings.  Teacher leaders also participate in four additional days of
              leadership development.  An institute provides RMMLC high school participants
              the professional development necessary to expand their understanding of
              mathematical content, curriculum, pedagogy and assessment using the Interactive
              Mathematics Program materials.  

Project evaluation includes student,
              teacher and leadership components.  Growth in participating teachers' knowledge
              of mathematical content and standards is assessed.  Student learning is
              assessed in Colorado using statewide and school-specific proficiency levels of
              the Colorado State Assessment Program's Mathematics Assessments during the
              three years of the project.  

RMMLC extends and draws on the experiences of
              two NSF-funded Teacher Enhancement projects in the Rocky Mountain region:  TEAM
              2000 (a secondary mathematics project, which expires in FY 2000) and COMMSTEP
              (a middle grades mathematics Local Systemic Change project). 

