Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Coil-to-Globule Transitions in Polymer Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a9911091

Award Number: 9911091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37740              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank E. Karasz fekarasz@polysci.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5940,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9911091
Karasz 

Description: This project supports a cooperative project by
              the Professor Frank Karasz, Department of Polymer Science and Engineering,
              University of Massachusetts at Amherst and Dr. Bahattin Baysal, Director,
              Research Institute of Basic Sciences at the Marmara Research Center (MRC) in
              Gebze, Turkey. The two scientists propose to extend their research on
              polymer-solvent systems.  They intend to extend the studies to more highly
              polar systems, in particular to poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide),
              poly(N-n-propylacrylamide) and their random copolymers in dilute aqueous
              solution.  In addition they will study coil collapse in a selected random
              copolymer-solvent system, on the premise that this constitutes an intermediate
              step between the simple homopolymer and the highly complex protein cases.  They
              suggest using dynamic light scattering techniques for detailed studies of coil
              collapse in near theta conditions for polar macromolecules.   The application
              of this research is in relating the polymeric behavior to cases of biological
              structures.

Scope: The proposal addresses an important area, that of
              collapse transition of macromolecules from the coil to the compact globular
              state.  This research on polymer coil collapse in poor solvents is intimately
              related to certain biological processes, including protein folding and DNA
              packing. The US investigator is a well-known research leader in polymer
              science. The Turkish scientist is an internationally known polymer chemist who
              leads a strong group of scientists at Turkey's major governmental research
              establishment, the MRC, near Istanbul.  This project fits the mission of the
              Division of International Programs (INT) for support of mutually beneficial
              research.  The project is supported by INT and the Division of Materials
              Research.
