Title       : The Optimal Design of Research Contests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9911930

Award Number: 9911930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72248              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yeon-Koo Che yche@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian L. Gale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The procurement of new products such as weapons systems, transportation systems,
              or new car models often requires substantial innovative effort by suppliers.
              Procuring such efforts through bilateral contracts may be difficult, however,
              since the efforts may be "unverifiable" and "cooperative." That is, the level
              of effort cannot be verified by a third party, and a substantial fraction of
              the value generated may accrue to the buyer. Also, bankruptcy concerns and
              legal restrictions limit the ability of the procurer to charge entry fees
              (i.e., "limited liability" ). Procurers have often relied on contests to
              procure innovative effort in such an environment. In particular, research
              contests have been an important part of R&D procurement competitions sponsored
              by various government agencies (notably the Department of Defense) as well as
              private firms.

The proposed research will study the optimal method of
              procurement when unverifiability,
cooperativeness and limited liability are
              important. We will first make the case for using contests in place of bilateral
              contracts. Second, we will study how the procurer should select the set of
              firms to participate in the contest. Finally, and most importantly, we will
              characterize the optimal contest design. In doing so, we allow for a vast array
              of prize structures, which includes auctions (contestants bid their prizes) and
              tournaments (the prize is fixed) as special cases.

Some aspects of these
              issues have been studied previously. For instance, the auctions literature has
              yielded substantial insights into the en post performance of auctions (i.e.,
              how the good or Contract is allocated, and how the surplus is divided), showing
              that auctions may be an optimal mechanism. The search for an optimal mechanism
              has not been extended to incorporate en ante investment incentives, however. 
              Recent work on research contests and entry into auctions has incorporated an ex
              ante dimension, but it still takes as given the form of contest (auction or
              tournament). The proposed research will be the first to consider a broad class
              of contests, to endogenize the prize structure, and to identify the optimal
              contest when ex ante and ex post performance considerations are
              important.

The completed research will be presented in two parts. In the
              first part, we will provide closed-form expressions for equilibrium investment
              and bidding strategies, even with asymmetric firms (i.e., firms with different
              investment technologies). The second part will identify the optimal contest
              design, using a novel duality argument. (The standard mechanism design approach
              does not work here.) A first-price auction with just two firms and no reserve
              price is optimal if the firms are symmetric. If the firms have different
              technologies, an auction with two firms appears to be optimal, but with the
              more efficient firm being handicapped.

This research will make a signficant
              contribution to the literature on contests in general, and auctions in
              particular. It will also contribute to the incomplete contracts literature by
              investigating the special role of contests in motivating cooperative
              investments. Finally, it will prove useful to contest designers. The optimality
              of first-price auctions with just two firms is particularly important, given
              the ease of administering auctions.

