Title       : Formation Kinetics of Tethered Nanolayers: Real-Time Studies with Model Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a9911181

Award Number: 9911181
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn S. Penn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roderic P. Quirk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT		CTS-9911181
		Lynn Penn, U. of Kentucky           

Tethered
              polymer layers provide a unique avenue for tailoring solid surfaces and the
              interfaces made from them.  Precise control of not only the chemical structure
              and architecture of the tethered polymer, but also of its molecular weight,
              dispersity, and surface attachment density offers the possibility of similarly
              precise control of the physicochemical characteristics of the layer and
              therefore of the performance of the solid surface.  Such precisely controlled
              layers have great potential value in additional areas, including corrosion
              prevention, friction and wear control, biofouling control, and waste stream
              purification

To construct a tethered layer that has the exact
              characteristics needed for a particular application, the scientist or engineer
              must be able to manipulate the tethering process with precision.  For this to
              be done, the kinetics and thermodynamics of layer formation must be understood
              and brought under experimental control.  However, the tethering process is made
              complex by the facts that a) the process involves heterogeneous phase reactions
              and b) the polymer chains are being attached to a surface that is changing
              during the process.  Furthermore, until recently, there has been no convenient
              way to monitor the kinetics of formation of a tethered layer.  These
              complexities and difficulties have prevented understanding-based control of the
              tethering process until the present time.

In this project, the kinetic and
              thermodynamic factors that control layer formation will be explored in terms of
              specific chemical and physical features of the tethering reaction.  These
              include polymer molecular weight, polymer architecture, and end group-surface
              interaction.  For this, model polymers that provide a wide variation of polymer
              architecture, molecular weight, and tethering entity will be synthesized by
              living anionic polymerization.  Other quantities that will serve as independent
              variables are temperature, concentration, solvent (and there interaction
              between polymer backbone segments and solvent), chemistry of the reactive sites
              on the solid surface (and thereby interaction between reactive sites and
              end-functional groups of the polymer chains), and energetics of the solid
              surface.  The tethering reactions of the model polymers to solid surfaces under
              different conditions will be monitored by means of a recently developed,
              real-time method based on size-exclusion chromatography.

The data obtained
              from the above studies and the principles that emerge will lead to a
              comprehensive description of the kinetics of tethering and an evaluation of the
              thermodynamic factors that influence the process.  From this, we will develop
              of a set of logical guidelines and a general applicable mathematical model of
              tethering kinetics that can be used for empirical control manipulation of
              tethered layer structure.









