Title       : Collaborative Research: Incorporation of Sensors into Autonomous Gliders for 4-D
               Measurement of Bio-Optical and Chemical Parameters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a9911037

Award Number: 9911037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra Isern                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $984570             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary J. Perry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
9911037
Perry

This research project is conducted under the auspices of the
              National Oceanographic Partnership Program (NOPP).  Partners include the Univ.
              of Maine, Univ. of Washington, several commercial instrument manufacturers, and
              two local government agencies.  The project addresses an ocean sciences
              requirement for new ocean observational capabilities for continuous,
              high-resolution measure-ments of oceanic processes that include
              characterization of distributions, mechanisms, and rates of processes involving
              chemical and biological variables together with physical variables in the
              ocean. The overall objective is to add new capabilities to a small (1.8 m, 52
              kg) autonomous underwater glider that moves horizontally and vertically using
              variable buoyancy control and wings. It can perform hundreds of cycles per
              launch from surface to 2,000 m or less, report data back (including GPS
              location) in real time upon each surfacing, and be reprogrammed from shore. New
              sensors will be developed and integrated into the system for dissolved oxygen
              and various inherent optical properties of seawater, all measured at the same
              time and space scales as physical properties. The project encompasses
              development of new sensors, miniaturization of several extant sensors and
              extensive field tests.  The research team includes industrial partners, local
              governments working on practical societal/scientific issues; biological,
              physical and optical oceanographers; and an education effort from 8th grade
              through graduate school. 

The specific goals of this project are:
- to
              extend development of an autonomous, underwater glider to be capable of
              measuring biological, optical,       physical and chemical variables on the
              same time and space sales, in real time, and in diverse            
              environments;
 -to develop small, light-weight, low-power sensors for
              measuring dissolved oxygen, inherent optical             properties (IOPs) of
              seawater, chlorophyll a fluorescence (the primary surrogate for phytoplankton  
                        biomass), and other fluorescing compounds;
 -to verify with
              ground-truth measurements the high quality data collected by the glider;
 -to
              demonstrate the glider's capabilities for real-time, data-adaptive sampling;

              -to enhance understanding of the dynamics of key physical and biological
              parameters in Puget Sound that           are essential to assessing human
              impacts on water quality;
 -to demonstrate the glider's ability to
              significantly improve validation of satellite ocean color data by            
              sampling at the appropriate scales; and 
 -to engage undergraduates and
              graduate students in engineering tests and research applications.

The newly
              developed optical sensors for IOPs and chlorophyll a fluorescence would be
              easily adaptable to other platforms, and hence be easily and rapidly available
              to the general oceanographic community. Also, the glider will be able to
              operate in areas beyond Puget Sound including both coastal and open-ocean
              environments.


