Title       : The Influence of Implicit Theories on Stereotype Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a9911144

Award Number: 9911144
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125052             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Stroessner Ss233@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              People differ in whether they believe that human nature is stable or dynamic,
              and these beliefs have been shown to have important consequences for how people
              think about and interact with others. Recent studies suggest that different
              implicit beliefs about the malleability of traits have important implications
              for the formation of and belief in the accuracy of stereotypes. People who
              believe that traits are unchangeable are more likely to express belief in
              existing stereotypes and to form new stereotypes. These individuals are also
              likely to ignore behavioral information indicating that stereotypes are
              erroneous or are not descriptive of an individual member of a stereotyped
              group. These findings suggest that people's implicit theories will affect how
              stereotype-inconsistent information is processed. If minimal
              stereotype-inconsistent information is encountered (because
              stereotype-inconsistent information either is rare or is distributed across
              multiple group members), it is expected that individuals who believe that
              traits are unchangeable entities will not show modification of their
              stereotypes. If substantial stereotype-inconsistent information is encountered
              (because stereotype-inconsistent information either is frequent or is
              concentrated within a subset of group members), it is expected that these
              individuals will form subtypes --  cognitive representations nested within the
              general category that preserve stereotype beliefs about the general category.
              In contrast, individuals who believe that traits are changeable are expected to
              modify their stereotypes in proportion to the amount of stereotype-inconsistent
              information they encounter. It is also suggested that presenting information
              about the goals or motivations of targets might reverse this typical pattern
              and facilitate the formation of subtypes by individuals who believe that traits
              are malleable. In some studies, implicit theories will be altered for a short
              term rather than simply measured, allowing a test of whether implicit theories
              play a causal role in the processing of stereotype-relevant information. In
              sum, it is expected that the proposed experiments will identify a variable that
              moderates the impact of stereotype-inconsistent information on perceptions of
              groups, simultaneously increasing our understanding of the conditions under
              which stereotypes can be changed and of the impact of perceptions of human
              malleability on judgments and behavior.

