Title       : The Effects of Landscape and Soil Development on the Terrestrial Phosphorus
               Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a9911526

Award Number: 9911526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99974              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabriel M. Filippelli   (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine J. Souch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Previous research has yet to quantitatively document how past climates,
              especially glacial-interglacial cycles, have affected the release of phosphorus
              from continental material and/or the availability of phosphorus to terrestrial
              and marine ecosystems.  As a biolimiting nutrient, phosphorus availability
              plays a key role in reconstructions of the biological cycle and the global
              carbon balance.  The major focus of this research project will be a
              comprehensive examination of phosphorus geochemistry in lake sediments as a
              record of soil development in surrounding landscapes since deglaciation.  New
              perspectives gained from studies of lake-sediment records promise to add a
              solid geologic component to understandings of the effects of climate and
              landscape development on the terrestrial phosphorus cycle.  This research will
              be performed on sediment cores from a variety of headwater lakes in North
              America, spanning a range of paleoclimates, bedrock lithologies, slope-aspect
              characteristics, and ecosystem types.  The project also will include an
              assessment of phosphorus transformations along a transect of lakes.  This will
              allow characterization of changes in phosphorus availability and assessment of
              the impacts on the phosphorus geochemical record from external input (soil and
              litter weathered from surrounding watersheds) and internal production (organic
              matter production and deposition from dissolved phosphate in the lake-river
              systems and the effects of sediment diagenesis).  The project also will include
              examination of several other potential paleoweathering indicators in these
              lakes, including clay mineralogy, organic matter and carbon-nitrogen-phosphorus
              ratios, phosphorus-aluminum ratios, and germanium-silicon ratios of lake
              diatoms using a recently developed technique.  Results from this project will
              add a critical terrestrial dimension to reconstructions of the global
              phosphorus mass balance.  It will shed new light on the biogeochemistry of
              phosphorus fluxes into oceanic environments over time, and it will provide
              quantitative information about the state of nutrient dynamics on the continents
              as a function of climate.

