Title       : ME: Metabolic Engineering to Study the Regulation/Plasticity of and to Modify
               Diterpene Metabolism in Trichome Gland Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2000     
File        : a9911455

Award Number: 9911455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Wagner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1063,1491,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project exploits the plant trichome (leaf hair) gland, a specialized plant
              tissue that produces and exudes copious end-product secondary biochemicals that
              are involved in pest and disease resistance.  This aggregate of cells suspended
              on a stalk above leaf and stem surfaces produces massive exudates that have
              species-specific, simple diterpene chemical profiles.  Dr. Wagner will study
              metabolic regulation that controls carbon flow in glands into specific
              diterpenes by introducing genes that encode enzymes which have potential to
              divert carbon flow into non-endogenous but closely related diterpenes.  Gene
              suppression experiments will also be used to metabolically engineer endogenous
              diterpene metabolism and study the plasticity of diterpene biosynthesis in
              glands.  These efforts will be based on a well characterized gland system,
              available genes from this system, and the recent demonstration of diterpene
              metabolic engineering in this system using a gene suppression approach.  
	In
              addition to being a system amenable to studying metabolic regulation of
              diterpene metabolism, plant trichome glands that produce copious diterpenes
              have potential to serve as "factories" for renewable and efficient production
              of pharmaceutically active diterpenes that are currently available only from
              environmentally-sensitive sources (e.g., those from soft corals).  An
              understanding of the metabolic regulation and plasticity of diterpene
              metabolism in trichome gland cells is needed if this high production cell type
              is to realize its potential as a renewable resource for producing valuable
              diterpenes and other secondary metabolites.  In addition, a better
              understanding of secondary metabolism in trichome glands can also aid in
              efforts to increase natural disease resistance in crop plants.  Trichome
              gland-based resistance of primitive tomato, potato, and other plants has often
              been lost during breeding of cultivated varieties to optimize yield, etc. 
              These properties might be re-established through metabolic engineering of
              trichome glands.  
	Broader aspects of the project include training and
              learning at the postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate and technician levels. 
              Under-represented groups will be included in the project.  The project will
              enhance the infrastructure of research and education by developing the
              diterpene trichome gland system as a tool for studying metabolic regulation and
              engineering, and establishing a partnership between G. Wagner's terrestrial
              plant biology laboratory and W. Fenical's (collaborator) marine animal biology
              laboratory, both having a common interest in diterpene metabolism.  A second,
              broader impact is the potential for the project to produce information that can
              be disseminated through commercial channels to provide new opportunities for
              sustainable agriculture.  Our long term goal is to develop the trichome gland
              system as a renewable, economical system for producing terpenes and other
              products, including pharmacologically active marine diterpenes.     

