Title       : Role of Growth Rate and Grazing Mortality in Regulating the Dynamics of
               Photosynthetic Prokaryotic Picoplankton in the Sargasso Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a9911534

Award Number: 9911534
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326046             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Binder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Two closely related unicellular cyanobacteria, Prochlorococcus and
              Synechococcus, are responsible for a significant fraction of total oceanic
              primary production. Although these two picoplankton groups are ubiquitous and
              abundant in most parts of the ocean, their distribution in time and space is
              often contrasting. This pattern is particularly evident over the course of the
              seasonal cycle in the NW Sargasso Sea, where Prochlorococcus dominates during
              the summer (under highly stratified, low nutrient conditions), and
              Synechococcus typically dominates during the winter (under well-mixed
              conditions). The fact that the summed biomass of these two groups remains
              approximately constant has led to the suggestion that together these organisms
              fill some sort of "picophytoplankton niche" in this environment. Explanations
              for these contrasting patterns of Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus
              distribution are most often framed in the context of growth rate regulation:
              dominance by one or the other group is assumed to reflect faster growth by that
              group under the environmental conditions prevailing at the time. However, the
              abundance of a natural population must reflect the relative balance between
              both growth and mortality terms, and there is no firm theoretical requirement
              that growth rate and standing stock be correlated. In fact, the few studies to
              date that have simultaneously examined the growth rates of both Prochlorococcus
              and Synechococcus in the field have found no such correlation. These results
              suggest that factors other than differential growth rate limitation are
              important in regulating the relative abundance of these two picophytoplankton
              groups in oceanic environments.

This project seeks to examine the
              relationship between growth rate, grazing mortality, and relative abundance of
              Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus, over the course of the well-defined seasonal
              cycle in the abundance of these two groups in the Sargasso Sea. A suite of
              overlapping and complementary approaches for measuring these processes in
              natural picoplankton populations will be applied during four research cruises.
              Specifically, the following questions will be addressed: Are seasonal changes
              in the relative abundance of Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus correlated with
              changes in the relative growth and grazing mortality rates of these
              populations? Are there significant seasonal changes in micro-grazer abundance
              or activity? Do such changes influence the seasonal cycle of picophytoplankton
              standing stock? Are there detectable differences in the functional response of
              the protozoan community to Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus abundance? Do
              these differences influence the seasonal cycle of picophytoplankton? Do cell
              cycle-based estimates of in situ growth rate coincide with estimates from
              dilution experiments? Are estimates of grazing mortality based on
              fluoresecently-labeled prey consistent with estimates from these
              experiments?


Unraveling the mechanisms by which the relative dominance of
              these two picophytoplankton groups (and their summed biomass) is regulated
              would lead to a better understanding of the more general, but much less
              tractable, issue of regulation of overall phytoplankton community structure.

