Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: A Three-Dimensional Analysis of Age-Related Change in the
               Adult Craniofacial Skeleton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2000      
File        : a9911294

Award Number: 9911294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : July 1,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10791              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan T. Richtsmeier   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Most skeletal research assumes that the human skull does not change in shape or
              size after age 20.  Indeed, most studies work under the assumption that aging
              plays little or no role in adult cranial variation, and adults of any age can
              be used equally in a study of human cranial form.  Contrary to this assumption,
              many scientists have found significant change in the adult skull long after
              sexual maturation.  This poses potential problems
for hundreds of clinical,
              paleoanthropological, and forensic studies that do
not consider age-related
              variability in skull form in their choice of human
comparative samples. 

A
              hypothetical example from the medical realm demonstrates this most clearly,
              though this is not itself medical research.  Some clinical studies compare the
              shape of normal and abnormal adult skulls to better understand the nature of
              genetic diseases affecting skull development. If the adult skull changes with
              age, a comparison between a normal and abnormal sample of 60 yr. olds might
              display extensive differences in skull shape and size.  The same comparison
              using samples of normal and abnormal 20 yr. olds, on the other hand, might show
              few or no differences.  Depending on the age-composition of comparative
              samples, doctors may refrain from treating skull regions that are actually
              pathological, or alternatively, attempt to correct an individual's skull that
              only appears to be abnormal.  Researchers would never think of comparing
              non-age-matched juveniles, yet this is common practice with adults. If adult
              cranial change exists, any study of the skull that does not consider variation
              due to age in their samples cannot be sure of the validity or unbiased
              character of their results.  

The proposed study will rigorously test
              assumptions of adult cranial stability using three-dimensional methods. 
              Multiple skeletal samples of known age and sex, differing stages of tooth-loss,
              and from different geographic regions will be examined for systematic patterns
              of age-related change in the skull.  Three-dimensional coordinate data will be
              collected from 115 landmarks on the skull and mandible.  These data will be
              analyzed using Euclidean Distance Matrix Analysis.  A pilot study using this
              method supports the presence of systematic change in the adult skull and
              documents sex differences in the patterns of this change that were not detected
              in previous studies.  These pilot data  demonstrate the critical need to
              consider adult age-related change in analyses of human skull form, and the
              essential role the proposed study has in the restructuring and reinterpretation
              of previous works.

