Title       : Transmission of Mathematical Ideas: 2000 Years of Exchange and Influence from
               Late Babylonian Mathematics to Early Renaissance Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2000     
File        : a9910964

Award Number: 9910964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12466              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Dauben   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/417-8423

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5920,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 99-10964 - Joseph W. Dauben (Lehman College, CUNY) - "Transmission of
              Mathematical Ideas:  2000 Years of Exchange and Influence from Late Babylonian
              Mathematics to Early Renaissance Science"

This award provides partial
              support for an International Symposium to be held at the Bellagio Conference
              Center, May 8-12, 2000, Bellagio, Italy. Other support for this Symposium is
              being provided by the Rockefeller Foundation, the International Commission on
              History of Mathematics, and the International Mathematical Union.

This
              conference is designed to investigate the 2000-year history of the transmission
              of mathematical ideas across cultures, geographically a history that spans the
              major silk routes and bridges the mathematical achievements of the ancient
              Mediterranean and those of East Asia, especially India and China. Its
              organizers plan to convene a group of international experts, scholars with
              diverse language abilities, to focus attention on texts, problems, methods and
              examples that, collectively, the organizers anticipate will help to resolve
              many open questions about the origins and dissemination of mathematical
              knowledge.

How is it possible, for example, to account for the fact that in
              various texts - from ancient China to medieval Europe - more or less the same
              problems arise, often using the same examples, parameters, and methods? If
              virtually identical problems and procedures were not rediscovered from culture
              to culture independently, then how were they transmitted, and to what
              effect?

The purpose of the Bellagio meeting is to focus attention on early
              mathematical works, especially those in China, India, the Arabic/Islamic world,
              and the late Middle Ages/Renaissance in Europe, in order to explore evidence of
              direct and indirect influences, possible connections, and various means by
              which the problems or methods devised in one particular place and time found
              their way to other points, often very distant in both place and time. The value
              of holding such a conference at Bellagio is that the Conference Center provides
              a quiet, reflective atmosphere conveniently located to accommodate both
              scholars from Europe and North America as well as those coming from the Near
              and Far East, or from North Africa. Bellagio will also provide a relaxed
              setting for an intensive conference where individual expertise can be
              collectively shared, and pre-circulated papers can be collectively discussed in
              anticipation of publishing a book devoted specifically to the problem of how
              mathematical ideas have migrated across time and cultures.

