Title       : Submillimeter Wave Characterization of DNA Macromolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2001    
File        : a9910693

Award Number: 9910693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tatiana Globus tg9a@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910693
Globus

This project will be focused on experimental spectroscopic
              characterization of biological macromolecules in Submillimeter Wave range from
              10 em-1 to 400 cm'1. Detailed investigations of short oligonucleotide with
              known sequence of bases, and different length of chain, and of more complex DNA
              molecules will be performed using techniques based upon Fourier-Transform
              Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. The emphasis will be made on receiving reliable,
              quantitative experimental results.
In our previous experimental studies,
              resonant modes have been observed in this very far infrared region, where
              specific features in spectra of different DNA objects are expected to be found.
              The goal of this project is to demonstrate experimentally the use of
              submillimeter wave spectra in the differentiation of specific DNAs.
The
              experimental study of vibrational spectra of DNA polymers in the subroillimiter
              wave range will confirm the fundamental character of the resonant spectra and
              will demonstrate the feasibility of long-wavelength vibration spectroscopy as
              an approach for identification of DNA signatures. In the long term perspective,
              these results create a scientific basis for the development and demonstration
              of revolutionary submillimeter wave bio-sensing technology.

Introduction-
              The Significance of the Proposed Activity

The development of new techniques
              for the detection and identification of bio warfare agents is a very important
              and challenging scientific problem at this time. Previous studies have
              indicated that spectroscopic characterization of biological RNA and DNA polymer
              chains in the very far-infrared (IR) region reflects low-frequency molecular
              internal motions and can give information regarding three-dimensional structure
              and flexibility of DNA double helix. In the submillimeter-wave frequency range
              ( 3 400 cm-1), vibrations of macromolecules involve rigidly bound subgroups
              which are connected by the weakest bonds and/or non-bonded interactions, and
              vibrations that stretch the bridging hydrogen bonds between the two strands
              [1]. Theoretical results have indicated that DNA low-frequency deformations are
              extremely sensitive to its nucleotide composition and three-dimensional
              structure, have an impact on the main processes related to transferring of
              genetical information, such as replication, transcription and viral infection
              [2], and should reflect features specific to the DNA code. Thus, phonon modes
              that arise in this range can serve as a signature of specific DNA-molecules.
              This new fundamental mechanism for bio identification, if confirmed, has to be
              used to demonstrate that a large number of species-specific phonon modes may be
              detected relatively easily from semi-dry films made from randomly oriented DNA
              fibers.

Objectives of the proposed work.

The objectives of the proposed
              work is to perform submillimeter wave spectroscopic research on DNA
              macromolecules including short-chained oligonucleotides of known base-pair
              sequences to demonstrate the utility of submillimeter waves for obtaining a
              unique, DNA signatures characteristic of moderate to short range order in the
              macromolecules.

Project description

Our initial work have demonstrated
              that interatomic interactions produce hundreds of low-frequency vibrations in
              the far-IR region. Such interactions are extremely sensitive to DNA structure
              and topology. We have also demonstrated that IR absorption produced by
              different modes can differ many folds. As a result, the analysis of DNA
              low-frequency vibrations has a potential to become a clue to DNA structure and
              topology. The next step is to perform an experimental study which will
              demonstrate uniqueness of low frequency characteristic of macromolecule
              fragments depending on the length, structure and topology.

