Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Comparative Ecology of Brown Lemurs(Eulemur fulvus sspp):
               Analysis of Sympatric and Allopatric Popoulations in Southeastern Madagascar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2000      
File        : a9910257

Award Number: 9910257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 15,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4926               (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah J. Overdorff overdorff@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The study of competition has been a cornerstone of ecological research. 
              Competition between related species may lead to exclusive ranges. 
              Alternatively, similar species may develop behavioral or morphological
              differences in shared environments.  These differences may serve two functions:
               1) to mediate resource competition and 2) to reinforce reproductive barriers
              between species.  The links between ecology and reproductive isolation form the
              basis of new and productive lines of inquiry.

In Malagasy lemurs,
              competition appears to have played a significant role in structuring
              communities.  Despite a wealth of information on related pairs of species, few
              studies have examined competition between different populations of the same
              species.  The overlap of populations with incomplete reproductive isolation is
              the focus of much speciation research.  Thus, these populations represent a
              compelling test case for examining the interface of community ecology and
              speciation. 

The present study proposes a 12-month field study of two brown
              lemur (Eulemur fulvus) subspecies in southeastern Madagascar.  The project will
              investigate interactions between white-collared lemurs (E. f. albocollaris) and
              rufous lemurs (E. f. rufus) in a shared environment, as well as an isolated
              population of white-collared lemurs.  Recent genetic studies suggest these
              animals may be separate species.  However, natural hybrids are found at the
              boundary of their ranges.  This area provides an opportunity to examine
              mechanisms of reproductive and ecological separation in these related
              populations.  

The major questions of the study are:  1) What are the
              ecological and behavioral factors that permit white-collared and rufous lemurs
              to overlap?  2) What are the variables that prevent further expansion beyond
              the area of overlap?  3) How do these variables contribute to the limitations
              of gene flow between the subspecies?

To test these questions, the project
              will examine habitat structure, feeding ecology, population densities, and
              interactions between social groups.  The following methods will be used:  daily
              animal follows (recording feeding and social behavior), line transect censuses,
              and botanical sampling (including forest structure and food availability).  In
              addition, genetic analyses will be conducted to clarify population affinities. 
              Research will take place in consecutive seasons of resource scarcity (when
              niche separation is most marked) at one isolated white-collar lemur site and at
              one site in the area of subspecies overlap.

This project will integrate
              areas of particular interest in ecology and evolutionary studies: competition
              and speciation.  Moreover, this research will provide new evidence to assist in
              the conservation of one of Madagascar's most endangered primates. 

