Title       : Dissertation Research: Early Theories of Virus Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a9910891

Award Number: 9910891
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Achinstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In the mid 1950s, after completing the DNA structure, James Watson and Francis
              Crick considered the structure of small viruses. On largely theoretical
              grounds, they conjectured that small viruses might be built from multiple
              copies of a single subunit arranged in a symmetrical way, much like a
              crystalline structure. At the same time, Donald Caspar and Aaron Klug began
              using x-ray diffraction to probe viral substructure. Their data supported the
              Watson-Crick hypothesis, but early electron micrographs of viruses taken by the
              microscopist, Robert Home, and the medical virologist, Peter Wildy, among
              others, indicated that there might be more subunits in the structure than the
              Crick-Watson hypothesis allowed. Caspar and Klug began to search for a theory
              of virus structure which would reconcile the theoretical considerations of
              Crick and Watson with the empirical observations. They were inspired by the
              architecture of Buckminster Fuller and his geodesic dome structures. Very
              roughly, their theory proposed that "spherical" viruses were constructed like
              miniature geodesic domes. This theory is still thought to explain the structure
              of the majority of spherical viruses, although some exceptions were
              subsequently discovered. Aaron Klug received the 1983 Nobel prize, in part for
              his work on viral structure.  The author of this dissertation research project
              plans to write the first detailed history of this interesting episode in the
              history of science. This NSF grant will allow him to travel to Cambridge UK, to
              spend a month in Aaron Klug's laboratory, to interview him, catalog the many
              physical models he and his collaborators built to illustrate his ideas, examine
              his notes from the period, and also to interview Robert Home, a number of
              collaborators, and Jo Wildy, the wife of Peter Wildy. (Tragically, Peter Wildy
              is deceased.) It will also allow a trip to the Buckminster Fuller Institute
              Archive, where among other things, the correspondence between Buckminster
              Fuller and Klug and Caspar is preserved, and the California Institute of
              Technology Archive. Donald Caspar and James Watson spent the first year (1954)
              of their analysis of virus structure at Caltech. And finally, it will allow
              Donald Caspar to be re-interviewed and his research notes analyzed once the
              detailed history is more complete. 
