Title       : SGER: Gene Arrays as a Tool to Explore Brain Stress Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9910573

Award Number: 9910573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan F. Lopez jflopez@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              All living organisms from bacteria to human, appear to have a set of
              built-in-programs critical for coping with deviations from the optimum in their
              environment.  To do so, they rely on mechanisms for detecting these changes, as
              well as mechanisms for coping; together, these mechanisms constitute the stress
              system.  This proposal focuses on a key component of the stress system, the
              limbic-hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal (LHPA) axis, and what genes are influenced
              in brain by this 'stress system'.  The LHPA effects its influence via stress
              hormones called glucocorticoid.  Glucocorticoids are released into blood, and
              impinge on numerous targets.  The brain is one of the many targets; here
              glucocorticoids turns brain cells "on or off" electrically by acting directly
              on the surface of the cells (neuronal mechanisms).  In addition,
              glucocorticoids can act on the genetic code within the neuronal cell to
              influence factors made by the cell that can have long lasting effects on cells
              close by, or far away (genomic mechanisms).  Because glucocorticoids work
              through a combination of neuronal and genomic mechanisms, their effects can be
              felt within minutes, but can also last long after the stressful event has
              terminated.  The effects that last longer for longer time can be detrimental
              (i.e. loss of memory, cell death).  This application proposes to study the
              genes activated by chronic stress and identify which are directly related to
              glucocorticoid action.  We use a novel technique called Gene Array that allows
              us to simultaneously screen thousands of genes, both known and unknown, within
              different brain areas.  We shall use the funding to improve the sensitivity of
              this technique to detect multiple genes in brain.  We hope by providing the
              understanding of the effects of stress in the brain and contribute by providing
              the refinement of a technical tool that will be valuable to the field of
              neuroscience.
