Title       : The Age of Common Beans (Phaseolus vulgaris) in the Northern Eastern Woodlands
               of North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a9910438

Award Number: 9910438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9282               (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Hart   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of the State of NY
	      Rm. 152 State Education Bldg.
	      Albany, NY  12234    518/486-2423

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. John Hart will collect samples of
              prehistoric common beans (Phaseolus vulgaris) excavated in archaeological sites
              in Eastern North America and submit them to the University of Arizona AMS
              radiocarbon laboratory for chronometric dating. Because of small sample size
              requirements, AMS permits individual beans to be directly dated. This stands in
              contrast to other methods where larger sample size requirements preclude direct
              dating of this type. The issue of the spread of agriculture is of great
              interest to many archaeologists. When Europeans arrived in  North America they
              found that most Native Americans relied on agriculture and that normally maize,
              beans and squash were cultivated in single fields and together these provided
              the necessary essential nutrients. While the diffusion of maize and squash are
              relatively well known, considerable less work has focused on beans. Likely
              domesticated in Middle America neither the path nor timing of their spread is
              understood and preliminary data surprisingly suggest their arrival at
              significantly different times in Eastern North America. Given the complementary
              role in the diet one would expect that the association between the three
              domesticates would be relatively old, but such appears not to be the case.
              Archaeologists have generally assumed that the development of cultural
              complexity and spread of agriculture occurred together and that the reliable
              and rich subsistence provided by domesticates played a causal role in this
              process. However in North America such appears not to be true and agriculture
              predates the growth of complex society by a significant interval. Thus
              archaeologists wish to understand when and how domesticates spread and thus
              approach the subsistence-complexity question on solid chronological ground. The
              dates obtained by Dr. Hart will provide much needed information. The results
              will be of interest to, and widely used by, many archaeologists. They will shed
              important new light on the prehistory of Native American peoples.
