Title       : SGER: fMRI and Social Cognition in Close Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9910420

Award Number: 9910420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99160              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur Aron aron@psych1.psy.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Haifang Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research explores the potential application of a new technology, functional
              magnetic resonance imagery (fMRI), to the study of two established research
              topics in the social psychology of close relationships. The research will focus
              on (a) differences in how information is processed about self and close others
              versus self and strangers, and (b) feelings and motivations associated with
              close relationships. fMRI is a noninvasive method for visualizing neural
              activation in the human brain. This technology permits the researcher to
              localize activity that reflects specific brain processes occurring during the
              presentation of experimentally manipulated material. Thus, for example, in the
              set of studies focusing on the first topic, each participant will rate a series
              of personality traits for the extent to which each is true of his or her self
              (the self-focus condition), his or her spouse (the close-other-focus
              condition), or an entertainment personality (the stranger-focus-condition). A
              comparison of areas of brain activation elicited under these three conditions
              permits an assessment of a theoretical model of close relationships which holds
              that information about close others is processed more similarly to the way
              self-related information is processed than to the way stranger-related
              information is processed.

Findings from these studies will advance
              scientific knowledge by helping discriminate among competing theories about
              basic social processes involving cognition, emotion, and motivation regarding
              close others. It will do so mainly by helping determine whether various
              experiences thought to be due to highly similar processes are associated with
              neural activation in the same brain regions. In addition, because these are
              among the first social psychological studies using this new technology, they
              will test its potential for the field in general, opening the way for broader
              use of fMRI technology in social psychological research.

