Title       : Cultural Tightness-Looseness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a9910760

Award Number: 9910760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123349             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele J. Gelfand mgelfand@psyc.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Traditional societies vary in the degree to which they express and adhere to
              social norms. This dimension of culture is known as cultural
              tightness-looseness. The current project will test a multilevel theory of
              cultural tightness-looseness in 20 nations. Cultural tightness-looseness is
              hypothesized to involve a complex interplay between ecocultural and historical
              factors, the structure of social situations, and psychological processes. 
              Ecocultural and historical factors create the need for predictability and order
              within cultures; factors such as high population density, lack of natural
              resources, and a history of external threat are associated with the need to
              create social structures to maintain order and enhance predictability. Such
              factors result in a greater preponderance of "strong" versus "weak" situations
              within cultures. Strong situations create predictability by limiting the number
              of behavioral patterns that are acceptable, and by increasing the propensity
              for censuring inappropriate behavior. Weak situations permit a wide range of
              acceptable behavior, and place little constraint on individuals. It is
              therefore expected that cultural tightness-looseness will be seen in terms of
              "situational constraint", or the range of behaviors that are permitted within
              situations in a culture. Finally, it is hypothesized that a variety of
              psychological processes are cultivated so that individuals are trained to fit
              into, and maintain, the predominantly strong or weak situations that comprise
              the cultural context. Individuals in tight cultural systems are expected to
              show a greater need for structure, less tolerance for ambiguity, greater
              concern for sanctioning, and greater chronic accessibility of ought
              self-guides, as compared to individuals in loose cultural systems. In addition,
              individuals' schemata should reflect the predominant strength of situations,
              with cognitive schemata being more clearly defined, and showing less
              variability across individuals, in tight, versus loose cultural systems. This
              multilevel research is expected to make important theoretical contributions by
              offering a ranking of cultures on tightness-looseness, as well as an
              understanding of its antecedents and consequences. It will also have practical
              value for expatriates, diplomats, international students, and even travelers,
              who will benefit from an understanding of the dynamics of tight and loose
              cultural systems.

