Title       : Dissertation: An Investigation of Prehistoric Population Relationships Using
               Ancient DNA: The Test Case of Azapa Valley, Northern Chile
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1999  
File        : a9910870

Award Number: 9910870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Merriwether andym@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Andrew Merriwether, MS Graciela Cabana will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation. The goal of her research is to utilize DNA
              data extracted from skeletal materials to understand the early prehistory of
              the Azapa Valley which is located in coastal northern Chile. Archaeological
              evidence indicates that in this region of Chile, as well as many other areas
              along South America's Pacific coast, the earliest human populations subsisted
              as hunters and gatherers relying largely on fish, shellfish and edible wild
              plants. Eventually this diet was replaced by domesticated cultigens and on this
              basis complex societies arose. Archaeologists and physical anthropologists
              however do not know whether this transition from reliance on wild to cultivated
              resources resulted from in situ change or population replacement. Ceramic
              evidence in the Azapa Valley demonstrates that highland type pottery first
              appears coincidentally the switch to agriculture and together with some
              skeletal analyses these data support a population replacement hypothesis. Other
              studies however suggest that the changes observed  may reflect trade and that
              the differences between early and late skeletal samples can result from in
              place change over time. To address this question MS Cabana will extract DNA
              from skeletons dating from both hunting and gathering and agricultural periods.
              Preliminary analyses indicate that well preserved DNA can be obtained. She has
              developed a simulation model which, assuming a single population, estimates the
              amount of change likely over time. One can then determine whether the actual
              DNA difference exceeds that predicted.

This research is important for
              several reasons. Archaeologists have speculated for many years on the processes
              which led to the development and spread of agriculture in South America.
              Because objects can be traded over long distances excavated ceramics and other
              items of material culture provide useful but not definitive information. MS
              Cabana will bring a powerful new source of data to bear on this question. The
              methods she develops will, hopefully, be useful to address many archaeological
              questions in many parts of the world.

