Title       : Dynamics of Highly Constrained Polymer Chains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2002   
File        : a9910386

Award Number: 9910386
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald G. Fuller ggf@rio.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Waymouth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9910386
Fuller

The studies in this seek to understand the static and dynamic
              properties of polymer chains constrained by branched architectures or partial
              crystallinity.  A specific objective is to investigate how long-chain branching
              and low levels of crystallinity influence the rheological and physical
              properties of polymers.  The rheology of these materials is much more
              complicated than exhibited by linear, amorphous chains where reptation is the
              principal mechanism governing the relaxation of orientation.  The experimental
              approach will combine synthesis with optical birefringence and IR dichroism
              techniques to investigate the component relaxation dynamics of constrained and
              partially-constrained polymer chains.  For long-chain branched polymers we plan
              to address why and how a long-chain branch acts as a molecular constraint on
              polymer chains subjected to strains.  A further objective is to investigate the
              relaxation dynamics of semi-crystalline block polymers whose chains are
              constrained by low levels of crystallinity.

Narrow molecular weight,
              long-chain branched polyethylenes represent a new composition of matter that
              have both excellent physical properties and good processing characteristics. 
              These materials have recently been introduced into the market on a large scale
              as a new class of polyethylene films.  The molecular origins of this excellent
              combination of properties are poorly understood; a better understanding might
              lead to rational strategies to improve the properties and processing
              characteristics of this important class of commodity plastics.

