Title       : GLOBEC: Mysticete Whale Acoustic Census
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a9910007

Award Number: 9910007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388045             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Hildebrand jhildebrand@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sue Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Mark A. McDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1308,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The U.S. Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics (U.S. GLOBEC) program has the goal of
              understanding and ultimately predicting how populations of marine animal
              species respond to natural and anthropogenic changes in climate.   Research in
              the Southern Ocean (SO) indicates strong coupling between climatic processes
              and ecosystem dynamics via the annual formation and destruction of sea ice. 
              The Southern Ocean GLOBEC Program (SO GLOBEC) will investigate the dynamic
              relationship between physical processes and ecosystem responses through
              identification of critical parameters that affect the distribution, abundance
              and population dynamics of target species.  The overall goals of the SO GLOBEC
              program are to elucidate shelf circulation processes and their effect on sea
              ice formation and krill distribution, and to examine the factors which govern
              krill survivorship and availability to higher trophic levels,  including
              penguins, seals and whales. The focus of the U.S. contribution to the
              international SO GLOBEC program will be on winter processes. This component
              will focus on determining minimum population estimates, distribution and
              seasonality for mysticete whales, especially blue whales. This will be
              accomplished using passive acoustic recorders deployed on the seafloor for a
              period of one to two years. The deployment of a large aperture autonomous
              hydrophone array in the Antarctic will incorporate the use of passive acoustics
              as a tool for mysticete whale detection and census. The result of the
              integrated SO GLOBEC program will be to improve the predictability of living
              marine resources, especially with respect to local and global climatic shifts.
