Title       : Young Infants' Perception of Partly Occluded Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1999   
File        : a9910779

Award Number: 9910779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott P. Johnson sj75@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The function of vision is to provide information to the observer in order
to
              facilitate subsequent action on the environment.  Accurate perception
entails
              discernment of the boundaries, coherence, and unity of objects.
This process
              is challenged by the fact that many objects are partly
occluded by other,
              nearer objects.  Successful object completion under
conditions of partial
              occlusion resides in the appropriate attention to and
utilization of several
              sources of visual information, such as the
luminance, color, texture, motion,
              and depth of visible surfaces.  A
complete account of object perception must
              include studies of its
development, and recent research has contributed
              important information to
our knowledge in this area.  Interestingly, at birth
              infants seem to
respond to a partly occluded object as if it consists of two
              disjoint
surfaces, even if it provides a clear percept of unity to adults.  By
              2
months of age, in contrast, infants have been found to perceive
              object
unity under some circumstances, and this skill improves over the
              following
months.  Thus humans are not born with the ability to perceive
              object
unity, but it develops very rapidly over the first few months.  At
              present
there are disagreements among researchers with respect to the
              mechanisms of
development of perception of object unity.  For example, young
              infants have
been claimed to rely exclusively on motion, and not other cues
              such as
surface appearance, to disambiguate visual scenes involving
              partial
occlusion.  Other approaches invoke "core principles" that guide
              object
perception from birth, such that the perceptual experience of
              bounded,
segregated objects is shared by all human observers, even very
              young
infants.  Recent research, however, provides evidence against both
              these
views:  Young infants, like adults, appear to rely on several sources
              of
visual information in object perception tasks, including motion as well
              as
surface orientation, color, texture, and depth.  On this account,
              the
development of veridical responses to objects proceeds via improvements
              in
the utilization of all these cues.  Despite this advance in
              theoretical
approaches to the development of object perception, important
              questions
remain.  The present research will investigate issues surrounding
              how infants
respond to the depth and segregation of objects in their
              environment.  The 
goal is to further elucidate the constraints that guide
              this fundamental perceptual 
skill in the first few months after birth.  This
              will be accomplished by testing
the role of specific visual cues in young
              infants' perception of object unity, as
well as explorations of young infants'
              visual scanning of object displays, to chart
developmental changes in
              attention to visual cues.
