Title       : Acquisition of a Laser Fluorination Vacuum Line for Oxygen Isotope Ratio
               Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1999  
File        : a9910129

Award Number: 9910129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Larson plarson@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Wolff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910129
Larson

This grant provides partial support of the costs of acquiring
              a laser fluorination vacuum line for the stable isotope laboratory at
              Washington State University.  The PI, Peter Larson, has utilized stable isotope
              analyses of silicate minerals and rocks in his research on high temperature
              geologic systems for the past 20 years.  In addition to Larson, Professors John
              Wolff (Co-PI) and Larry Meinert at Washington State University, and Dr. Dennis
              Geist at the University of Idaho, together with their graduate students, will
              utilize the laser fluorination line in their respective research
              programs.

The addition of a laser fluorination system at WSU will allow for
              the analyses of samples an order of magnitude smaller than can be currently
              analyzed with the lab's conventional fluorination system.  Additionally,
              refractory minerals which have been traditionally difficult to measure with a
              conventional set-up can be analyzed easily with the new apparatus.  The laser
              line will be constructed on-site and will deliver gas samples directly into an
              existing gas source mass spectrometer bellows.  The new system will be used in
              an ongoing research project that is investigating the evolution of ocean island
              basalts on Tenerife, Canary Islands.  Preliminary oxygen isotope data for
              phonolitic magmas from Tenerife suggest that assimilation of altered wall rocks
              is important in their evolution.  However, this work is now limited by our
              inability to analyze small, individual phenocrysts from the nearly-aphyric
              basanites and phonolites.  This facility will also be used in other ongoing
              research projects that focus on the sources and evolution of ore-forming
              hydrothermal fluids, magmatism and its relationship to tectonism and crustal
              evolution in continental environments, and paleoclimate studies of Tertiary
              paleosols in the Pacific Northwest. 

***


