Title       : Using Speech Recognition to Enhance Communication Capabilities for Individuals
               with Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a9910607

Award Number: 9910607
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $456284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Sears asears@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clare M. Karat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 6846      UNIVERSAL ACCESS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to understand and improve how individuals utilize
              continuous word speech recognition (CSR) systems, with a special emphasis on
              the use of such systems by people with physical disabilities (such as C1-C8
              spinal cord injuries, severe repetitive stress injuries, upper extremity
              amputations, and muscular dystrophy) to enter non-trivial quantities of
              spontaneous speech.  While speech recognition algorithms and accuracy rates
              continue to improve, identifying and correcting recognition errors remain
              significant problems plaguing CSR systems.  The difficulties are compounded
              with spontaneous speech input, due to increased recognition errors, or when the
              users have physical disabilities, due to increased difficulty in identifying
              and correcting errors.   This research addresses these problems by modeling the
              relationship between user tasks, the difficulties users encounter identifying
              and correcting errors, feedback accuracy, methodologies used to correct
              recognition errors once they are identified, and the type and timing of
              feedback provided by the CSR system.   Subsequently, new interaction processes
              will be defined which increase the effectiveness of CSR systems.   The PIs
              believe increased collaboration between users and CSR systems during the error
              identification process is critical to increasing the effectiveness of these
              systems:  CSR systems can provide confidence annotations which drive the
              feedback users receive to help them complete the error identification and error
              correction processes.  This research will result in the development of models
              that provide unprecedented understanding of the relationship between users and
              CSR systems, thereby leading to enhanced speech based human machine
              communication for all users, including those with physical disabilities.
