Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science: Morphology of Ion Bombarded Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a9910426

Award Number: 9910426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheun-Lan Liu                           
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14598              (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert-Laszlo Barabasi alb@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,5942,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910426
Barabasi

This award supports a 3-year collaborative research between
              Dr. Albert-Laszlo Barabasi, University of Notre Dame, Indiana and Professor
              Byungnam Kahng at Konkuk University, Seoul, Korea.  The proposed collaboration
              aims to obtain a coherent understanding of the main physical factors
              contributing to the morphology of surface eroded by ion bombardment, as well as
              to investigate the effect of the surface morphology on the sputtering yield.
              

Ion-beam sputtering, the removal of material from the surface of solids
              through the impact of energetic particles, is a particularly important thin
              film processing technique.  Due to its relevance to a number of experimental
              techniques, measuring tools and patterning methods, the morphological features
              of surfaces erodes by ion bombardment is a much investigated problem.  Beyond
              the technological driving forces, such studies are timely due to the increasing
              availability of high resolution observation techniques that offer detailed
              information about the surface morphology.

The PIs plan to develop
              integration and discrete models to investigate the following problems:

(1)
              The dynamics of yield evolution during the sputtering process, a phenomenon
              that can be directly compared to various experimental results.
(2) The low
              temperature morphology of sputter eroded surfaces when thermally induced
              surface is small, and surface relaxation is dominated by ion-induced effective
              diffusion.
(3) To use dynamic renormalization group methods to investigate the
              effect of the anisotropy on the surface morphology.

This project will be
              performed in conjunction with Professor Kahng's group at  Konkuk University,
              Seoul, Korea under the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program.  This project is
              relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program, which
              seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists
              and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills,
              and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  The
              Korea Science and Engineering Foundation support Korean
              participation.




 

