Title       : Collaborative Research: Characterization of a Fungal Pathogenicity Island
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a9910624

Award Number: 9910624
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans D. VanEtten vanetten@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
VanEtten
MCB-9910624 

A primary question in plant pathology has
              been what makes a pathogen a pathogen. This research will characterize a
              cluster of fungal genes with properties similar to what have been called
              "pathogenicity islands" in bacteria.  This cluster was identified in a strain
              of the fungus Nectria haematococca which is pathogenic on pea and is called the
              Pea Pathogenicity or PEP gene cluster because it contains genes for
              pathogenicity on pea.  The PEP cluster is located on a  1.6 Mb "conditionally
              dispensable" (CD) chromosome.  CD chromosomes are dispensable for normal growth
              in culture but contain unique genes that appear to allow strains containing the
              chromosomes to live in specific habitats; in this case pea tissue. The PEP gene
              cluster contains six genes that are expressed during infection of pea tissue
              but the biochemical function of only one of the genes is known with certainty. 
              This gene, PDA1, encodes a specific cytochrome P450 that confers resistance to
              pisatin, an antibiotic produced by pea plants. Three of  the PEP genes, in
              addition to PDA1, can independently confer some level of virulence to an
              isolate lacking the CD chromosome; functions for two of these three genes are
              hypothesized based on predicted amino acid sequences. The deduced amino acid
              sequence of another transcribed portion of the PEP cluster,  as well as three
              apparently non-transcribed open reading frames in this 25 kb region, have a
              high degree of similarity to known fungal transposases.  Differences between
              the G+C content and codon usage of the six genes in the PEP  cluster and
              chromosomal DNA suggest that the PEP  cluster and possibly the CD chromosome
              might have been acquired horizontally.  Several of the features  of the PEP
              cluster - a cluster of pathogenicity genes, the presence of transposable
              elements and the indication of an exogenous origin - are shared by
              pathogenicity islands in animal and plant pathogenic bacteria.  The objectives
              of this research are 1) localization of the physical borders of the PEP gene
              cluster, 2) evaluation of the relative contributions of the individual PEP
              genes to the lesion-causing ability of N. haematococca, 3) characterization of
              the distribution of PEP homologues, 4) analysis of the expression of PEP genes
              and 5) determination of their biochemical function(s).  The results of the
              proposed research may define new mechanisms of pathogenicity as well as
              contribute to a better understanding of host specialization, evolution and
              variation in plant pathogenic fungi.

Most diseases of plants, including
              economically important crop plants, are caused by fungi. The strains of fungi
              that cause plant disease are often very closely related to harmless,
              free-living fungi.  This research has identified a cluster of genes found in a 
              plant pathogenic fungus that is missing or altered in related but nonpathogenic
              strains.   This research into the function of these genes and their inheritance
              can lead to a greater understanding of how pathogenic microbes develop from
              their harmless nearest relatives.


