Title       : Construction and Support of a Polar Rock Repository
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a9910267

Award Number: 9910267
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $758667             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary A. Askin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Leonid Polyak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs, supports the establishment
              of a repository for polar geological materials. The objective of this project
              is to construct and operate a Polar Rock Repository to serve the U.S. Antarctic
              and Arctic earth science community. This National Polar Rock Repository would
              house sample collections from Antarctica and the Arctic obtained by U.S. earth
              scientists through more than 40 decades of fieldwork, and provide for future
              needs. The United States does not currently have such a facility, and rock
              collections are scattered throughout the country, often in inadequate and
              uncurated storage. The rock collections would be catalogued and curated, and
              accessible to the U.S. earth science community and overseas colleagues, as well
              as being available for earth sciences educational purposes. All collection and
              appropriate analytical data will be stored in the on-line Antarctic Geologic
              Database recently designed by BPRC personnel and available via the Internet.
              The Database can be expanded to include Arctic rock and sedimentary core
              collections. 

The award will help to support construction of a single-floor
              building with about 6,000 square feet of storage apace on The Ohio State
              University campus, adjacent to an already existing cold storage building that
              houses sediment cores and other samples, and adjacent to Scott Hall (site of
              laboratories and offices of the Byrd Polar Research Center). In Scott Hall,
              work rooms with rock saws and a drill press, wet laboratory/sample preparation
              facilities, microscope and photographic equipment are available for preliminary
              rock and fossil examination. The planning and construction phase is expected to
              take about two years. This award also supports a Curator and student help for
              the set-up and establishment phase of the National Polar Rock Repository
              following completion of construction.

Access to the collections will be
              possible by direct physical examination of the specimens by a visiting
              scientist, by loan/request of sample splits, and via the on-line Database. A
              National Steering Committee will provide input from the U.S. earth science
              community for this facility and will oversee policies, procedures and
              management. 

Such a national storage and research facility is of vital
              importance for the continuing high quality research conducted by the U.S. It
              provides, along with a database of sample information, an essential resource
              for focused proposal preparation, and an invaluable source of material for
              future research that should make future fieldwork more efficient and effective
              by facilitating pilot studies and other sample-based research. This latter
              aspect could reduce environmental impacts in sensitive polar regions. 


