Title       : Investigation of NO Reburn Chemical Mechanism at High Pressure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a9910978

Award Number: 9910978
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig T. Bowman bowman@navier.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Golden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT-BOWMAN


This is a combined experimental and modeling study of
              nitric oxide (NO) reburning chemistry.  The primary objective is an improved
              understanding of the reaction mechanism for reburning expressed as an optimized
              comprehensive model useful for prediction of NO emissions from laboratory
              flames.  It may also serve as the basis for reduced mechanisms that can be
              incorporated into the CFD design codes used by industry.  The experiments are
              conducted in a high-pressure flow reactor that can be operated at pressures up
              to 50 bar.  The hot-gas source for the reactor is a laboratory burner operating
              on methane-oxygen-nitrogen.  Varoius amounts of NO are added to the feedstream
              to simulate levels in practical devices.  Downstream of the burner, fuel is
              injected into the reactor and rapidly mixed with the combustion products to
              initiate the reburning reaction.  Temperature and concentration profiles of
              stable species are measured using traversing probes coupled to on-line
              analyzers.  The concentrations of injected fuel are sufficiently small that
              reburning occurs under nearly isothermal conditions in order to simplify data
              interpretation.  A range of temperatures, pressures, fuel types, and
              reburn-zone stoichiometrics are investigated.  The modeling study employs
              solution mapping; in this approach, a starting detailed reaction mechanism and
              rate and thermochemical parameters are optimized by successive comparisons of
              model predictions with experimental data within a set of constraints that
              reflect prescribed uncertainties in the model parameters.

Reburning is a
              promising control technology for nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions that uses
              natural gas or other fossil fuel as a reducing agent to remove nitrogen oxides
              from combustion products.  It also plays an important role in establishing NO
              emissions from nonpremixed hydrocarbon-air flames and fuel-rich premixed
              hydrocarbon-air flames.

