Title       : Conference: Partial Student Travel Award Grants to attend the 1999 MMM
               Conference in San Jose, CA, November 15-18, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9910821

Award Number: 9910821
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Romney R. Katti   (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin L. Burke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Inst of Physics
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403842    /   -

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910821
Katti

The purpose of this proposal is to obtain NSF support to
              provide partial funding to allow graduate students to attend and to participate
              in the 1999 MMM Conference at The Fairmont Hotel in San Jose, California, from
              Monday, November 15 through Thursday, November 18, 1999.  This Conference is
              sponsored jointly by the American Institute of Physics and the Magnetics
              Society of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, in cooperation
              with the Minerals, Metals and Materials Society, the Office of Naval Research,
              the American Society for Testing and Materials, the American Physical Society,
              and the American Ceramic Society.  The proposed budget for this grant is $5000,
              to provide partial travel and lodging support to ten students as described in
              the proposed budget.  A request for partial support is also being requested
              from the Magnetics Society of the Institute for Electrical and Electronic
              Engineers, and for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.

Graduate
              students play a key role in the advancement of new and enabling ideas. 
              Graduate students, particularly those in their final years of doctoral study,
              have expertise that is closely tied to the development, demonstration, and
              understanding of new concepts and technologies.  The dissemination of these
              concepts, along with the intellectual development of the students that is a
              consequence of scientific and technical interaction, supports long-term
              leadership needed by the technical community.  The funding provided by NSF can
              enable the MMM Conference to invite graduate students from the U.S. and abroad
              to present papers in key areas of magnetism and to benefit from discussions
              with experts in the field.  With breadth and quality, these presentations and
              interactions are an integral part of each Conference.  Such interactions are
              essential if the Conference is to serve its purpose of providing an effective
              forum for the discussion of new state-of-the-art results and developments in
              magnetics to the domestic and international scientific
              community.
***












