Title       : Dialect Maintenance, Accommodation, and Development in Sociohistorical Isolation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a9910224

Award Number: 9910224
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214243             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter A. Wolfram walt_wolfram@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines the dynamics of dialect maintenance, 
accommodation, and
              change in three contrastive insular settings 
which vary in geographical
              location, contact dynamics, and 
sociohistorical circumstances.  Mainland Hyde
              County in coastal 
North Carolina represents a longstanding, isolated
              bi-racial 
community situated within a unique dialect area--the Outer Banks.
              
 African Americans and European Americans have now lived 
together in
              relative isolation for almost three centuries, thus 
providing an opportunity
              to examine the role of local dialect in the 
historical development of African
              American English.  Cherokee 
Sound, located on a remote peninsula of the Abaco
              region of the 
Bahamas, presents a mirror image of Hyde County--a small
              
community of  transplanted Anglo Americans who fled the United 
States in
              the aftermath of the Revolutionary War and have lived in 
relative isolation
              for two centuries surrounded by a majority Black 
population speaking a
              distinctive Bahamian English variety.  
Tristan da Cunha is the world's
              "loneliest island," located in the 
South Atlantic 1500 miles from the nearest
              settlement.  It was 
settled by a small group (75-200) of British and American
              whalers 
in early 1800s who then had virtually no contact with outside
              
groups for almost 150 years.  Thus, it offers a perspective on the
              
development of language in a small community relatively free 
from external
              language influence.

Sociolinguistic data in these different settings provide
              an ideal 
empirical base for comparing the relative role of dialect
              
accommodation and innovation in contrastive insular language 
settings and
              for examining the dynamics of ethnolinguistic 
accommodation in contrastive
              situations.  This study will further 
our understanding of the fundamental
              principles that underlie 
language contact, language innovation, and language
              maintenance.
