Title       : Articulatory and Perceptual Correlates of Syllable Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a9910701

Award Number: 9910701
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92702              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. de Jong kdejong@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Two projects will examine how it is that speakers organize the very large number
              of actions which make up speech into an extremely rapid orchestration.
              Specifically, this research seeks to establish a phonetic definition of
              syllable affiliation. While the linguistics and speech science literature makes
              reference to the syllable, exactly what this unit is and what it means for a
              consonant to belong in the onset or the coda of a syllable has yet to be
              determined.

The data to be examined here is elicited using a controlled
              rate-scaling paradigm. In this paradigm, speakers produce syllables of
              specified structure repeatedly in time to a metronome which controls the rate
              of speech. The rate of the metronome is systematically varied in order to
              sample a broad range of speech rates.

The research plan includes four
              experimental procedures grouped into two projects. The first project comprises
              two experiments which work with an articulatory database of approximately 2400
              syllables, composed of various stop-vowel sequences produced by speakers who
              repeated syllables in time to a metronome. This database includes dynamic
              measurements of the location of oral speech articulators, recordings of the
              glottal opening, recordings of oral air pressure, as well as acoustic records.
              The first experiment will determine articulatory differences between consonants
              in onsets and codas, as well as how these differences evolve in the face of
              speech rate increases. Also obtained in this first experiment will be
              information on the articulatory strategies speakers use to change speech rates,
              and how these strategies apply to consonants made with different articulators.
              The second experiment will acquire perceptual responses to the same database,
              thus determining which aspects of the articulatory differences are relevant to
              syllabification from the listener's perspective. The two experiments combined
              will provide a coherent picture of basic syllabic organization from both
              articulatory and perceptual perspectives.

The second project will extend the
              results to consonant clusters and to tense-lax vowel pairs. This project is
              particularly designed to examine how language-particular grammatical
              constraints on allowable segment sequences affect speakers' production
              patterns. This project forms the first step at generalizing the results of the
              first project to less constrained speech situations.
