Title       : Multicomponent Drying of Semicrystalline Polmer Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1999 
File        : a9910162

Award Number: 9910162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Surya K. Mallapragada suryakm@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9910162
Mallapragada, S. K.
Iowa State U.

This proposal
              requests (support for a planning visit as part of a potential tri-national
              collaborative effort between the principal investigator (PI) Dr. (Surya)
              Mallapragada at Iowa State University (USA), Dr. Sacide Alsoy at Izmir
              Institute of Technology (Turkey) and Dr. Joseph Miltz at Technion - Israel
              Institute of Technology (Israel), devoted to investigating the multicomponent
              drying mechanism of semicrystalline polymer packaging materials.  The idea for
              this collaborative was born during Tri-National US-Israel-Turkey sponsored by
              the National Science Foundation and held in Haifa, Israel (in March 1999). 
              Solvent removal is a key-processing step in the case of packaging materials,
              many in which are made from semicrystalline polymers.  Therefore, understanding
              the mechanism of this process has a significant impact on industrial drying
              processes.  The expertise of the three investigators perfectly complement each
              other for this industrially and fundamental important problem in polymer
              science.  A two pronged approach will be used to deal with the problem of
              multicomponent drying of semicrystalline polymers in the context of food
              packaging applications.  Experimental approaches to investigate the effect of
              drying conditions on the final product will be complemented with mathematical
              modeling to enable optimization of drying conditions and dryer designs.  The
              three investigators have had an opportunity to interact in Israel and tour the
              facilities available.  However, important details still need to be resolved and
              the investigators would benefit greatly from inspecting the other project sites
              as well.  Therefore, support is requested from NSF to enable the PI to visit
              the facilities available in Turkey and work out the details to enable a
              collaborative research proposal to be submitted by the three investigators.    
                

