Title       : The U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Two-Phase Flow Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9910023

Award Number: 9910023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theofanis G. Theofanous theo@theo.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910023
Theofanous

This award supports the participation of American
              scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on Two-phase Flow Dynamics, to be held in
              Santa Barbara, California from June 5-10, 2000.  The co-organizers are
              Professors Theofanis Theofanous at the University of California, Santa Barbara
              and Professor Yochiro Matsumoto at the University of Tokyo in Japan. 
              Multiphase flows are ubiquitous in science, engineering and the environment. 
              Yet, the practice of the subject has remained largely empirical, hindering
              predictive capability, and hence the discovering of new applications of the
              enhancing of existing industrial processes.  Some strides have been made in the
              past five years that demonstrate the potential of the field, both as a
              scientific discipline, as well as in significantly impacting practice.  The
              goal of the seminar is to expand, refine and coordinate efforts in this area. 
              The topics to be discussed are:  1) survey of research subjects in multiphase
              flow, with emphasis on emerging applications;  2) approach for, and field
              equations;  3) turbulence in multiphase flows;  4) multiscale treatment of
              complex interactions, computational fluid dynamics (CFD);  5) integrated
              strategies for research;  and  6) specific future research directions and
              multiphase flow education.

Recently realized capabilities in experimental
              techniques and computational power are making possible more comprehensive
              approaches, with modeling anchored strongly on basic physics, which for
              multiphase flows often occur at the microscopic, detailed level.  Such
              approaches being more fundamentally based are expected to allow a much wider
              scope in modeling, eventually becoming truly predictive.  The key is
              integration across the different scales to the macroscopic level needed in
              practice.  The Seminar organizers have made a special effort to involve younger
              researchers as both participants and observers.  The exchange of ideas and data
              with Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S. participants to advance
              their own work, and will set the stage for future collaborative projects.  It
              is expected that information on proceedings of the meeting will be available in
              then "International Journal of Nuclear Engineering and D

