Title       : An Automated Learner for Phonology and Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9910686

Award Number: 9910686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103419             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce P. Hayes bhayes@humnet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This basis of this project is a machine-implemented algorithm that
learns the
              phonological and morphological rules governing inflectional
paradigms. The
              algorithm, following exposure to a set of learning
data, can generate
              appropriately inflected forms for novel stems. The
system has the capacity to
              generate multiple guesses for a given stem,
and offers gradient
              "well-formedness judgments" for each, which
correlate well with the
              well-formedness judgments of human speakers. 

The project will involve two
              activities. First, the algorithm will be
used in exploring areas of phonology
              and morphology that have hitherto
been underinvestigated because they require
              the kind of detailed rule
systems that can best be discovered by machine.
              Pilot evidence,
primarily from Italian, indicates that people learn the
              phonological
generalizations of paradigms in surprising detail, in a way that
              is
approximated by the machine algorithm. The project will explore
              such
detailed systems further though large-scale "Wug"-testing
              experiments,
in which subjects provide inflected forms for nonce
              stems.

Tests will be carried out in four areas.  *English past tenses*
              are
important because they relate to a large body of work in
              computational
modeling and psycholinguistics. *Spanish diphthongization*
              
exemplifies a process that is subject to irregularity, but is 
phonological
              rather than morphological. *Korean stem-final consonant 
alternations* are
              involved in a major diachronic restructuring, which 
the algorithm will be
              used to model. *V ~ O alternations in Polish* 
bring evidence from the
              learning algorithm (and parallel judgments 
and productions of native
              speakers) to bear on theoretical issues of 
abstractness and opacity.

The
              learning algorithm will be developed further, incorporating
resources from
              computational linguistics: richer phonological
representations, more
              sophisticated methods of finding phonological
rules, and a morphological
              parser to serve as a front end. The revised
algorithm will also incorporate
              elements of phonological theory: a
projection-based theory of long-distance
              rules (permitting the
algorithm to discover vowel-to-vowel processes), and a
              conception of
derived-environment processes that proceeds naturally from
              the
algorithm. 

The proposed project will (a) increase our knowledge of how
              phonology
and morphology work at the level of detailed generalizations;
              (b)
provide a test for phonological theories; (c) contribute to the
education
              of linguistics students in developing lexical databases,
programming, and
              carrying out experiments; (d) provide databases
usable for testing learners
              developed by other researchers.
