Title       : Attention in Associative Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9910720

Award Number: 9910720
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337186             (Estimated)
Investigator: John K. Kruschke Kruschke@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Medical clinicians learn to associate certain symptoms with particular
              diseases. Seafarers learn to associate certain patterns of wind, wave and
              animal activity with particular future weather conditions. Stock traders learn
              to associate certain levels of value, earnings and market activity
with
              increases or decreases in price. Law enforcement agents learn to associate
              features of people and the environment with particular crimes. Consumers learn
              to associate various products with different feelings. These examples
              illustrate that associative learning underlies much of human behavior, with
              potentially significant consequences for decisions in
the real
              world.

	People are adept at learning many arbitrary associations very
              quickly, without entirely forgetting previously learned associations. Despite
              this proficiency, people also show numerous learned behaviors that are
              suboptimal or irrational from a normative statistical perspective. The
goal of
              the present research is to investigate one likely cause of these irrational
              behaviors, namely, selective attention. When people are learning to associate a
              complex array of information with an outcome, a subset of the information can
              be selectively attended to. By attending to
distinctive aspects of the
              situation, the person can learn quickly without confusing it with previous
              knowledge. Selective attention, because it excludes some aspects of the
              situation, also implies incomplete knowledge. This side-effect of selective
              attention can then lead to numerous
suboptimal behaviors in later
              circumstances.

	The research involves (a) numerous experiments in human
              learning and (b) computer simulation of mathematical models of attentional
              shifts. A primary goal of the proposed research is to explain a wide spectrum
              of seemingly disparate and irrational effects in associative learning as the
              natural consequence of attention shifting. The attention shifting itself is
              actually an efficacious and adaptive response to the goal of learning quickly.
              The mathematical model reflects this goal by shifting attention to whatever
              features reduce predictive error most rapidly. The model mimics human learning
              in detail, and makes new predictions to be tested by the research. The model
              also accounts for several previously unexplained or disparately explained
              phenomena. The research will improve our understanding of the basic principles
              of associative learning. Future research can build on this understanding to
              develop interventions and applications in real-world environments.


