Title       : Dissertation: Early Socio-Economic and Organizational Developments in Highlands
               of Western Iran
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1999  
File        : a9910660

Award Number: 9910660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry T. Wright hwright@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Henry Wright, Mr. Kamyar Abdi will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological research in the
              Zagros Mountains region of Western Iran and combine geomorphological
              reconstruction and regional survey with excavation at selected sites. He will
              focus on the Neolithic and Chalcolithic (Copper Age) periods when plants and
              animals were first domesticated and the roots of civilization in the Near East
              were established. Prior work by Mr. Kamyar has indicated an abundance of sites
              attributable to both early settled and nomadic populations. Although it has
              been many years since archaeological research in this area has been possible,
              the region is importance because it has provided evidence for very early
              domestication and is seen as one of the hearths from which complex societies
              arose. Evidence indicates that both pastoralism, based on sheep and goat
              herding as well as settled village agricultural life developed at roughly the
              same time in the Zagros and prehistorians have speculated on the relationship
              between the two. Some have argued that these represent separate and competing
              ways of life and that the two groups were perpetually at odds competing for
              grazing and agricultural space. Others have postulated that the two types of
              subsistence are linked, that pastoralists were dependent on farmers for
              essential grain supplies and that animals grazed during winter months on
              remains in harvested fields. Likewise farmers obtained necessary protein
              through nomad supplied meat. Some researchers such as Mr.  Abdi have also
              maintained that this very complexity and complementarity lead to the
              development of social complexity and to the mechanisms which regulated large
              scale social interaction. His research in the Zagros will evaluate this idea.
              Because climate and landform are not stable over time, a geomorphological
              survey will be conducted. Based on a time sensitive ceramic chronology already
              developed, Mr. Abdi and his colleagues will map and locate surface sites, both
              agricultural and pastoralist and determine their relative ages. Limited
              excavation at representatives of each type will provide information on the
              degree of social stratification as well as trade. Recovery of floral and faunal
              remains will permit dietary reconstruction. On this basis the interaction
              between groups and the degree of stratification within each can be
              determined.

This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
              insight into the basic mechanisms which gave rise to complex society. It will
              provide data of interest to many archaeologists and contribute to training a
              promising researcher.

