Title       : The Writing Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9910843

Award Number: 9910843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Valentine H. Kass                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53186              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene Searchinger Equinoxfilms@mindspring.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ways of Knowing, Inc.
	      200 West 72nd Street, Suite 46
	      New York, NY  100232824    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9910843
SEARCHINGER

Ways of Knowing, Inc. is developing "The Writing
              Project," two one-hour television documentary programs about the science (the
              archeology and written history, anthropology, and cognitive science) of writing
              systems and, at the same time, about "creative writing," from cuneiform tablets
              to e:mail.  The programs will show how writing is a different thing from
              speech, and how it did not evolve, like speech, but had to be invented.  The
              goal of the project is to inform a wide, general audience about the most
              important technological invention since the beginning of civilization, to
              introduce them to the science of writing systems (grammatology), and to create
              an original "Introduction to Writing" for colleges and high schools. 
              

During this planning phase, the staff will conduct the research needed to
              bring order and focus to the topic and develop a treatment for presenting the
              topic in the two films.  The PI and his colleagues would draw upon the wisdom
              of numerous experts in the field of science of writing including three world
              renowned scholars:  William Bright, University of Colorado, Professor Emeritus,
              UCLA, and editor of "Written Language and Literacy;"  Peter Daniels, author,
              scholar, lecturer on grammatology, and editor of "The World's Writing Systems;"
              and Victor Mair, Professor of Chinese at U-Penn.  On the literary side, writers
              to be interviewed in the planning phase include Kurt Vonnegut, Elmore Leonard,
              and Helen Vendler.   Specific costs involved in the nine-month planning phase
              include travel; producer, writer, and researcher fees; fees to consultants; and
              mini conferences of experts.


