Title       : Workshop on Improving Internet-Based Education for Adult Learners in
               Universities and Corporations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a9910767

Award Number: 9910767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33676              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Stephenson rstephe@sun.science.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      656 W. Kirby
	      Detroit, MI  48202    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Proposal Number: SES 99-10767
Principal Investigator: R.
              Stephenson


	With NSF funding, this proposal seeks to create an influential
              workshop focused on ways to enhance learning for adults via online education.
              The two-day workshop will bring together developers from the university and
              corporate worlds who are pioneers in building interactive,  Internet-based
              courses or course materials for adults in educational and corporate settings.
              Its goal is to move the field forward and bring its focus back to effective
              teaching and learning. The developers of online classes are the workshop's
              target audience, and the issues considered will be those with the greatest
              impact on educational effectiveness and of greatest concern to such developers.
              Specifically, the topics examined will be:
n conveying concepts and
              understanding through active learning
n concept-based navigation
n testing
              understanding online
n ways to get learners collaborating online
n providing
              elements of a laboratory experience online
n assessing what determines
              educational effectiveness and how it is measured
n novel ways to build
              interactive, effective, online educational content.

A number of different,
              innovative approaches to each topic will be presented, evaluated and compared
              from the point of view of educational effectiveness and practicality. The goal
              is to identify the best, leading-edge techniques for effective internet-based
              teaching and promote them so as to advance the state of the art. The results of
              the workshop will be widely disseminated, both as a book, and via the Web (via
              asynchronous streaming video broadcast of the proceedings) which will be widely
              publicized. 


