Title       : Biocatalytic Conversion of Aromatic Waste into Useful Compounds: Amaryllidaceae
               Alkaloids and Oligo Inositols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a9910412

Award Number: 9910412
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomas Hudlicky hudlicky@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Professor Tomas Hudlicky, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
              Florida, is supported by the Organic Synthesis Program for his studies of the
              biocatalytic conversion of aromatic waste into useful compounds.  Through
              whole-cell fermentation of aromatic and halogenated aromatic compounds with
              Pseudomonas putida or a corresponding recombinant strain (E. coli JM109A),
              Professor Hudlicky generates homochiral synthons useful for further
              manipulation to desired target molecules.  His studies are leading to the
              isolation and identification of new metabolites, including those derived from
              aromatic substrates containing chiral centers on their side chains, and to the
              synthesis and chemical evaluation of oligoinositols.  Taking advantage of the
              unusual homochiral precursors made readily accessible through his biocatalytic
              studies, Professor Hudlicky is developing a concise synthesis of
              pancratistatin, a promising but hard-to-obtain antitumor agent.  This synthesis
              not only exploits the environmentally benign aspects of the biocatalytic
              conversion of aromatic compounds, but also allows a number of synthetic
              manipulations to be carried out in water or alcohol instead of more hazardous
              conventional organic solvents.

Consideration of environmental impacts is
              playing an increasingly important role in chemical processing and
              manufacturing.  "Green" chemical approaches include the use of renewable
              resources, alternative solvents and reagents, the design of efficient chemical
              syntheses, and the recycling of waste as feedstock for other processes.  With
              the support of the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor Tomas Hudlicky, of the
              Department of Chemistry at the University of Florida, is investigating methods
              for the conversion of aromatic waste, especially halogen-containing compounds,
              into valuable products.  Through exploitation of the catalytic activity of
              microorganisms, Professor Hudlicky is able to convert such wastes into a
              variety of compounds which promise to serve as chemical precursors to materials
              of biomedical, material, and environmental significance.  These studies are
              "green" not only in their use of chemical wastes as starting materials, but
              also in their synthetic efficiency and in their use of environmentally
              friendlier solvents.
