Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating Western Lowland Gorilla Social
               Dynamics and Genetic Variability Using DNA from Feces and Hair
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a9910399

Award Number: 9910399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane M. Doran ddoran@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The behavior of wild mountain gorillas has been well documented through the
              pioneering work of Dian Fossey and colleagues.  However, the behavior of the
              other gorilla subspecies (the western lowland gorillas and the eastern lowland
              gorillas) remains largely unknown. Until recently, it was assumed that the
              behavior of mountain gorillas was representative of that of gorillas in
              general. However, researchers have now discovered that western lowland gorillas
              are ecologically quite different from mountain gorillas. While mountain
              gorillas eat primarily leaves, western lowland gorillas incorporate large
              amounts of fruit into their diet.  Although we know that the diets of these two
              subspecies differ, the degree to which they differ in social behavior and
              social
composition  is uncertain. This is largely due to the fact that there
              are not yet groups of western lowland gorillas habituated to the presence of
              human researchers.  Because of this limitation, we have yet to answer some of
              the most fundament questions about western lowland gorilla social organization:
              Does a single dominant silverback have exclusive mating access to all of the
              females in the group, as is thought to be the case for mountain gorillas? How
              closely related are individuals within a group? Are females remaining in the
              group into which they are born, or do they disperse to neighboring groups upon
              reaching adulthood?  This project will address these questions about western
              lowland gorilla social structure through genetic analysis. 

This study will
              investigate the social composition of western lowland gorillas by analyzing the
              DNA from hair samples collected in the wild. Each sample yields a unique
              pattern, or genetic profile, that can be used to determine the number and sex
              of individuals in a group as well as family relationships.  Thus, aspects of
              social dynamics can be  discerned even without direct observation. 

Between
              June and August 1998 and February and April 1999 hair samples were collected
              from the nests of wild gorillas at Mondika Research Center in the Central
              African Republic.  The collected samples are from approximately 75 individuals
              belonging to 9 different gorilla groups.   These samples will now be analyzed
              by developing genetic profiles, similar to DNA fingerprints, unique to each
              gorilla individual. The genetic profiles will be used to determine several key
              aspects of gorilla social dynamics: First, these profiles will give insight
              into the mating system and reproductive behavior of gorillas by providing
              information about which silverbacks fathered which infants.  Is a single male
              fathering all of the offspring in the group (one-male with a harem of females)
              or do multiple males father offspring (multiple-male /multiple-female mating
              system)? Second, the DNA profiles will identify the genetic relationships
              between group members, and it will be determined whether or not the females in
              each group are part of the same matriline, (i.e., the females have remained in
              the same group as their mother and sisters rather than dispersing to other
              groups).  

This study will provide important information on the family
              relationships, and therefore the social structure, of western lowland gorillas
              in the wild.  The results of this project will aid in understanding western
              lowland gorilla social dynamics and behavior, and will contribute to gorilla
              conservation and captive management efforts by increasing our knowledge of
              gorilla population structure and genetic variability.  Investigating the links
              between gorilla diet and behavior will lead to a greater understanding of how
              ecological factors influence sociality in animals.

