Title       : Dendroarchaeology of the Navajo Occupation of the Southwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9910773

Award Number: 9910773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267305             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Dean jdean@ltrr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Towner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Jeffrey Dean and Ronald Tower will
              conduct dendrochronological analysis on a massive collection of wood collected
              from both prehistoric and historic Navaho sites. Assembled in response to a
              court case involving land claims, this collection of great potential
              anthropological siginficance was only partially studied and this award will
              allow detailed analysis and the construction of a readily accessible data base
              which will be of value to a wide range of scientists.Dendrochronological
              information from other projects will also be standardized and included. Drs.
              Dean and Tower will also use the data to address a series of anthropological
              questions. 

The project will significantly refine the chronology of events
              and processes important for understanding the Navajo adaptation to the
              Southwest since dendrochronology, or tree-ring dating, is the most accurate and
              precise archaeological dating method available to scholars interested in the
              recent past. Although the Navajo are relative latecomers to the US Southwest
              and arrived after 1,200 their occupation predates Spanish arrival and thus they
              adapted to this major transition. They also adopted pastoralism as a major
              subsistence strategy. Thus archaeologists can gain insight into the processes
              of cultural change and adaptation through the study of their past. The
              dendrochronological data will allow one to address questions of Navajo social
              organization and change and relate shifts in settlement pattern and social
              organization to both environmental and social variables. Impacts of the
              introduction of metal tools and horses, timing and mechanisms for the
              incorporation of non-Navajos into Navajo culture, the consequences of the
              transition to pastoralism and a range of other issues can be examined. The
              project will also aid in calibrating other dating techniques such as
              radiocarbon, archaeomagnetism, ceramic seriation and obsidian hydration. 

