Title       : GLOBEC: Biochemical Determination of Age and Dietary History in the Krill
               Euphasia superba
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a9910043

Award Number: 9910043
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262356             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. R. Harvey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1308,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The U.S. Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics (U.S. GLOBEC) program has the goal of
              understanding and ultimately predicting how populations of marine animal
              species respond to natural and anthropogenic changes in climate.   Research in
              the Southern Ocean (SO) indicates strong coupling between climatic processes
              and ecosystem dynamics via the annual formation and destruction of sea ice. 
              The Southern Ocean GLOBEC Program (SO GLOBEC) will investigate the dynamic
              relationship between physical processes and ecosystem responses through
              identification of critical parameters that affect the distribution, abundance
              and population dynamics of target species.  The overall goals of the SO GLOBEC
              program are to elucidate shelf circulation processes and their effect on sea
              ice formation and krill distribution, and to examine the factors which govern
              krill survivorship and availability to higher trophic levels,  including
              penguins, seals and whales. The focus of the U.S. contribution to the
              international SO GLOBEC program will be on winter processes. This component
              will apply new biochemical approaches to determine the population age structure
              of krill in field populations over seasonal and interannual time scales. Lipids
              specific to different food resources will be used in parallel with the intent
              of establishing markers for dietary history. This research will be coordinated
              with components studying krill feeding and growth. The result of the integrated
              SO GLOBEC program will be to improve the predictability of living marine
              resources, especially with respect to local and global climatic shifts.


