Title       : Highly Reduced Complexes of the Early Transition Metals and the Lanthanides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1999  
File        : a9910233

Award Number: 9910233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $446000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Ellis ellis@chemsun.chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. John Ellis, Chemistry Department, University of Minnesota, is supported by
              the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division for research into highly reduced complexes of the early
              transition metals and the lanthanides. The goal of the project is to develop
              reagents that function as storable sources of "naked" metal atoms or highly
              unsaturated organometallic groups. Prior results demonstrate that bis- and
              tris(polyarene) metal species can be conveniently produced by reactions of
              naphthalene and anthracene radical anions with early transition metal halides.
              These complexes are of special interest since they provide the first available
              "naked" metal anion reagents of the early transition metals. In this research
              the scope of early transition and lanthanide metal polyarene chemistry will be
              assessed. Special interest will be paid to the development of distinctly new
              isocyanide, nitrosyl, carbonyl, and dinitrogen metal chemistry. The project
              will contribute to the training of graduate students and postdoctoral
              associates in very demanding experimental chemistry.

Transition metals and
              their compounds are often unique mediators or catalysts in many significant
              chemical reactions. This project will develop new strategies for the synthesis
              of compounds containing transition and lanthanide metals in unusual or
              unprecedented environments that resemble those that are present in effective
              mediators and catalysts. One specific objective will be compounds that can
              provide highly reactive metal atoms. These "naked" metal atom reagents will be
              examined as catalysts and reactants with industrially important feedstocks such
              as carbon monoxide, nitrogen, hydrogen, and a variety of related substances.
              New, novel transformations that may contribute to the improvement of industrial
              processes are anticipated.  

