Title       : Verifying and Augmenting EPA's DOCKET Database of Civil Judicial Enforcement
               Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a9910788

Award Number: 9910788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13784              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Atlas mark_atlas@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1333,1386,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              One of the most contentious areas of environmental social science research over
              the last 10 years has been "environmental justice," a movement promoting the
              fair treatment of people of all races, incomes and cultures with respect to the
              development, implementation, and enforcement of environmental laws and
              policies.  Various studies have been done in the last several years on whether
              the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") discriminates against
              minorities in its civil judicial enforcement cases by imposing lower penalties
              on violators in disproportionately minority areas.  These studies used data
              from EPA's DOCKET database, which contains records of EPA's civil enforcement
              cases since 1972.

Subsequent studies by this project's principal
              investigator focused substantial attention on the quality of the DOCKET data. 
              DOCKET data were found to have errors or omissions in the penalty amounts,
              descriptions and locations of the violations, and relevant dates.  Obviously,
              if the data are inaccurate or incomplete, they cannot be used reliably in
              analyses.  The purpose of this project is to verify and augment DOCKET data so
              that future research, whether environmental justice-related or otherwise, can
              use the data with greater flexibility and more assurance of their validity. 
              The information in each of approximately 2,400 DOCKET cases will be checked
              against the available source documents (e.g., consent decrees or judicial
              opinions) to correct and augment DOCKET.  Furthermore, databases from EPA and
              elsewhere will be used to identify the latitude and longitude coordinates of
              the violation locations so that future studies can use their precise locations.
               The final result of this process will be an improved DOCKET database that can
              be used for more reliable and sophisticated statistical analyses of EPA's
              enforcement processes.

