Title       : Constraints of the Genesis of Continental Crust via Arc Magamatism: Geology,
               Geochemistry, Structure and Physical Properties of the Talkeetna Arc Section
               South Central Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2002   
File        : a9910899

Award Number: 9910899
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1780627            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Kelemen peterk@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter D. Clift  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley R. Hart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Gregory Hirth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910899
Kelemen


This project is for a multi-year, interdisciplinary study
              of the exposed crustal section of the Talkeetna island arc (Alaska) to address
              the rate and mechanism of continental growth at convergent margins.  The
              Talkeetna arc section, particularly in the Nelchina-Tonsina region, is a
              crustal section through an accreted, Jurassic subduction-related magmatic arc,
              from volcanic, volcaniclastic and sedimentary rocks at the top to residual
              mantle peridotites at the base.  Detailed studies of exposed, island arc
              sections can provide a crucial link between geophysical observations and
              geochemical ophiolite studies have provided an ideal counterpoint to both
              marine geophysics and analysis of mid-ocean ridge basalts in developing a
              complete picture of crustal accretion at oceanic spreading ridges, studies of
              arc magmatism and crustal genesis over the coming decade.

The project
              addresses a key question regarding arc processes:  What is the rate and
              mechanism of continental growth at convergent margins?  Work on the Talkeetna
              section can  provide crucial constraints on the composition and timing of
              accretion of the middle and lower arc crust, which are generally not exposed in
              active arcs.  The P.I.s will address various aspects of crustal genesis,
              applying a variety of analytical techniques:  1)  improved geological mapping; 
              2) determine deformation history of lower crustal rocks, look for faults and
              missing sections;  3) physical properties measurements on typical rocks in the
              section;  4) detailed investigations of  residual mantle harzburgites and
              igneous utlramafic rocks at base of crust;  5) delineate liquid lines of
              descent in the arc crustal section;  6) petrological and trace element
              modeling; and 7)  determine the P-T-t history of the lower crust.
***

