Title       : International Conference on Establishment Surveys II (ICES-II)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2000     
File        : a9910906

Award Number: 9910906
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 15,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ray A. Waller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Statistical Assoc
	      1429 Duke Street
	      Alexandria, VA  223143461    703/684-1221

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for the 2nd International Conference on
              Establishment Surveys, to be held in June 2000 in Buffalo, New York.  The
              Survey Research Methods (SRM) Section of the American Statistical Association
              (ASA) has adopted a program of organizing international conferences as a
              vehicle for encouraging discussion and publication of current research on
              survey methods and applications.  Establishment surveys pose many different
              problems from those of social and demographic surveys at every stage of
              collecting and processing data.  This conference is designed to address the
              diversity of these unique features.  The pre-conference will offer short
              courses in areas such as Sampling and Estimation for Business Surveys, Applying
              Principles of Visual Design to Establishment Surveys, and Using the North
              American Industry Classification System.  The main conference will consist of
              workshops and a software demonstration lab for sessions dedicated to particular
              survey activity packages such as matching and record linkage, data capture,
              computer-assisted interviewing, automated coding, and data analysis.

Sample
              surveys, augmented with periodic censuses, are the predominant mode for
              collecting data about businesses, farms, and institutions.  There is remarkable
              commonality in the types of problems encountered in designing and implementing
              sample surveys and censuses of such establishments.  For this project,
              "establishment surveys" is used as a general term for surveys that study the
              characteristics or attributes of organizational entities as opposed to surveys
              that study persons or households.  In spite of their very different target
              populations, establishment surveys share common attributes that do not occur or
              are unimportant for social and demographic surveys.  This conference will
              provide stimulus for the continued, interdisciplinary, cross agency, and cross
              country research cooperation needed to address the unique features of
              establishment surveys.


