Title       : Acquisition of an Ultra High Field Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1999 
File        : a9910947

Award Number: 9910947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Jane Saunders                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard D. Spicer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol A. Fierke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony A. Ribeiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

9910947



Abstract

	This project involves the acquisition and
              installation of an 800 MHz NMR spectrometer at the Duke University NMR Center,
              to be used by scientists from Duke, University of North Carolina and North
              Carolina State.  Use of the spectrometer will be coordinated with scheduling
              and use of existing lower field instruments so that its ultra high field and
              enhanced sensitivity and resolution can be dedicated to the most challenging
              research problems in characterization of structure/function and dynamics of
              important biological macromolecules.  Six basic scientists in biochemistry and
              the NMR Center at Duke along with three investigators from the University of
              North Carolina and North Carolina State University comprise the initial major
              users.  The spectrometer will also be available for use by others who have a
              demonstrated need for this state-of-the-art capability to address projects of
              unusual interest and importance.  Research in the following areas will be
              significantly advanced:

	DNA regulation and repair proteins and
              assemblies
	RNA-protein catalytic complexes
	Enzymes important in the
              synthesis of membrane lipids
	Membrane associated lipids
	Modified
              RNAs
	Cell signaling enzymes and peptide binding transporter
              proteins
	Protein conformational dynamics
	Methodology for structural studies
              of large proteins and protein complexes

	The proposed ultrahigh field
              spectrometer represents a significant addition to the instrumentation
              capabilities at Duke and will serve as a unique resource in the region.  It
              will be located in and function as part of the Duke Magnetic Resonance
              Spectrometry Center, a shared instrument facility serving the geographic area
              of the Carolinas.  With the acquisition of this instrument, the Duke facility
              will substantially enhance research efforts in currently strong biochemical
              programs at this institution, in the Research Triangle, and in the region.
