Title       : Action-Based Model of Cognitive Dissonance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a9910702

Award Number: 9910702
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304703             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eddie Harmon-Jones eharmonj@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The theory of cognitive dissonance has been one of the most important and
              generative theories in social psychology. It has been used to better understand
              attitude, belief, value, and behavior change. Despite the amount of research on
              the theory, the mechanisms underlying the production of the cognitive and
              behavioral changes produced by dissonance are not well understood.
              Understanding the processes by which cognitive, affective, and behavioral
              changes result from dissonance and the conditions that intensify such changes
              should advance theoretical development and be useful to persons attempting to
              promote change in others in educational, organizational, therapeutic, and
              community settings. The present proposal presents a model of dissonance - the
              action-based model - that asserts that dissonance, an aversive motivational
              state, occurs because a sufficient inconsistency between cognitions (defined
              broadly as knowledge about one's attitudes, beliefs, or behaviors) has the
              potential to interfere with effective and unconflicted action. Experiments will
              test the idea that processes that facilitate goal-directed thinking (which has
              been found to increase goal-directed action) will increase left frontal
              cortical brain activity and cognitive discrepancy reduction (i.e., the attitude
              change that results from dissonance). Left frontal cortical brain activity is
              predicted to increase because past research has suggested that the left frontal
              region is involved in self-regulation, planning, and intention. In addition, an
              experiment will test the hypothesis that the manipulation of the left frontal
              cortical brain activity -- a proposed mediator of the effects of goal-directed
              thinking on increased discrepancy reduction -- will increase cognitive
              discrepancy reduction. Experiments will also test whether increasing the
              salience of the action implications of cognitions (beliefs or emotions)
              involved in the cognitive discrepancy will increase the degree to which persons
              reduce cognitive dissonance. Finally, an experiment will compare predictions
              derived from self-affirmation theory with those derived from the action-based
              model. The proposed model and experiments have the potential to assist in
              understanding the motivation underlying attitude, belief, value, and behavior
              change, to resolve debates among revisions of dissonance theory, to synthesize
              dissonance theory with self-regulation and action-control theories, to offer
              insights into the role of the prefrontal cortex, and to shed light on clinical
              problems such as depression, at both cognitive and neuroscientific levels of
              analysis.

