Title       : IUTAM Symposium: Scaling Laws in Ice Mechanics and Ice Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1999 
File        : a9910158

Award Number: 9910158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Dempsey john@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hayley H. Shen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will provide funds for the partial support of an International Union
              of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics (IUTAM) symposium on Scaling Laws in Ice
              Mechanics and Ice Dynamics, to be held in Fairbanks, Alaska, in June 2000.  The
              IUTAM is one of the components of the International Union of Geodesy and
              Geophysics (IUGG), a non-governmental international scientific
              organization.

The purpose of IUTAM symposia is to bring together researchers
              who have made significant contributions to the study of ice on various scales
              with those who have made significant contributions to the mechanics of
              heterogeneous media in other fields.  

Over the last few decades the
              analysis of composite materials has required the development of thermodynamic
              constitutive laws for materials comprised of discrete phases.  These principles
              may be applied to sea ice when viewed as such a material, i.e. its phases being
              multi-year floes, thick first-year floes, and ridges in a matrix of thin
              first-year ice, with varying degrees of damage, i.e. cracks and leads.  At this
              time there is no clear understanding of the range of applicability of different
              constitutive laws, and how the behavior of ice at small scales is linked to its
              behavior at geophysical scales.  A major objective of the symposium is to
              establish an organized approach to an understanding of the scaling problem in
              the ice dynamics and ice mechanics community through the exchange of ideas with
              leaders in the heterogeneous materials research community.

