Title       : Classic Maya Elite Households: The Analysis of Floor Assemblages from Burned
               Sructures at Aguateca, Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2000       
File        : a9910594

Award Number: 9910594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164606             (Estimated)
Investigator: Takeshi Inomata   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Takeshi Inomata will
              conduct three seasons of analysis of archaeological material recovered from the
              site of Aguateca. Located in the Petexbatum region of Guatemala, this large
              multiroom site includes an extensive and complex system of defensive walls. Its
              epicenter contains a main plaza, causeway and a "palace group" which was the
              possible residence of a royal family. Surrounding this are elite residential
              areas. Dr. Inomata has conducted three seasons of excavation at the site and
              this indicates that the elite area was burned during an attack by enemies
              during the Late Classic period, ca. 800 A.D. The residents fled leaving most of
              their belongings behind and these have proven to be the richest floor
              assemblages ever found at a lowland Classic Maya site. Aguateca therefore
              offers a unique opportunity since at most sites, room materials which
              archaeologists recover represent worn-out and abandoned artifacts which provide
              only the most limited and biased insights into prehistoric lives. Dr. Inomata
              and a team of collaborators will now analyze the materials recovered. Because
              most pottery was smashed, significant effort will involved reconstruction.
              These objects, as well as many fragments, will be drawn and photographed.
              Use-wear analysis of stone tools will provide important information about the
              activities conducted the residents. The team will analyze the spatial
              distribution of various types of materials to examine activity areas and
              household organization. Soils will be analyzed to search for chemical
              signatures of specific cultural activities.

Both archaeologists and cultural
              anthropologists have come, in recent years, to realize that in traditional
              societies households are the basic units of subsistence and production and to
              understand how groups such as the Maya functioned it is necessary to
              reconstruct activities on a household level. It is through comparison of
              individual well documented household groups that insight into social
              hierarchies and economic and political organization can best be understood. Dr.
              Inomata and his colleagues wish to understand how Classic period Maya
              households were organized. They will determine what kind of activities were
              conducted in and around dwellings and how individual households articulated
              with higher-level political, economic and social organizations.

This
              research is important for several reasons. Because of the extraordinary nature
              of the site, it will provide a unique insight into Maya life and produce data
              of interest to many archaeologists. It should also shed new light on how with a
              relatively simple technology and in harsh environmental conditions the Mayan
              civilization arose and was maintained.

