Title       : SGER: Surface and Sub-Surface Imaging at Nanometer Scales Using Picosecond
               Thermoacoustic Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1999    
File        : a9910823

Award Number: 9910823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84118              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arunava Majumdar majumdar@newton.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT


Proposal Number: CTS-9910823

Principal Investigators:  A.
              Majumdar

The ability to manipulate matter and to observe and control
              physical and biological phenomena at nanometer scales is providing researchers
              with rich opportunity for basic science as well as new technology.  One of the
              most important aspects of this research is the ability to observe objects and
              phenomena with nanometer scale spatial resolution.  The scanning tunneling
              (STM) and the atomic force microscopes (AFM) and, in general, the whole class
              of scanning probe microscopes (SPMs), have made it possible to image single
              atoms and observe single biological molecules on a solid surface.  The current
              SPMs, however, fail to address some fundamental needs in nanotechnology,
              namely: (i) the ability to image objects below the surface, i.e. in three
              dimensions, with nanometer vertical and lateral resolution; (ii) the ability to
              perform spectroscopy in order to identify the chemical content of the material.
               Imaging in three dimensions is extremely important because of the following
              reasons: (a) microelectronics chips are becoming increasingly multilayered; (b)
              biological molecules have three-dimensional structure and function; (c)
              nanophase materials are generally three dimensional.  The ballistic electron
              emission microscope (BEEM) [1] is able to image and perform electron
              spectroscopy below the surface to a distance of about 100-200 A.  However, it
              needs a metal and a semiconducting material to operate.  Magnetic resonance
              imaging using the AFM [2,3] can provide a three-dimensional picture, although
              one needs to perform experiments at very low temperatures ( 1 K) to obtain
              sub-micron resolution. 

To image objects in three dimensions, there are two
              possible approaches: (i) to either emit some form of radiation and measure its
              time-resolved scattering (elastic or inelastic) at a certain point in space
              (eg. ultrasonic imaging); or (ii) to confine resonance excitation to a certain
              location by an external field (eg. nuclear magnetic resonance).  This project
              will use the first approach.  It will combine two techniques - scanning probe
              microscopy for high lateral resolution and picosecond thermoacoustics for high
              vertical resolution - to obtain three-dimensional images with nanometer-scale
              resolution.  



