Title       : Evaluation of Possible Diachroneity in Homotaxial Mid-Carboniferous Ammoid and
               Conodont Successions, North American midcontinent, Western Europe, Russia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1999    
File        : a9910456

Award Number: 9910456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21251              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter L. Manger wmanger@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910456
Manger

Biostratigraphy of the Middle Carboniferous on a worldwide
              basis has relied on the well-documented successions of ammonoids and conodonts
              from the North American mid-continent, Western Europe, the southern Urals,
              Russia and the Donets Basin, Ukrainia.  Based on the British ammonoid
              orthochronology established in the early part of this century, the North
              American midcontinent must be regarded as possessing a significant break at the
              Mississippian-Pennsylvanian boundary representing the missing Homoceras
              interval as it has been interpreted for nearly a century.  Significant breaks
              in the succeeding Morrowan interval of North America are also necessitated by
              the missing representation of index species of the ammonoid genus
              Reticuloceras. If correlations between Great Britain and the North American
              midcontinent are based on a standard utilizing the first appearances of index
              conodont taxa, then the problem of a diachronous, yet homotaxial, succession is
              transferred to ammonoid occurrences. Acceptance of an isochronous conodont
              biostratigraphy also necessitates the presence of a significant, yet
              unrecognized, gap in the Pennine section of Great Britain.  This gap would be
              filled by the lower Morrowan succession from the North American midcontinent
              based on conodont correlations.  Resolution of the apparent diachroneity of the
              ammonoid and conodont successions is critical to the stated goals of the SCCS
              and IUGS in establishing a precise chronostratigraphy for the Carboniferous.
              Thus, evaluation of this problem with ammonoid/conodont diachroneity lies at
              the foundation of the entire chronostratigraphic framework for the
              Carboniferous (Mississippian/Pennsylvanian) System.  This SGER will attempt to
              evaluate and resolve these critical correlations. 







