Title       : Field Research in the Middle Awash Valley, Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a9910344

Award Number: 9910344
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $631862             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tim D. White timwhite@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research involves paleoanthropological fieldwork conducted in Ethiopia's
              Afar Depression.  The Middle Awash research project is a multidisciplinary,
              international effort to help illuminate the origin and evolution of human
              ancestors and close relatives during the past six million years.  The research
              project gives priority to placing archaeological and paleontological
              discoveries within accurate time-stratigraphic and paleoenvironmental contexts.
               The Middle Awash is a tectonically active segment of the African rift system. 
              This study area offers a patchwork of sediments exposed by tectonic action and
              erosion, and calibrated by interbedded volcanic horizons.  This unique set of
              geological circumstances allows the project to simultaneously explore different
              time horizons, and to generate data bearing on different aspects of human
              origins and evolution.  The study area has yielded fossil hominoid remains
              spanning five million years; a longer record than is available anywhere else on
              earth.  Six species in three hominid genera have already been discovered here,
              and every stage of paleolithic technological development is represented.  The
              project's field investigations can be loosely divided into three stages for
              each major fossiliferous sedimentary package.  First, exploration identifies
              and constrains the package.  Geologists attempt to link it chronologically with
              other sites, and with the record of global climatic change embedded in cores of
              contemporary marine sediment taken from the floor of the adjacent Gulf of Aden.
               Next, focused research establishes the contents and chronostratigraphic
              relationships within each sediment package, generating much primary data in the
              form of rock samples, fossils, and artifacts.  Finally, long-term management of
              each major exposed sedimentary package allows additional fossil and artifact
              recovery as erosion and excavation continue.  Research funded by the current
              proposal will represent the final stage of overall exploration in the study
              area.  Focused research is targeted on sedimentary packages in the critical c.
              5.2 myr, c. 2.5 myr, and <1.0 million-year-old periods.  Management of
              adjacent, already proven localities will provide additional data.


