Title       : SGER: Physics-Based Propagation Models for Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a9910804

Award Number: 9910804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78382              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin R. Parker mparker@jaguar1.usouthal.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Hamid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    251/460-6101

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              99010804
Parker

An analytic solution of the problem of electromagnetic
              scattering by a dielectric spherical scatterer resting on, or partially buried
              in, an infinite perfectly conducting ground plane is formulated using the
              method of images. This is one of a series of canonical problems introduced to
              develop new propagation models for wireless communications. The basic
              assumption is that the earth can be modeled by a sphere whose surface is
              initially considered to be locally smooth and flat, while all objects above it
              can be simulated by spheres/spheroids, some of which may be partially buried in
              the ground. All the spheres/spheroids used in the model range from perfectly
              conducting on the one extreme to imperfectly conducting- with complex
              permittivity on the other extreme. The solution of this canonical problem is
              particularly relevant to analyzing the scattering by complex three-dimensional
              bodies, such as plastic mines, icebergs, rough surfaces, etc., in which the
              assumed locally-flat background can be modeled by the ground plane and the
              complex body can be simulated by a sphere/spheroid or a system of
              spheres/spheroids in free space or partially buried in the ground plane. The
              incident wave is assumed to be a uniform plane electromagnetic wave of
              arbitrary angle of incidence. The method of images is applied to replace the
              partially buried sphere in a ground plane by two overlapping spheres of equal
              size, or by two touching spheres of equal size if the sphere is resting on the
              ground plane, and a supplementary incident plane electromagnetic wave such that
              the total electric field is satisfied at all points where the ground plane is
              located in the original problem. The incident, supplementary and scattered
              fields are expressed in terms of appropriate spherical wave functions. To
              impose the boundary conditions on the surfaces of the spheres, the translation
              addition theorem for the spherical wave functions are used to express the
              coordinate system of the scattered field from one sphere in terms of the
              coordinate system of the other sphere leading to a matrix equation which can be
              inverted numerically to recover the scattered field coefficients. The problem
              is formulated such that the boundary condition on the surface of each sphere
              can also be satisfied by an iterative approach. This iterative procedure
              continues until the solution converges, and has the obvious advantage that it
              does not require matrix inversion since the scattered field coefficients in
              each iteration are obtained and used in the next iteration. The scattered field
              coefficients generated by the exact and iterative methods are obtained, from
              which the scattered field can be evaluated everywhere. In particular, the
              scattering cross section can be calculated as a function of the sphere radius
              and permittivity as well as the burial distance for any specified angle of
              incidence.

In order to solve the inverse scattering problem, we employ a
              radial basis function network which consists of an input layer with four
              inputs, a hidden layer using Gaussian nonlinearity functions, and an output
              layer with three outputs. The four inputs in the input layer are the real and
              imaginary values of the computed scattered field complex coefficients for the
              TE and TM polarization cases, while the outputs are the electrical radius and
              burial distance of the training sphere as well as its relative permittivity.
              This network is then trained using the orthogonal least-squares algorithm with
              a specified range of the electrical radius and a specified number of learning
              data samples (50 for each output) to train the network in order to retrieve the
              radius, burial distance and relative permittivity of the test sphere for new
              data (usually experimental) which is different from the learning data.
***

