Title       : Ethical Challenges and Professional Responses of Travel Demand Forecasters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9910956

Award Number: 9910956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Wachs mwachs@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Transportation engineers and planners are often called on to model future demand
              for travel and its  potential impact on built and proposed transportation
              facilities. These demand forecasts are often hopelessly optimistic. Why is this
              the case?  The accepted answers remain inconclusive.  Studies indicate that
              flawed methodology alone cannot account for errors in travel demand forecasts. 
              It may be tempting to surmise that travel demand forecasters as a group are
              corrupt. However, the conclusion of universal corruption is probably too
              simplistic. Experience and an abundance of anecdotal evidence do not support
              it.  Investigators must look beyond the most conspicuous explanations to answer
              why travel demand forecasts are seriously and systematically incorrect. This
              requires an examination of practice and an understanding of how modelers make
              decisions having an ethical cast.

The objective of this research is foremost
              to understand why, and, to a lesser extent, how modelers generate biased travel
              demand forecasts and tolerate the misuse of their work. A secondary goal of
              this study is to collect data necessary to suggest practicable steps to reform.
              Investigators plan to test three primary hypotheses - self-deception,
              role-singularity and role-schizophrenia - to describe how ostensibly
              thoughtful, well-meaning transportation professionals systematically make
              questionable ethical decisions. 

The self-deceived modeler knowingly fails
              to think about a question in the way she believes most likely to give the right
              answer. Role-singularity refers to the tendency among modelers to accept the
              role of dispassionate technician to the exclusion of other roles. The
              single-role modeler of this type ignores or dismisses considerations for which
              reasons of a certain type cannot be given. The role-schizophrenic modeler
              covertly, and alternatively, accepts two conflicting models of his role.
              Metaphor theory is the single unifying thesis that provides a stable
              theoretical framework and common thread with which to weave together these
              positions. It promises to provide the theoretical grounding necessary for
              understanding the systematic failures of travel demand forecasting.

To
              accomplish the stated objectives, the investigators propose a detailed survey
              of approximately 1,300 travel demand forecasters. In addition to framing the
              problem, the survey results will help identify a number of researchable
              questions in the area of ethics and transportation planning. The results will
              also provide a rich sample frame for more in-depth qualitative research
              involving thirty interviews with travel demand modelers throughout the United
              States aimed primarily at testing the hypotheses of this study.

The research
              proposed here is significant because it represents the next step towards
              crafting practicable solutions to a costly societal problem. Additionally, it
              has the potential to provide a new perspective from which to re-evaluate
              professional codes of ethics and furnish a more nuanced vocabulary for ethical
              discourse. Finally, this research is valuable because it provides scarce
              empirical data needed for the study of professional ethics.

