Title       : Urban Domestic Economy and Social Organization at Early Bronze Age Titris Hoyuk,
               Turkey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9910556

Award Number: 9910556
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114858             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy Matney matney@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Timothy Matney and his colleagues
              will conduct archaeological fieldwork in a domestic habitation area within the
              Early Bronze Age city of Titris Hoyuk in southeastern Turkey. Analysis of the
              recovered artifactual, ecofactual and economic data will continue through 2001.
              The Early Bronze Age (ca. 2600-2100 BC) saw the emergence of numerous urban
              polities across much of the near Eastern "Fertile Crescent." This emergence set
              into motion patterns of city life and social relations that ultimately form
              much of the basis for the urban tradition of western civilization. Yet
              understanding of how this process developed is far from complete. To a great
              degree archaeological work on early Near Eastern cities has focused on temple
              and palace areas at the very core of those centers and has ignored the much
              more extensive areas of domestic habitation at their periphery. As a result,
              scientists still lack substantial data for the nature of household economies
              and social organization, and understanding of these units is essential for
              reconstructing how these cities functioned. Dr. Matney and colleagues will
              excavate a single well-preserved domestic residence to test current models of
              household economy and social organization in ancient Mesopotamia. Previous
              subsurface magnetic mapping at Titris Hoyuk has provided a fairly high
              resolution map of primary architectural features within the city. This has
              allowed the location of an area of well-preserved architectural remains which,
              based on their size, orientation and morphology are almost certainly domestic
              residences. The team will focus on a detailed examination of the contents of
              approximately fifteen rooms in a single discrete large residential building.
              Recovered paleobotanical, paleofaunal, phytolith, microdebris and residual
              organic materials associated with room floor and features will be analyzed.
              With these data it will then be possible to study patterns of resource
              production and consumption at a household level. Dr. Matney will test the
              largely undemonstrated assumption that domestic life throughout Mesopotamian
              cities was organized around extended households operating within a economic
              climate dominated by great redistributive systems run through temple and palace
              organizations. 

By concentrating efforts on non-elite residential areas of a
              major site, this project will illuminate the nature of household organization,
              production and consumption practices. It will correct the biased current
              understanding of ancient economic systems in Mesopotamia which is reconstructed
              largely from cuneiform texts and village ethnographies. The work will provide
              archaeologists with a more holistic picture of ancient urbanism in Mesopotamia,
              allowing for comparisons with theoretical models of urban genesis derived from
              other regions and time periods.

