Title       : Effects of Covert Attention on Early Visual Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a9910734

Award Number: 9910734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272006             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marisa Carrasco-Queijeiro marisa@psych.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Attention allows us to select and grant priority in processing to certain
              location or objects in the environment.  Does attention affect the appearance
              of objects?   This question was central for the founders of experimental
              psychology and psychophysics.   At the end of the XIX century and at the
              beginning of the XX century, Wundt, James, Titchener and Mach, among others,
              proposed that attention intensifies the sensory impression, whereas others,
              like Fechner, denied such an idea.  This is still a critical issue in
              perception and cognition.  Most researchers believe that attention affects
              perception.  However, there is a long-standing debate about how and when this
              comes about.  A central goal of current psychophysical and neurophysiological
              studies of attention is to determine the level of processing at which attention
              starts modulating visual cognition and to characterize how that modulation
              takes place. My students and I have reported attentional effects on basic,
              early visual tasks that had previously been considered to be performed
              preattentively; e.g., visual search for features, orientation discrimination
              threshold, texture segmentation, and spatial resolution tasks.  Moreover, we
              have shown that covert attention increases spatial resolution at the attended
              location. We will further explore the mechanisms underlying visual attention
              and will investigate the way they affect early visual processes.  We will
              concentrate on characterizing two (not mutually exclusive) mechanisms proposed
              to underlie the processes by which attention affects perceptual performance,
              namely, signal enhancement and external noise reduction.  1) We will examine
              the extent to which contrast sensitivity is affected by covert attention. In
              particular, to assess whether covert attention affects the contrast sensitivity
              function (CSF) by increasing contrast gain or by shifting the tuning of the
              spatial filters, we will investigate if there isan interaction between target
              eccentricity and degree of attentional effect for different spatial
              frequencies.  In addition, we will evaluate whether the performance fields are
              determined by visual or attentional variables.  2)  We will investigate how the
              presence of homogeneous or heterogeneous distractors affects contrast
              sensitivity in orientation discrimination, detection and localization tasks. 
              These manipulations will allow us to study the interaction of signal
              enhancement and external noise reduction.  3)  By using a texture segmentation
              task that we have used previously, we will be able to ask more refined
              questions regarding the resolution hypotheses as well as the levels of
              processing at which the attentional mechanisms exert their effect.  We will
              determine whether the attentional effect is driven by first- or second-order
              filters and if the attentional effects in texture segmentation differ in the
              upper and lower visual fields.  Lastly, we will use the procedure of selective
              adaptation to learn more about the interaction between visual and attentional
              variables underlying performance in this segmentation task. 


