Title       : SGER: Antarctic Borehole Research with an Advanced TV/UV Instrument Developed by
               the Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9910838

Award Number: 9910838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24948              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barclay Kamb barclay@gps.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              OPP 9910839
Kamb

This award, provided by the Antarctic Glaciology Program of
              the Office of Polar Programs, is made under the Small Grants for Exploratory
              Research (SGER) program. The award is to apply new, advanced TV imaging
              technology of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) to research on the West
              Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS). JPL will provide a deep borehole TV camera system
              for observing directly the zone of contact between ice and subglacial till at
              the base of the West Antarctic ice streams.  The purpose is to gain an
              understanding of the mechanism of rapid ice stream motion, which governs the
              ice streams' effect on the stability/instability of the West Antarctic Ice
              Sheet in relation to global change.  A borehole TV system is needed to reveal:
              (1) the configuration and dimensions of the basal ice-till contact and possible
              gaps between the ice and the till, which may be conduits in a basal water
              system; (2) the amount, character, and distribution of rock debris in the basal
              ice; and (3) any dynamic motions of the ice or till. JPL has developed a new
              borehole instrument system, which is to operate on a fiber optic cable and
              consist of a high-resolution TV camera combined with a UV spectral fluorometer.
              JPL has made this new instrument available for use in our NSF-OPP sponsored
              research project on the West Antarctic ice streams. JPL would in turn be able
              to use the instrument to make fluorometric measurements aimed at detection of
              microbial activity in the deep ice and on rock surfaces. The fluorometric
              technique represents a forerunner in the development of a method for microbial
              detection intended ultimately for use in Lake Vostok or similar
              environments.

The objective of this work is thus to apply a new technology
              to the fundamental problems of rapid ice-stream motion and the existence of
              microbial activity at or near the basal (ice-till) interface.  The research is
              exploratory in tackling two fundamental observations in Antarctic science that
              have not been attempted previously.  It is high risk in lacking a basis in
              previous experience for predicting how successful the observations will
              be.



