Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science: Network for Optical Detection of Gamma-Ray
               Bursts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9910484

Award Number: 9910484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheun-Lan Liu                           
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Hye-Sook Park hpark@llnl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lawrence Natl Laboratory
	      1 Cyclotron Road
	      Livermore, CA  94720    415/422-1100

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5942,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910484
Park

This proposal supports a 2-year collaborative research between
              Dr. Hye-Sook Park, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore and Dr.
              Yong-Ik Byun, Yonsei University, Korea.   The proposed collaboration aims to
              study the prompt optical signal from gamma ray bursts by forming a telescope
              network between 3 geological sites: California, Arizona, U.S.A. and South
              Korea.  The PIs also propose to study variable astronomical objects by
              analyzing data from these telescopes.
 
Dr. Hye-Sook Park at Livermore Lab
              has led a group called LOTIS for optical detection of GRBs during the past few
              years.  The PI is now preparing a 60cm wide-field telescope for more vigorous
              observations at Kitt Peak.  Professor Yong-Ik Byun at Yonsei University has
              been preparing two 50cm wide-field survey telescopes called TSTAR, which will
              be installed and become operational this fall in Korea.  The PIs propose to
              combine these two separate efforts in the U.S. and Korea.  By the proposed
              collaboration, YSTAR telescopes will have capability to follow-up GRB events
              within 20 seconds after the initial detection by orbiting gamma-ray burst
              detectors.  The geographical locations of Korea and U.S. allow the joint team
              to monitor large areas of the sky continuously without significant
              interruption.  YSTAR's high speed computing facility will also analyze the
              LOTIS data archive for other optical transient events.

This project will be
              performed in conjunction with Dr. Byun's group at Korea under the U.S.-Korea
              Cooperative Science Program.  This project is relevant to the objectives of the
              U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program, which seeks to increase the level of
              cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
              exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
              collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. 

