Title       : Female Work, Public Policy, and Fertility in Developed Nations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a9910662

Award Number: 9910662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64811              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane A. Menken menken@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred C. Pampel  (Principal Investigator former)
              Robert McNown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-9910662
Fred C. Pampel

This research examines the macro-level
              relationship between female labor force participation rates and fertility rates
              across temporal and national contexts that differ in the public policies aimed
              at easing the conflict between work and family. Hypotheses that will be tested
              include (s) as the institutional supports for women's roles outside the family
              rise over time, the negative influence of female participation on rates on
              fertility declines and perhaps even reverses; (2) nations with women-friendly
              public policies will exhibit a weaker relationship and experience the over time
              reversal in direction more quickly and strongly than nations without such
              policies, and 3) the consequences of female wages relative income, and
              post-materialists values for the relationship between female work and fertility
              will likewise vary across time and nations.
Data on fertility, female labor
              force participation, and a variety of control variables will be analyzed from
              21 high-income nations from 1949-1996.  These data will supplement the figures
              published in standard sources with data from comparable micro-level surveys
              that measure employment of women by age, marital status, and the presence of
              children at home.  Using statistical techniques for pooled cross-sectional and
              time-serial data and for multi-level data that take fertility rates as the
              dependent variables, the analyses will examine the curvilinear effects of
              female work and the interaction of female work and women-friendly policies
              (without and with controls for other determinants such as female wages,
              relative income, and value change).  The results will evaluate claims for the
              contextual influences on the female work and fertility relationship, and the
              divergence in fertility patterns and determinants during the later stages of
              the second demographic transitions.

In terms of practical implications, the
              project's description and comparison of national policies for support of
              working women relates to political concerns over the difficulties of combining
              work and family, the negative consequences of these difficulties for the lives
              of children and mothers, and the potential problems brought on by
              below-replacement fertility.  The study of other nations with different
              policies and relationships between work and fertility can address these
              concerns, and contribute to policy debates in the United States. 

