Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Fragmentation and Transport of High Energy
               Nuclei in Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9910062

Award Number: 9910062
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30665              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lawrence Berkeley Lab
	      1 Cyclotron Road
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/486-4000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910062
Miller

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Dr. Jack Miller of the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in
              California and Dr. Takeshi Murakami of the National Institute of Radiological
              Sciences in Chiba, Japan.  The Brookhaven National Laboratory in New York will
              also be participating in the project.  The researchers will be undertaking a
              study of the fragmentation and transport of high-energy nuclei in matter.  The
              objective is to measure the nuclear fragmentation and transport properties of a
              range of ions including helium, carbon, silicon and iron in thin and thick
              elemental and composite targets at beam energies between 200 and 1500
              MeV/nucleon.  This research is of great interest to both U.S. and Japan as
              partners in the International Space Station.  The principal source of
              high-energy ions in nature is the galactic cosmic radiation (GCR).  The Earth's
              magnetic field deflects many of these particles, but during future space
              missions crew members will spend many months either outside the geomagnetic
              field or in the high inclination orbit of the International Space Station,
              where the protective effects are smaller than in the typical space shuttle
              orbit.  Crew members will be exposed to considerable radiation from both
              primary and secondary nuclei which can cause late cancers, damage to the
              central nervous system and cataracts.    

This project brings together the
              efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
              capabilities.  The Heavy Ion Medical Accelerator (HIMAC) at Chiba and the
              Alternating Gradient Synchrotron (AGS) at the Brookhaven National Laboratory
              are among the very few accelerators in the world which can accelerate heavy
              charged particles to energies comparable to those found in space.  They are
              complementary in energy, together covering the peak in the energy spectrum of
              the heavy ion component of galactic cosmic rays.  Results of this research will
              be used by physicists, spacecraft shielding designers and radiobiologists to
              understand the effects of the heavy ion component of the galactic cosmic
              radiation on spacecraft shielding materials, detectors and electronics and
              biological systems.  This research advances international human resources
              through the participation of graduate students.  Through the exchange of ideas
              and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and
              promote international understanding and cooperation.  
***

