Title       : Collaborative Research: The Role of Wind-Driven Transport in Shelf Productivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a9910897

Award Number: 9910897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra Isern                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $760665             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis W. Botsford lwbotsford@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. Hastings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910897
Botsford

This collaborative project, involving eleven investigators
              at five institutions is under the auspices of the Coastal Ocean Processes
              (CoOP) Program, and it focuses on the role of wind-driven transport in shelf
              productivity. Wind-driven continental shelves represent a paradox in that while
              they are characterized by high productivity due to upward fluxes of nutrients
              into the euphotic zone, wind forcing also represents negative physical and
              biological controls via offshore transport and deep (light-limiting) mixing of
              primary producers.  Specifically, upwelling ecosystems along mid-latitude
              eastern boundaries of the ocean are well known for wind forcing and high
              productivity at lower trophic levels, with concomitant transport of
              near-surface plankton offshore.  

The group of researchers will conduct an
              interdisciplinary study to examine the roles that wind-driven transport plays
              in productivity over the shelf off northern California.  Research will focus on
              key processes to explain the integrated functioning of highly productive
              planktonic systems over eastern boundary shelves in response to wind-driven
              transport, and specifically, to determine the sensitivity of these processes to
              both wind intensity and the time scales of wind forcing. Work will also
              identify specific features of the nutrient-phytoplankton-zooplankton (NPZ) food
              web that lead to greater or lesser secondary productivity in response to
              changes in wind forcing.

To implement the study, part of the work will
              examine the 3-dimensional wind-driven circulation of water concurrently with
              size-structured distributions of phytoplankton and zooplankton species.  Other
              efforts will study the key physical and biological processes that control
              primary production, zooplankton population responses, and offshore transport of
              plankton and nutrients over the strongly wind-driven shelf and slope off Bodega
              Bay. An integrated sampling scheme coupled with appropriate physical-biological
              models designed to synthesize and guide the fieldwork has been developed.  The
              fieldwork will be comprised of fixed station time-series, ship surveys, drifter
              releases, and satellite remote sensing.  There are two parts to the fieldwork -
              one focusing on the mooring array off Bodega Bay, and a second involving ship
              surveys and drifters.  The mooring array places emphasis on eulerian
              measurements of cross-shelf circulation, aiming also to resolve up/downwelling
              fluxes. The surveys and drifters place emphasis on transformations in the water
              column, specifically the maturation of upwelled water as it moves away from the
              mooring site. By combining these data with the synoptic measurements available
              from satellites and the integrative aspects of the modeling, the project seeks
              to address all the important processes associated with wind-driven transport. 
              This promises to unravel the paradox of how wind-driven transport supports high
              levels of productivity over eastern boundary shelf regions.

This particular
              component of the study addresses the modeling component, which includes
              physical (circulation) and biological (plankton) modeling objectives. The first
              general objective of modeling is to integrate and generalize research results -
              to formulate a model that integrates all of the important dynamic links between
              the physical and biological processes in such a way that all of the
              collaborators can make joint use of data and analyses from all disciplines. 
              The second general objective is to develop increasingly efficient models that
              allow the inclusion of more complex dynamics in models that can be run on local
              workstations.  For example, the exclusion of size or age structure may also
              exclude some of the stronger non-linear effects in plankton systems.

