Title       : The Role of Language in the Acquisition of Kind Concepts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a9910729

Award Number: 9910729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41975              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fei Xu fxu@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research will investigate the relation between early language
              acquisition and how children acquire concepts.  Specifically, how learning
              words for kinds of objects such as "dog" and "cup" may lead the infant to
              organize the world in terms of kinds of physical entities and how this process
              changes the infant's object representations.  Previous studies have shown that
              there may be a major developmental change in infant's ability to individuate
              objects towards the end of the first year: Infants as young as 4 months are
              able to use spatiotemporal information for establishing representations of two
              distinct objects, but it is not until somewhere between 10 and 12 months that
              they are able to use object kind information to do so.  That is, infants
              understand that objects travel on continuous paths and if a spatiotemporal
              discontinuity is detected, they will conclude that a second, distinct object is
              involved.  In contrast, if shown, say, a toy duck and a cup emerging from
              behind a screen and returning, one at a time, 12- but not 10-month-old infants
              would conclude that there are two distinct objects behind the screen. 
              Furthermore, several studies have shown that infants are able to use labeling
              to facilitate categorization and toddlers are able to use labels as a source of
              information for inductive inference.  The current proposal tests the hypothesis
              that infants may use distinct labels to pick out the kinds of objects in their
              environment, that is, the process of learning words such as "dog" and "cup" is
              the process of acquiring kind concepts dog and cup.  Learning these words may
              subsequently impact on infants' object representations, their concept of kind,
              and their ability to make inductive inference.  These hypotheses will be
              investigated with several methods, including a violation of expectancy looking
              time method, a manual search method, and an inductive inference method.  The
              results of these experiments should lead to a more detailed and deeper
              understanding of the relation between early language acquisition and cognitive
              development in the domain of learning count nouns and acquiring kind concepts. 
              In the future these results may be helpful to researchers in early education.
              






