Title       : Tropospheric Impact of Waves and Flows Generated by Landscape Heterogeneity: A
               Theoretical Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a9910857

Award Number: 9910857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417203             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger A. Pielke Sr. pielke@atmos.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Giovanni Dalu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The general aim of this research is to better understand the physical processes
              associated with the influence of landscape heterogeneity on the atmosphere,
              and, through the development of an analytic theory, to contribute to the
              parameterization of these effects on larger-scale models. 

The Principal
              Investigators will focus on: the further development of an analytic theory
              developed under previous support; investigating the role of persistent
              mesoscale flows and waves generated by landscape variability in flat
              landscapes; the evaluation of these atmospheric flows on tropospheric
              structures, specifically stability and wind profiles. 

The need for this
              study is motivated from the analysis of data from previously completed field
              experiments and related numerical results, which have shown that signatures in
              the free atmosphere may be related to mesoscale waves and mesoscale vertical
              transport.  The implication is that mesoscale flow, which is generated over
              heterogeneous flat landscapes, can influence the tropospheric stability and
              wind profile, when these flows persist for a few days.

The Principal
              Investigators will quantify the mesoscale imprint on the free atmosphere during
              clear days with light wind conditions.  In addition, when the environmental
              wind and stability profiles are favorable to propagating waves, the researchers
              will determine how deeply these perturbations penetrate into the free
              atmosphere.  The Principal Investigators will study how the tropospheric
              environment is influenced by mesoscale wave energy, and associated momentum
              convergence and deposition.

Successful completion of this research could
              eventually lead to better parameterizations in numerical models and better
              weather forecasts from these models.

