Title       : GLOBEC: Seabird Distribution and Abundance in Winter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a9910095

Award Number: 9910095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286233             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Fraser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1308,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The U.S. Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics (U.S. GLOBEC) program has the goal of
              understanding and ultimately predicting how populations of marine animal
              species respond to natural and anthropogenic changes in climate.   Research in
              the Southern Ocean (SO) indicates strong coupling between climatic processes
              and ecosystem dynamics via the annual formation and destruction of sea ice. 
              The Southern Ocean GLOBEC Program (SO GLOBEC) will investigate the dynamic
              relationship between physical processes and ecosystem responses through
              identification of critical parameters that affect the distribution, abundance
              and population dynamics of target species.  The overall goals of the SO GLOBEC
              program are to elucidate shelf circulation processes and their effect on sea
              ice formation and krill distribution, and to examine the factors which govern
              krill survivorship and availability to higher trophic levels,  including
              penguins, seals and whales. The focus of the U.S. contribution to the
              international SO GLOBEC program will be on winter processes. This component
              will focus on seabird diet composition and foraging behavior. This will be
              accomplished by direct observation of diet samples from both penguins and
              flying birds. Foraging behavior will be studied using time-depth recorders and
              satellite transmitters. This research will be coordinated with the component
              focusing the large-scale distribution, abundance and habitat of seabirds. The
              result of the integrated SO GLOBEC program will be to improve the
              predictability of living marine resources, especially with respect to local and
              global climatic shifts.


