Title       : U.S. - France Cooperative Research: String Theory and M-Theory Applied to
               Particle Physics and Cosmology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2000   
File        : a9910077

Award Number: 9910077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hitoshi Murayama murayama@lbl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary K. Gaillard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910077
Murayama
This U.S.-France cooperative research award supports Drs.
              Hitoshi Murayama and 
Mary K. Gaillard and some graduate students from the
              University of California at Berkeley in a collaboration with Emilian Dudas and
              Pierre Benetruy of the Theoretical Physics Laboratory, University of Paris XI,
              Orsay, France.  The international collaboration funded by this award in string
              theory and M- (membrane) theory will focus on (1) supersymmetry breaking in
              string theory and in effective field theories; (2) construction of
              string-derived effective theories and their consequences for particle
              phenomenology; and (3) cosmological aspects of strings and M-theory.  The
              theoretical investigations will provide information for experiments at the LEP,
              Fermilab, Large Hadron Collider and future lepton colliders, and experiments in
              high-energy physics and cosmology.  

Superstring theory and related theories
              with elementary extended objects, like membranes, offer the promise for a
              quantum theory of gravity that encompasses all particle interactions.  The
              ultimate goal of these investigations is to determine the consequences of these
              theories, subsequently tested by observations and high-energy physics
              experiments.  The Berkeley group brings to this collaboration extensive
              expertise in superstring models, effective field theories, and the
              supersymmetric and grand unified model.  This is complemented by the Orsay
              group's expertise in string theory, quantum gravity, and cosmology.  The U.S.
              and French investigators, in particular, the graduate students in the project,
              will benefit from interaction with each other and with other string theorists,
              theoretical cosmologists, and astrophysicists located on the Berkeley and Orsay
              campuses. 

