Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Innovative Measurement Techniques in Cryogenics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9910937

Award Number: 9910937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Van Sciver vnsciver@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910937
Van Sciver

This award supports the participation of American
              scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on Innovative Management Techniques in
              Cryogenics, to be held in Tallahassee, Florida, from December 4-7, 2000.  The
              co-organizers are Professors Steven Van Sciver at Florida State University and
              Professor Tomiyoshi Haruyama at the High Energy Accelerator Research
              Organization (KEK) in Tsukuba, Japan.  The topic encompasses many of the
              measurement issues involved in superconducting magnet and cryogenic systems. 
              Three main topic areas will be discussed:  1) recent developments in
              measurement devices for pressure, temperature, level and flow at low
              temperature;  2) measurement techniques in technical systems such as
              superconducting magnets and space cryogenic systems;  and  3) innovative
              measurement techniques of potential interest.  Specific topics include flow
              metering techniques, pulse tube refrigeration, particle image velocimetry, low
              temperature pressure transducer, acoustic emission/friction, low temperature
              machines, low temperature heat transfer, space cryogenics measurements, high
              resolution temperature and pressure, detection of second sound in He II and
              generating high Reynolds number He II.  The goal of the seminar is to encourage
              closer cooperation between the researchers developing new devices and the more
              goal-oriented applications, which could utilize these new techniques.  They
              also hope to provide an overall view of the state-of-the-art in the field for
              young scientists and engineers.  

There has been considerable progress in
              this field over recent years.  Some of this progress has been driven by
              applications such as superconducting magnet systems and space based technology.
               Other major applications are in development of refrigeration, particularly
              small-scale cryocollers.  Seminar organizers have made a special effort to
              involve younger researchers as both participants and observers.  The exchange
              of ideas and data with Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S.
              participants to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future
              collaborative projects.  Dissemination plans for the seminar proceedings
              include publication in the journal "Cryogenics."

