Title       : M-reps: Deformable Solid Modeling for Graphics & Simulation, Using
               Medially-Defined Multifigural Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1999    
File        : a9910419

Award Number: 9910419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44046              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Pizer pizer@cs.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
M-reps define a multiscale approach to graphics modeling and rendering,
              replacing traditional polygonal and spline-based boundary representations
              (B-reps) with a solid modeling paradigm based on medial representation by
              meshes of medial primitives----diatoms.  Each mesh defines a protrusion, an
              indentation, or a separate associated figure, and these figures are grouped in
              directed graphs to create complete objects.  Each diatom represents the center
              of a solid region of width r, with a width-proportional tolerance defined on
              the diatom's associated surface regions and on its links to neighboring
              diatoms.  Thus, a diatom mesh defines the figural boundary to within a
              width-proportional tolerance, and provides a width-proportional sampling of the
              figure's medial surface.

This project will undertake four main areas of 
              research to develop and demonstrate the potential of M-reps:

1. augmenting
              current modeling tools and techniques to incorporate figural hierarchies,
              CSG-style boolean construction, boundary tolerances and width-proportionality
              into the modeling process;
2. adding specialized diatoms for creating sharp
              edges, corners, and creases in M-rep models;
3. implementing a new rendering
              system which combines implicit surface rendering with scale-based models to
              provide automatic simplification based on image-scale; and
4. exploring
              techniques for mapping boundary displacements and image textures to the
              medially implied surface.



