Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Flatness Metrology of Large Wafers with
               Nanometer Accuracy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a9910063

Award Number: 9910063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peisen S. Huang peisen.huang@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5921,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9910063
Huang

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor Peisen Huang of the State University of New York
              (SUNY), Stony Brook and Professor Wei Gao of Tohoku University in Japan.  The
              researchers will be undertaking a study of the flatness metrology of large
              wafers with nanometer accuracy.  The continuous drive toward smaller features
              and larger wafer sizes is making the requirements on wafer flatness
              increasingly stringent.  This demand cannot be met by simply extending the
              currently existing technologies.  A paradigm shift is necessary and new
              concepts need to be developed.  This research is aimed at developing a
              completely new method, namely absolute flatness metrology, for next generation
              wafer and device manufacturing.  With this method, the flatness measurement
              results are free from errors caused by the scanning motion and method, the
              flatness measurement results are free from errors caused by the scanning motion
              and are thus expected to be significantly more accurate compared to those
              achievable by the traditional methods.        

The project brings together
              the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
              capabilities. The successful use of this method will eventually eliminate the
              need for periodical calibration of the metrology system with a wafer master,
              which reduces system maintenance costs.  The impact of this research is not
              limited to the semiconductor industry.  The same technology can also be applied
              to the metrology of liquid crystal panels, advanced optical mirrors such as
              x-ray synchrotron mirrors, hard disk substrates, etc. to significantly improve
              their measurement accuracy.  This research advances international human
              resources through the participation of graduate students.  Through the exchange
              of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge
              and promote international understanding and cooperation.  The researchers plan
              to publish results of the research at technical meetings and on their web site
              (http://www.precision.eng.sunysb.edu).

