Title       : MLIAM: ISLE-International Standards for Language Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a9910603

Award Number: 9910603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $717160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha Palmer mpalmer@linc.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Liberman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1399,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year of funding of a 2 year continuing award. The increased
              interest in multilingual information processing, which requires detailed
              mappings between languages, has highlighted the need for international
              standards, and agreed upon evaluation/validation procedures. We can no longer
              afford to (re)develop language resources for each new application; a shared
              broad scale platform of basic components is an absolute necessity as a common
              infrastructure to ensure the interoperability of systems through compatible
              interfaces and components that can be readily integrated and reused (plug and
              play). This project provides a framework for achieving international consensus
              on essential standards that would enable the sharing of resources and
              components on a global scale. The PI's approach builds on an already existing
              methodology for achieving consensus that has been developedvithin the EAGLES
              standardization initiative in Europe
              (http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/rep2.html). The PI will spearhead the
              formation of an equivalent American group, AIGLES, the American Interest Group
              on Language Engineering Standards (also French for eagles), that will join
              forces with the Europeans in the development of International Standardization
              for Language Engineering (ISLE). The underlying philosophy of the effort will
              be not to prove the truth or correctness of a particular theoretical approach,
              but rather to agree on a common format that can allow the merger of multiple
              sources of information. In order to move forward rapidly, coarse distinctions
              will be made initially and the results laterrefiner. (an approach that was
              anathema some years ago). The work will focus on three distinct areas the P1
              considers the most critical for continued progress in multilingual information
              processing: standardization of multilingual lexicons, with lexical semantics;
              standardization of paradigms fornatural interaction inmultimodal systems;
              evaluation of machine translation systems and spoken language systems.
