Title       : GLOBEC: Winter Distribution and Success of Southern Ocean Krill
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a9910307

Award Number: 9910307
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1203118            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Wiebe pwiebe@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cabell S. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carin J. Ashjian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott M. Gallager  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1308,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The U.S. Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics (U.S. GLOBEC) program has the goal of
              understanding and ultimately predicting how populations of marine animal
              species respond to natural and anthropogenic changes in climate.   Research in
              the Southern Ocean (SO) indicates strong coupling between climatic processes
              and ecosystem dynamics via the annual formation and destruction of sea ice. 
              The Southern Ocean GLOBEC Program (SO GLOBEC) will investigate the dynamic
              relationship between physical processes and ecosystem responses through
              identification of critical parameters that affect the distribution, abundance
              and population dynamics of target species.  The overall goals of the SO GLOBEC
              program are to elucidate shelf circulation processes and their effect on sea
              ice formation and krill distribution, and to examine the factors which govern
              krill survivorship and availability to higher trophic levels,  including
              penguins, seals and whales. The focus of the U.S. contribution to the
              international SO GLOBEC program will be on winter processes. This component
              will focus on juvenile and adult krill and mesozooplankton prey distribution
              and abundance using a sophisticated instrument package, BIOMAPPER II, which is
              equipped with an acoustic backscatter sonar system, a video plankton recorder
              and an environmental sensor system. The system is used in large-scale studies.
              Additionally, a remotely-operative vehicle will be used to map the distribution
              and behavior of krill under ice. The result of the integrated SO GLOBEC program
              will be to improve the predictability of living marine resources, especially
              with respect to local and global climatic shifts.



