Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Collagen Fiber Orientation and Locomotor Loading in
               Primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a9910211

Award Number: 9910211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11000              (Estimated)
Investigator: C.Owen Lovejoy olovejoy@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This study examines some important microscopic structural details of bone.
              Results can potentially improve our understanding of the tissue's microscopic
              architecture and how forces imposed on it during upright walking and running
              are distributed. Collagen fibers are a large component of bone microstructure. 
              Their orientation reflects the types of forces sustained by bone over the time
              period during which it is being deposited.   By microscopically analyzing
              histological sections, this study will provide new data about forces imposed on
              specific areas of the human skeleton during walking and running.

Bone
              microstructure in animals that practice highly specialized forms of locomotion
              and which have been studied by other means such as in vivo strain gauge
              examination will first be reviewed. This will permit detailed standardization
              of methodology and also serve as a means of testing the capacity of collagen
              orientation to accurately reflect bone forces.   It will then qualitatively and
              quantitatively assess the orientation of collagen fibers in human and non-human
              primate bone taken from highly localized parts of the skeleton.  The first site
              to be studied will be the gibbon forelimb.  Gibbons practice brachiation, which
              is a locomotor pattern in which the body is alternatively suspended by each
              forelimb.  Strain in the gibbon ulna is primarily tensile, whereas, that in its
              companion bone of the forearm, the radius, is primarily bending.  These force
              characteristics should specifically affect the collagen orientation in the two
              bones.  This study will quantify and qualify the collagen fiber orientation in
              the gibbon forelimb and compare the results with the strains which have been
              measured in the limb.    

The second site that will be investigated in this
              study is the femoral necks of humans and chimpanzees.  Human femoral necks are
              unique in that they have a very thin cortical bone shell at the superior
              portion. This region is very sensitive to bone loss from osteoporosis and is a
              frequent site of fracture in elderly females. An improved knowledge of the
              forces and structure of this region are therefore of potentially great
              importance. In contrast to those of humans, chimpanzee femoral necks are
              distinct because they have a thick cortical layer of bone on the superior neck.
               The different pattern of cortical bone development in humans and chimps is
              thought to be due to the forces sustained during their respective modes of 
              locomotion and the result of different muscular anatomies in the hip.  Humans
              practice bipedal locomotion during which the hip muscles function to stabilize
              the body on the pelvis, but chimpanzees only infrequently walk bipedally.  The
              hip musculature in chimps therefore differs anatomically from that of humans. 
              In humans the hip muscles (abductors) are thought to relieve forces on the
              upper part of the femoral neck. This results in only minimum bone formation in
              this region, and may be the primary reason for the thin cortical shell typical
              of human femora.  However, chimp hip muscles do not have as strong an abductor
              function and therefore permit their femoral neck to suffer higher forces
              resulting in a thicker cortex.  By examining collagen fiber orientation in
              chimp and human femoral necks, this study will determine what forces occur in
              the two species' femoral necks.  These results will test whether the
              distribution of cortical bone is the result of different forces acting on the
              chimp and human femoral necks.

This investigation will also examine the
              microanatomical construction of bone.  The arrangement of collagen fibers in
              bone remains a highly debated topic in bone biology.  Most researchers believe
              that collagen fibers possess particular orientations in bone.  However, there
              are those who believe that collagen fibers are randomly oriented without any
              particular orientations.  This study will examine collagen fibers in three
              orthogonal planes of bone in order to determine if specific orientations do
              indeed exist.

The findings from this investigation will further our
              understanding of bone microstructure and its relationship to loads suffered by
              bone.  This study will add critical new empirical evidence to the question of
              bone's microstructural adaptation to mechanical stimuli.  In addition, new
              evidence will be produced that will help elucidate the microstructural
              architecture of bone by examining collagen fiber orientations.  These results
              will have implications for physical anthropology, bone biology, orthopaedics,
              tissue engineering, and structural biology.           


