Title       : Cognitive and Neural Mechanisms of Figure-Ground Segregation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a9910727

Award Number: 9910727
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaun P. Vecera shaun-vecera@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Luck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project will investigate a fundamental aspect of human perception, the
              ability to organize the visual world into figures and backgrounds.  In everyday
              visual scenes, objects overlap and occlude one another, which necessitates a
              visual process for determining which objects lie in the foreground (figures)
              and which lie in the background.  Psychologists have proposed a set of rules
              that describe figure-ground segregation.  For example, a symmetrical region is
              more likely to be perceived as a figure than as the background.  However, this
              descriptive approach does not specify the mechanisms of figure-ground
              segregation-the precise computations that allow these rules to be instantiated.
               Neurophysiological studies in nonhuman primates, in contrast, show promise for
              elucidating the mechanisms of figure-ground segregation, but the results of
              these studies are difficult to link with studies of human perception.  The goal
              of this project is to bridge the gap between human perception and monkey
              neuro-physiology in figure-ground segregation by using noninvasive
              electro-physiological recordings of the brain's activity (colloquially known as
              'brain waves' and technically as 'event-related potentials').  These recordings
              will allow us to assess the time course and neuroanatomical substrates of
              figure-ground segregation, thereby elucidating both the cognitive and neural
              mechanisms of figure-ground segregation.  We hypothesize that figure-ground
              segregation relies on a mechanism that amplifies the neural representation of a
              figure relative to the neural representation of the ground.  Our research uses
              non-invasive electro-physiological methods that can test this hypothesis more
              directly by measuring the sensory processes associated with both "figures" and
              "grounds."  This research will provide an understanding of how the brain
              processes complex visual scenes, which may have implications for artificial
              vision systems and techniques for rehabilitation of visual perception following
              brain injury.


