Title       : The Chunchucmil Regional Economy Program: Phase 11: Trade and Specialized
               Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a9910545

Award Number: 9910545
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306732             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce H. Dahlin bdahlin@intrepid.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Traci Ardren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Bruce Dahlin and Traci Arden will
              conduct three seasons of research at the archaeological site of Chunchucmil
              located in the Yucatan Peninsula of Mexico. Dating to the Classic Maya period,
              the site is an enigma and unique among its contemporaries. Although it is
              extremely large with a center encompassing ca. 45 ha, it is remarkably drab and
              lacks the hallmarks of a major Mayan settlement. The site center lacks easily
              recognizable civic and public religious architecture. Missing are the obvious
              structures such as elaborate and conspicuous acropolises and palace complexes
              which would suggest administrative functions or focal temple pyramids which
              would serve to enhance sacred power. The site center also lacks typical Classic
              Mayan period sculpture, carved and inscribed stelae, altars, lintels and other
              trappings of traditional Mayan hierarchy. Dahlin and Arden believe that because
              of the site's location near the Gulf Coast (an active late prehistoric and
              early historic commerce route,) it may have served as a trading center with
              enclaves of merchants from various Mayan groups and regulated commerce both
              along the coast and inland. They and their collaborators have conducted
              preliminary mapping and survey at the site and will now follow up with a major
              field initiative. In addition to gathering basic temporal and spatial data, the
              program includes mapping and survey, midden testing, intensive excavation and
              paleoecological work. The central 6 km  sq. and four 10 km long cruciform
              transects will be mapped. The team will excavate a stratified random sampling
              program of residential units, specialized production areas, possible
              marketplaces and possible civic areas. Paleoecological work will include soil
              analysis and flotation of screened midden materials for macrobotanical remains,
              pollen and phytoliths. Laboratory analyses will include analyses of ceramics
              and the search for starch residues on grinding stones which will provide
              dietary insight.

While considerable archaeological research has focused on
              individual Mayan sites and many small scale regional systems have been
              reconstructed, scientists do not understand the extent to which these
              individual units were bound together and interacted during the height of Mayan
              civilization. In the following Post Classic period extensive trade networks
              existed but none have been identified during the preceding Classic. If Dr.
              Dahlin's and Adren in their hypothesis that Chunchucmil was a multi-ethnic
              trade center, this will provide important insight into how Mayan society
              functioned.

