Title       : Nonparametric, Semiparametric, and Bootstrap Methods in Econometrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9910925

Award Number: 9910925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory N. Price                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195882             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Horowitz joel-horowitz@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This project consists of research on three topics with wide potential empirical
              application: testing parametric models against nonparametric alternatives,
              Semiparametric estimation of proportional hazard models with unobserved
              heterogeneity, and bootstrap methods for econometric models estimated from time
              series. All build on prior work by the investigator.
	The first topic is
              concerned with testing a parametric model of a (possibly vector valued)
              conditional moment or quartile function against a nonparametric alternative.
              The research will develop tests that are uniformly consistent over smooth,
              nonparametric alternative models whose distance from the parametric model
              converges to zero at the fastest possible rate as the sample size increases. 
              Tests which do not require a priori knowledge of the smoothness of the
              alternative model will also be developed. These properties provide important
              practical benefits in terms of power, and the new research will develop tests
              for more general parametric models and for models based on time-series data.
 
                     The second topic is concerned with estimating proportional hazard models
              with unobserved heterogeneity. Neither the baseline hazard function nor the
              distribution of the unobserved heterogeneity will be assumed to belong to a
              known, finite-dimensional parametric family of functions. They will be treated
              nonparametrically. The research will focus particularly on fixed-effects models
              for panel data, models with covariates that are time varying within spells, and
              cross-sectional models in which the unobserved heterogeneity is an unknown form
              of heteroskedasticity.  All of the models are relevant to applied research. 
 
                     The third topic is concerned with testing hypotheses about a
              finite-dimensional parameter that is estimated by the generalized method of
              moments (GMM) using dependent data.  Since first-order approximations can be
              very inaccurate with the sample sizes found in applications, the true and
              nominal probabilities that a test rejects a correct null hypothesis can be very
              different when critical values are based on first-order asymptotic
              approximations. Similarly, the true and nominal coverage probabilities of
              confidence intervals based on first-order approximations can be very different.
              The block bootstrap provides a way to obtain improved approximations with
              dependent data, but recent research has shown that the amount of improvement is
              not large. The new research will investigate the use of the sieve bootstrap in
              which the data generation process is approximated by an expanding sequence of
              finite-dimensional parametric models, and bootstrap samples are generated by
              simulation from  the sieve approximation. In settings much simpler than those
              of GMM estimation and testing, it has been found that the sieve bootstrap
              provides a substantially greater improvement over first-order approximations
              than does the block bootstrap. The new research will investigate whether the
              improved performance of the sieve bootstrap extends to the kinds of tests and
              models to which for which GMM is typically used in economics. In addition, the
              research will investigate whether iterated versions of the sieve bootstrap can
              be used to provide asymptotic refinements without the need for
              heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent (MAC) covariance matrix
              estimation.

