Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Structure-Function Relationship in
               Hyperthermostable, Archaeal Rieske- Type Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9910113

Award Number: 9910113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergei Dikanov dikanov@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              0510304   Electron & Energy Sources               
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910113
Dikanov

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor Sergei Dikanov of the University of Illinois,
              Urbana-Champaign and Professor Toshio Iwasaki of the Nippon Medical School in
              Tokyo, Japan.  The researchers will be undertaking a study of the
              structure-function relationship in hyperthermostable archael Rieske type
              protein.  Iron-sulfur (Fe-S) proteins, widely represented in nature, exhibit
              reversible oxidation-reduction between different oxidation states of the
              iron-sulfur cluster.  Because iron-sulfur proteins are engaged in electron
              transport, the redox potentials of the clusters are among the principal
              characteristics of their biological function.  The project is devoted to the
              study structure-function relationships in two hyperthermostable, archael
              Rieske-type proteins:  a) sulredoxin (SDX) of Sulfolobus sp. Strain 7; and  b)
              archaeal Rieske-type ferredoxin (ARF) from a closely related organism,
              Sulfolobus solfataricus by advanced magnetic resonance techniques.  It is
              proposed to investigate samples of reduced SDX and ARF as well as their
              mutants, to compare with the Rieske center in cytochrome bc1 complex, whose
              X-ray structure is available, and to characterize the cluster environment in
              detail including coordination of histidine and cysteine ligands, presence of
              hydrogen bonds and noncoordinated nitrogens, and accessibility of the solvent.
              

The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have
              complementary expertise and research capabilities. Results of the research will
              provide fundamental information about the structural factors controlling the
              redox potentials in hyperthermostable, iron-sulfur proteins, and will have far
              reaching consequences in both basic and applied energy conversion systems
              involving more complex metallo-enzymes.  The research would also have an impact
              across a wide spectrum of disciplines.  This research advances international
              human resources through the participation of postdocs and graduate students. 
              Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our
              base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of the research in
              scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific meetings.  The
              results will also be available on the www home page of the Illinois EPR center:
              http://ierc.scs.uiuc.edu and at the Center for Biophysics at the University of
              Illinois at:
              http://www.life.uiuc.edu/crofts/bc_complex_site

9910113
Dikanov

This
              award supports a three year collaborative research project between Professor
              Sergei Dikanov of the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign and Professor
              Toshio Iwasaki of the Nippon Medical School in Tokyo, Japan.  The researchers
              will be undertaking a study of the structure-function relationship in
              hyperthermostable archael Rieske type protein.  Iron-sulfur (Fe-S) proteins,
              widely represented in nature, exhibit reversible oxidation-reduction between
              different oxidation states of the iron-sulfur cluster.  Because iron-sulfur
              proteins are engaged in electron transport, the redox potentials of the
              clusters are among the principal characteristics of their biological function. 
              The project is devoted to the study structure-function relationships in two
              hyperthermostable, archael Rieske-type proteins:  a) sulredoxin (SDX) of
              Sulfolobus sp. Strain 7; and  b) archaeal Rieske-type ferredoxin (ARF) from a
              closely related organism, Sulfolobus solfataricus by advanced magnetic
              resonance techniques.  It is proposed to investigate samples of reduced SDX and
              ARF as well as their mutants, to compare with the Rieske center in cytochrome
              bc1 complex, whose X-ray structure is available, and to characterize the
              cluster environment in detail including coordination of histidine and cysteine
              ligands, presence of hydrogen bonds and noncoordinated nitrogens, and
              accessibility of the solvent. 

The project brings together the efforts of
              two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities.
              Results of the research will provide fundamental information about the
              structural factors controlling the redox potentials in hyperthermostable,
              iron-sulfur proteins, and will have far reaching consequences in both basic and
              applied energy conversion systems involving more complex metallo-enzymes.  The
              research would also have an impact across a wide spectrum of disciplines.  This
              research advances international human resources through the participation of
              postdocs and graduate students.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology,
              this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of the
              research in scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific
              meetings.  The results will also be available on the www home page of the
              Illinois EPR center: http://ierc.scs.uiuc.edu and at the Center for Biophysics
              at the University of Illinois at:
              http://www.life.uiuc.edu/crofts/bc_complex_site


