Title       : Workshop on Classifier Constructions in Sign Languages, La Jolla, California,
               April 14-16, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1999   
File        : a9910717

Award Number: 9910717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49911              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen D. Emmorey emmorey@salk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The study of signed languages offers a window into how the modality of language
              transmission and perception affects the nature of linguistic structures. The
              focus of this workshop is the grammatical structure and cross-linguistic
              variation of classifier constructions in sign languages (a.k.a. classifier
              predicates, verbs of motion and location, and polymorphemic verbs). Early
              research suggested that these forms can be analyzed as combinations of discrete
              morphemes, specifically, as predicates consisting of one or more movement roots
              along with several other morphemes encoding, for example, the shape or semantic
              class of object involved (indicated by a classifier handshape), the location,
              and the orientation of the object.  However, several critical questions have
              arisen regarding the syntactic, morphological, and phonological analysis of
              these forms.  Some researchers have suggested that these forms do not actually
              involve classifiers in the usual sense of the term, may involve gestural
              (rather than morphemic) components, and may be unique to signed languages. 
              

In an effort to resolve the current controversy, the workshop will bring
              together sign linguists working on various unrelated languages for the purposes
              of documenting and describing similarities and differences in the grammatical
              structure and semantics of classifier constructions in sign languages.  In
              addition, the meeting will bring together both sign and spoken language
              linguists, along with experts on gesture, to discuss and analyze the
              grammatical and typological nature of these constructions.  An essential
              objective of the workshop is to produce a volume containing the presented
              papers (with revisions after workshop discussions).  Such a book will be
              valuable for several reasons:  1) it will establish a standard for the field of
              sign linguistics with respect to current analysis and debate regarding
              classifier constructions, 2) it will provide spoken language linguists with
              broader insight into the nature of classifier systems in human languages and 3)
              it will add to our general understanding about the relation between language
              and gesture, the nature of grammaticization, and the effects of language
              modality on linguistic structure.
