Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Nuclear Incompressibility and the Exotic
               Compressional Modes in Nuclei
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a9910015

Award Number: 9910015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56365              (Estimated)
Investigator: Umesh Garg umesh.garg.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910015
Garg

This award supports a three year collaborative research project
              between Professor Umesh Garg of the University of Notre Dame in Indiana and
              Professor Mamoru Fujiwara of Osaka University in Japan.  The researchers will
              be undertaking a study of nuclear incompressibility and the exotic
              compressional modes in nuclei.  The goal of this research is to gain new
              insight into the compressibility properties of bulk nuclear matter.  The
              proposed measurements aim at investigating the Isoscalar Giant Dipole Resonance
              (ISGDR) in detail.  The ISGDR is arguably the least studied of the low-l
              isoscalar giant resonances.  However, it's enormous importance lies in the fact
              that it is a compressional mode and the energy of the ISGDR is related to the
              nuclear incompressibility Ka.  

The project brings together the efforts of
              two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. 
              The work on nuclear compressibility has crucial bearing on our knowledge of the
              nuclear equation of state that in turn will greatly enhance our understanding
              of many interesting phenomena like supernova explosions, neutron stars, and
              collective flow in heavy-ion collisions.  This research involves state-of-art
              technologies in vacuum systems, high-strength magnets, electronics circuitry
              and computer interfacing.  The project advances international human resources
              through the participation of a  postdoc, graduate students, an undergraduate
              and a high school student.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
              project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.   Results of the research will be published in
              international scientific journals and also presented at scientific meetings in
              the U.S. and abroad.
***

