Title       : Dissertation Research: Fighting Science with Science: Mary Putnam Jacobi and the
               Politics of Women's Health
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2002   
File        : a9910963

Award Number: 9910963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan J. Brumberg jjbl0@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Historians of women and medicine have paid great attention to the history of the
              female body and its social construction by men of medicine in
              nineteenth-century America. But less attention has been granted to studying the
              medical science of women physicians and understanding how women's knowledge and
              practices reflected their own notions of gender, society, and politics. This
              dissertation research project provides travel funds to archives in order to
              examine the published works of Mary Putman Jacobi, Abraham Jacobi, and other
              relevant social activists and physicians. This research will contribute to the
              completion of a dissertation which examines the life and work of Mary Putnam
              Jacobi (1842-1906).  The dissertation's aim is to achieve a greater
              understanding of how women physicians, especially those interested in women's
              rights and equality, produced scientific knowledge that reflected their social
              concerns. It will trace how women physicians like Jacobi used science to
              contest the pathological constructions of female biology that were employed to
              justify women's exclusion from the spheres of politics, the professions, and
              higher education. Mary Putnam Jacobi was the most respected and influential
              woman doctor of her time, well-educated and widely published on a variety of
              medical issues. She supported and put into practice the main tenets of
              scientific medicine, which helped her gain the support of medical men. Jacobi
              was also an adamant social activist who worked on behalf of women's rights,
              suffrage, and education. This cultural biography of Mary Putnam Jacobi will tie
              this activism to the results of her scientific inquiry, showing how Jacobi's
              social experience and political ideologies shaped her theories on menstruation,
              hysteria, and physiology. This dissertation will be the first scholarly
              biography to use Jacobi as a starting point for understanding the social
              experiences of women physicians, and the wider intellectual debates among
              physicians in the nineteenth century. This study will also add historical
              perspective to contemporary and sociological discussions on gender and science.
              Feminist theorists have challenged the notion of objectivity and argued for new
              forms of feminist empiricism. Jacobi stands as a historical example of a woman
              scientist who pursued scientific objectivity in the hope of producing medical
              knowledge that was more favorable to women. This dissertation will show,
              however, that like feminist scientists of today, Jacobi's work remained bound
              to her social, cultural, and political interests and concerns.
         

