Title       : Secrets of the Earth Pilot Television Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a9910163

Award Number: 9910163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74545              (Estimated)
Investigator: Doug Prose   (Principal Investigator current)
              Diane LaMacchia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Earth Images Foundation
	      535 Bellevue Ave #16
	      Oakland, CA  94610    /   -

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9180,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910163
Prose

This project involves the production and distribution of a
              one-hour television pilot for a Public Broadcasting Servece (PBS) series called
              "Secrets of the Earth".  The project is a joint effort of Earth Images
              Foundation and KTEH-TV (PBS affiliate in San Jose, CA).  The series will
              spotlight the adventures of earth scientists working on leading edge research
              projects around the world.  The pilot program features two stories, each half
              an hour in length.  The first story is "Watching Mountains Grow," and it
              follows a team of geologists as they try to find out why Nanga Parbat, a
              remote, 26,600 foot high mountain in the Pakistani Himalayas, is the
              fastest-growing and fastest-eroding mountain on Earth.  The second story, "Rock
              Around the Earth,"  features geologists unveiling the mysterious processes that
              built Earth's crust, the foundation of all living things.

This project
              offers a look at a subject not often seen on television:  how working
              geologists approach the study of our dynamic Earth.  If the pilot is
              successful, there is a plentiful supply of fascinating geologic stories waiting
              to be told in a high-profile PBS series.  The primary audience for the pilot
              program, and the envisioned series, is the PBS prime time audience.  Earth
              Images and KTEH-TV will also attempt to have the pilot aired internationally; 
              its international scope will be a strong selling point with foreign program
              directors.  The secondary audience is students in middle and high school
              science classes and undergraduate earh science classes, who will be reached by
              educational video distributor Bullfrog Films.
***


