Title       : Identifying the Mechanisms Involved in Early Language Acquisition with
               Artificial Grammars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9910203

Award Number: 9910203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca L. Gomez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,9283,SMET,
Abstract    :
              


Although recent research shows that infants are sensitive to structural
              regularities in linguistic input, little is known about the degree to which
              these sensitivities reflect general-purpose statistical learning mechanisms
              versus innate language-specific 'expectations' about the kinds of structure
              that will occur. The objective of the proposed research is to determine the
              nature of the learning mechanisms available to infants and older learners. This
              is achieved by exposing learners to artificial languages. Use of artificial
              language stimuli enables more precise control over the learning environment
              than is found using natural language. Such control enables systematic
              manipulation and testing of structural factors that may play a role in language
              acquisition. Prior learning is also controlled, permitting the separation of
              effects due to artificial language exposure from those due to prior knowledge.
              Prior research conducted by the Pl demonstrated that infants use both general
              associative and perceptual pattern matching mechanisms in the acquisition of
              artificial languages. Pattern-based abstraction is important because it signals
              a system capable of representing relations among abstract variables. However,
              the Pl wishes to take the next step in investigating the types of abstraction
              processes involved in language acquisition. Specifically, the Pl plans to (1)
              investigate abstraction of distributionally defined categories, and (2)
              learning in the context of frequently occurring cues. The Pl's previous
              research investigated learning with infants and adults. The proposed research
              will incorporate methodologies for testing older children. Infants, young
              children, and adults will be exposed to auditory sequences generated by
              artificial grammars. Learners will then be tested to see whether they can
              discriminate new grammatical sequences from ungrammatical ones. Infants will be
              tested using the head-turn preference and visual preference procedures.
              Three-year olds will be tested using computer generated programs with
              touch-screen interfaces. Five-year-olds will be tested in the context of an
              incidental learning task. Adults will be tested using computer generated
              programs. The proposed research is expected advance our understanding of  how
              children learn language by investigating (1) the abstraction abilities
              available to learners; (2) the types of architectures and mechanisms involved;
              and (3) the developmental sequencing of such learning.



