Title       : GOALI: Integrated Experimental and Computational Multi-Zonal Approach to
               Multiple-Scale Problems: Flow in a Stirred Tank Reactor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a9910543

Award Number: 9910543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Balachandar s-bala@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kishore Kar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald J. Adrian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Balachandar - 9910543

This project is to develop a new generation
              of predictive methodology for complex and turbulent multiple-scale flow
              problems.  The PIs are looking for natural separation of the entire flow domain
              into multiple zones, each characterized by their own range of length and time
              scales.  Different techniques, both experimental and computational, will be
              employed over the different domains, as appropriate.  The goal is the
              development of generalized data-facing that will permit seamless interfaces
              between the different techniques across different zones.  Data-facing involves
              matching of flow physics across interfaces between different zones, as well as
              consistent transfer of numerical data.  The methodology to be used involves two
              techniques: large eddy simulation (LES) of turbulent flow and multi-dimensional
              velocimetry experiments, in particular, particle image velocimetry (PIV).  The
              approach to dynamic data-facing between parallel PIV experiments and LES
              computations is the use of conditional statistics, approximated by the
              stochastic estimation procedure.

The above concept of dynamic data-facing
              between integrated experiments and computations will be applied to the problem
              of flow in a stirred tank.  The mixing of two or more fluids is a complex
              physical process that is fundamental to a wide range of engineering
              applications.  In many chemical industrial processing units the rate at which
              mixing can be achieved determines the overall throughput and profitability of
              the plant.  In other devices, such as turbines that rely on the combination of
              fluid mixtures, the thermal efficiency depends on the quality and speed of
              mixing in a sensitive way.  Scale-up is critical to good plant design.  Through
              integrated PIV and PLIF experiments and large eddy simulations, accurate
              prediction of macro-scale mixing and the problem of reliable scale-up will be
              addressed using a range of laboratory to pilot plant scale stirred tank
              geometries.

