Title       : Conceptual Learning of Engineering (CoLoE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a9910588

Award Number: 9910588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Grow grow@ee.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project evaluates the Conceptual Learning of Engineering (CoLoE) concept
              and addresses its possible implementation in classroom teaching at universities
              and community colleges across the US.  The idea is based on conceptual rather
              than mathematical teaching and learning of engineering courses.  The procedure
              involves the application of the fundamental laws of nature to a larger number
              of individual molecules, atoms, and electrons, and the observation of their
              collective behavior under a variety of external forces and operating
              conditions.  Mathematical equations are derived as a result of observing
              changes in these interactions as a function of time and space.

Faculty
              workshops are used to evaluate the educational merits of the CoLoE concept. 
              Colleagues from CoLoS Europe demonstrate their software modules, and the
              colleagues from schools of education in the US also present their own
              evaluations and discuss methods for improvements.  Breakout groups discuss ways
              and means for integrating CoLoS material in courses and classroom teaching, and
              also identify focused engineering subjects that will benefit most from this
              teaching methodology.  Groups of institutions from universities and community
              colleges are identified and asked to prepare proposals in their respective
              areas.

In support of the workshops, the PI and his colleagues at the
              University of Utah are developing software modules that emphasis conceptual and
              intuitive understanding of basic engineering courses.  For this proposal, focus
              is placed on electromagnetics and the properties of matter.  The project is
              managed by the CAEME Center for Multimedia Education and Technology at the
              University of Utah, and dissemination is via the Internet, CD-ROMs and
              publications in journals.
