Title       : Society and Settlement in a Territorial State: Survey and Excavations at the
               Outer Town of Ayanis, Turkey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a9910421

Award Number: 9910421
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155316             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth C. Stone estone@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Zimansky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Cilinguroglu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Elizabeth Stone and
              her
colleagues will conduct archaeological research in the settlement
              area
surrounding the Urartian fortress of Ayanis, located on the shore of
              Lake
Van in Eastern Turkey.  Occupied for only a single generation around
              650
B.C., this city covers at least 80 ha.  Prior work on the citadel
              has
revealed extensive fortifications, large scale storage facilities and
              a
pillared hall/temple complex, of the kind associated with
              the
administrative elite at other Urartian centers.  Ayanis is the
              only
Urartian site that currently offers an opportunity to investigate
              the
governed as well as the rulers, and an investigation of the outer
              town,
through mapping, shovel test survey, magnetometry and selected
              excavation,
commenced in 1997.  With NSF support Dr. Stone's team will extend
              and
refine its study of the relationship between the denizens of the
              fortress
and those of the outer town.  Shovel testing will define the limits
              of the
settlement and extended magnetic field gradient survey will
              reveal
subsurface architectural patterning over a substantial
              portion.
Excavations will be conducted in areas within the outer town that
              exhibit
differential patterning in the magnetometry.  Analysis will focus
              primarily
on high status materials such as red polished ceramics and bronzes
              that may
indicate interactions between the central government and the
              larger
population, and on economic reconstruction.  Specific methods to
              be
employed include: ceramic petrography; radography of ceramics to
              determine
whether they were wheel-made or hand-made; neutron activation
              analyses of
ceramics and bronzes to determine chemical composition; analysis
              of faunal
remains; phytolith analysis; micromorphological analysis;
              statistical and
spatial analyses of domestic artifact assemblages; the use of
              GIS to
examine the spatial distribution of activities.

The goal of this
              project is to determine whether the principles used by
modern city planners
              can be modified to help identify key organizational
distinctions in ancient
              cities and states.  The variable distribution of
people and institutions
              within the urban framework may be understood to
reflect fundamental
              differences in the structure of ancient societies,
between hierarchically
              organized territorial states and more
heterarchically organized city states,
              but as yet too little work has been
conducted on urban organization in
              different archaic states  to be certain
of this.  The data generated by this
              project will make clear the
organization of an urban center in an archetypical
              territorial state.  This
research is important for several reasons.  It will
              provide data of
interest to many archaeologists and students of urbanism on
              urban planning
and its relationship to social organizationm, and a paradigm of
              the
material imprint of a state that is known to be highly centralized. 
              It
will foster Turkish-American academic cooperation, and its results
              should
help in the understanding of early complex societies that were either
              not
literate, or whose writing has yet to be deciphered.

