Title       : Triarchic Model of Opinion Social Comparison
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a9910592

Award Number: 9910592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311366             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry M. Suls jerry-suls@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rene E. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The power of opinions to inspire individual and collective action is
              well-documented. Just as dramatic is the speed with which opinions can change.
              These properties of opinions can be attributed to the fact that opinions are
              formed partly as a function of the social context, particularly by comparisons
              with other people or groups. The social psychological processes that underlie
              opinion formation and change, however, are still not well-understood. This
              project includes seven experiments to test a new approach for understanding how
              comparisons with other people contribute to the formation of opinions. The new
              theory proposes that there are three main types of opinion comparison. One type
              concerns how people validate their personal preferences. Other persons who are
              similar in general background seem to furnish the most relevant information in
              these cases. A second type concerns the evaluation of beliefs which is best
              addressed through comparison of opinions with persons who have more expertise.
              However, expertise is not sufficient -- these "experts" also need to be
              perceived to share certain underlying values connected to the belief topic.
              This aspect of the theory has the potential to elucidate our knowledge about
              our interactions with outgroups. The opinions of expert outgroup members (e.g.,
              someone from a different ethnic or socioeconomic group) might be rejected
              despite their greater knowledge. The third major type of opinion comparison
              involves prediction about future situations or choices. In this type,
              comparisons with other people who have already experienced the situation
              provide the most useful information, but only if they also have a similar
              background or expressed consistent reactions in past circumstances. The seven
              laboratory experiments will test the three-process theory predictions
              concerning selection and impact of comparison using a variety of opinion
              issues. Because opinion comparison plays a substantial role in decision-making,
              group behavior, and persuasion, the proposed theory and research should advance
              basic knowledge about social problems where these processes are involved.


