Title       : The Evolution of Human mtDNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a9910871

Award Number: 9910871
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390149             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil Howell nhowell@utmb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Med Branch Gal
	      301 University Boulevard
	      Galveston, TX  775550136    409/761-1011

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) has been used extensively as an evolutionary
              clock with which to study the origins and population genetics of modern human
              populations because of its strict maternal inheritance, lack of recombination,
              and high but relatively constant or clock-like rate of divergence.  However,
              there are indications that human mtDNA may not behave as a simple molecular
              clock.  In addition, there are recent - and controversial - reports that mtDNA
              recombination has confounded the evolutionary pattern.  This project will
              determine the pedigree rate of mtDNA divergence, and it will test,
              comprehensively and systematically, whether a simple mtDNA clock is a valid
              tool for studies of human molecular evolution.  The possible role of mtDNA
              recombination during human evolution will also be investigated.  A basic tenet
              of the mtDNA clock hypothesis is that there is a single rate of mtDNA
              divergence that can be applied to any set of sequences.  However, many
              different models of evolution have been developed to estimate the rate of mtDNA
              divergence, and they yield mtDNA divergence rates that differ by an order of
              magnitude, and each is associated with a high degree of statistical
              uncertainty.  In this project, sequence divergence within the rapidly-evolving,
              non-coding mtDNA D-loop will be analyzed.  As a complementary approach to
              previous phylogenetic analyses at the population level, we will use a unique
              empirical approach to estimate the divergence rate of the D-loop at the level
              of the pedigree (Aim 1).  We will test the hypothesis that the rate of D-loop
              divergence is higher in pedigrees than that obtained with phylogenetic, or
              population-based, approaches.  In addition, we will undertake extensive
              phylogenetic analysis of the D-loop in two large sets of European mtDNA
              sequences to ascertain if the rate of divergence and the spectrum of sequence
              changes are the same in both sequence sets, as predicted by the molecular clock
              hypothesis (Aim 2).  Finally, we will analyze the evolution of mtDNA through
              the comprehensive analysis of mtDNAs from Europeans whose entire sequences have
              been determined (Aim 3).  Particular emphasis will be placed upon testing the
              mtDNA molecular clock hypothesis, and upon the possible role of recombination
              in human mtDNA evolution.  The long-term goal of our research is to elucidate
              the processes by which mutations arise and become fixed within the human
              mitochondrial genome, and so to improve our understanding of human evolution
              and population genetics.
