Title       : Open Workshop: Decision-Based Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9910550

Award Number: 9910550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126203             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kemper E. Lewis kelewis@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wei Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda C. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              	This award provides funding for the continued conduct of an open workshop on
              decision-based design.  The workshop will be conducted via a series of
              face-to-face meetings, and with continuing interaction between all interested
              parties via electronic and Internet technologies throughout the two-year
              continuation period.  Specifically, the workshop will include the continuation
              of a web site for conduct of the workshop.  A primary component of the workshop
              will be the continual, open development and dissemination of the philosophical,
              theoretical and practical results of the workshop discussions and activities. 
              The workshop will continue to concentrate on a diversity of research efforts
              directed at the development of a theory of engineering design based on the
              emerging notion that engineering design is a decision making process amenable
              to the tools and theories that have developed in the field of decision theory. 
              The workshop web site address will remain: 
              www.eng.buffalo.edu/Research/DBD.

	If successful, this workshop will provide
              a new direction for research and education in engineering design.  New
              theoretical concepts should lead to approaches to engineering design that will
              enable the design of better products, products that have greater market appeal,
              cost less, have lower environmental impact, and that are more friendly for
              customers.  Further, these concepts are likely to lead to entirely new
              approaches to engineering education, with a strong focus on engineering design
              as a decision making process.
