Title       : Fundamental Studies of Thermal Plasma Chemical Vapor Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2001   
File        : a9910718

Award Number: 9910718
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Girshick slg@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Zachariah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract-Girshick

This is a fundamental study of thermal plasma chemical
              vapor deposition. (TPCVD) with the objective of developing TPCVD as a robust
              process for the high-rate deposition of high-quality hard films and coatings. 
              An inductively coupled radio-frequency plasma at pressures of 1 Torr to 1
              atmosphere is used to deposit films of boron carbide and silicon carbide. 
              Reactants are the appropriate chloride vapor (boron trichloride or silicon
              tetrachloride) and methane, injected into an argon-hydrogen plasma.  Films are
              characterized by several ex-situ techniques to determine elemental composition,
              crystallinity, morphology, chemical bonding, hardness and related mechanical
              properties.  Film growth rates and properties are related to operating
              conditions, surface temperature, and the chemistry of the fluid boundary layer
              adjacent to the growth surface.  Molecular-beam mass spectrometry (MBMS) is
              used to obtain on-line measurements of mole fractions of gas-phase species
              during deposition; this technique can provide absolute measurements of mole
              fraction for all species present above the detection limit (ppm) of the
              spectrometer.  Numerical models of the chemically reacting boundary layer at
              the growth surface are developed and tested using MBMS measurements

This
              topic is potentially a major enabling technology for production of coatings
              resistant to abrasion and chemical attack.  Two graduate students are receiving
              interdisciplinary training in advanced experimental and computational methods
              involving heat transfer, plasma science, chemistry, and materials science.  In
              addition, a new diagnostic (MBMS) for plasma deposition studies is developed.

