Title       : Wealth and Health: Nineteeth-Century Mortality in Emergent New England Mill
               Towns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a9910755

Award Number: 9910755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139198             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan C. Swedlund Swedland@Anthro.UMass.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas L. Anderton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-9910755
Alan Swedlund

This research will analyze the local
              socioeconomic, public health and compositional patterns of mortality and
              mortality decline in the emergent urban/industrial mill towns of Northampton
              and Holyoke in western Massachusetts during the late 19th and early 20th
              century mortality decline in New England.  These cities experienced the full
              force of rapid urban, industrial, and population growth concurrent with
              sustained high levels of epidemic mortality in the middle of the 19th century
              as mortality fell elsewhere.  It was not until these mill towns had matured
              into large urban/industrial centers with slower population growth, public
              health infrastructures, and aging populations that the beginnings of a
              sustained mortality declined occurred at the turn of the century.

This
              project focuses on the emergent mill towns as a case study in which local
              socio-economic, public health, and compositional aspects of the mortality
              decline are expected to be especially salient and more readily discerned than
              at either a national/regional scale or in large established metropolitan
              centers, both of which have received greater prior attention.  The research
              uses an existing, NSF funded, database of census information for samples from
              each town from censuses between 1850 and 1910 linked to corresponding death
              record information for the two years after each census. The database is
              extended by linking tax valuation records to individual-level census and death
              data, and by coding local health improvements which impacted specific community
              areas.

Demographic analyses will address the relative importance and
              interaction of socioeconomic (e.g., wealth and occupation) differentials in
              infant, child and adult mortality; the local effects of rapid population growth
              (e.g., density, relative growth, crowding, housing quality) and specific public
              health improvements (e.g., water supply or sewage improvements); and
              compositional cause-specific changes in morality (e.g., age-sex-cause-specific
              trends, occupational mortality, specific high-interest causes of death). 
              Preliminary analyses with available data have supported some role for each of
              these conventionally hypothesized effects.

