Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science: Accurate Stress Analysis of Fiber-Reinforced
               Composite Material with Delamination Cracks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a9910345

Award Number: 9910345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10135              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hae-Soo Oh hso@math.uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,5942,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910345
Oh

This award supports a 2-year collaborative research project
              between Dr. Hae-Soo Oh, University of North Carolina, Charlotte and Dr. Sungjin
              Lee, Daejin University, Korea.   The proposed collaboration aims to conduct
              accurate stress analysis of fiber-reinforced composite materials with
              delamination cracks.

The PI proposes to investigate the failure mechanisms
              of fibrous composites both at the micro-level and at the laminate level.  The
              PI proposes to develop new algorithms by generating the Method of Auxiliary
              Mappings, which the PI developed previously together with I. Babuska.   Since
              fibrous composites are heavily used for components in a wide variety of
              industries, investigating the mechanisms for their failure is an important
              activity, which extends well beyond the basic research questions arising in the
              approximation of singularities occurring in mathematical models involving
              partial differential equations. The proposal suggests an interdisciplinary
              activity between efficient numerical analysis and mechanics of fibrous
              composites.  

This project will be performed in conjunction with Dr. Lee's
              group at Korea under the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program and will
              enhance the international experiences for the PI's U.S. graduate student.  This
              project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science
              Program, which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and
              Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information,
              ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual
              benefit.

