Title       : Collaborative Research: Optical Environmental of the Western Antarctic Peninsula
               (WAP) Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a9910122

Award Number: 9910122
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167278             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas G. Martinson dgm@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1308,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project is a contribution to a coordinated attempt to understand the
              interactions of biological and physical dynamics by developing mechanistic
              links between the evolution of the antarctic winter ice and snow cover, and
              biological habitat variability, through modeling the optical properties of the
              environment.   The work will be carried out in the context of the Southern
              Ocean Experiment of the Global Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics Study (Globec), a
              large, multi-investigator study of the winter survival strategy of krill under
              the antarctic sea ice.

The optical properties of snow and sea ice evolve
              through the winter and vary greatly both spectrally and spatially.  These
              properties are an important element of the physical environment that strongly
              influences both the distribution of and the resources available to antarctic
              krill.  The intensity of incident radiant energy and its distribution within
              the snow, ice, and water column environment, and the linked physical, optical,
              chemical, and biological processes that modulate its distribution are generally
              known but poorly quantified.  The optical properties of snow and ice also
              influence snow algae, ice algae, and water column productivity, as well as
              visibility for both predator and prey.  Furthermore, optical properties play an
              essential role in satellite observations as proxy indicators of geophysical sea
              ice parameters which permit local observations to be more accurately
              extrapolated in space and time, thus providing regional coverage that would
              otherwise not be possible.  What is proposed is the deployment of an array of
              instrumented ice beacons, augmented by periodic ship-based and satellite
              observations, along with theoretical studies to create improved quantitative
              models with which to follow the temporal and spatial evolution of this snow and
              ice marine ecosystem.

The specific objective is to develop a thermodynamic
              sea ice/ecosystem model through coupling of existing components in order to
              test our understanding of the system, determine its sensitivities, and to
              provide an organizing mechanism for integrating the Southern Ocean Globec
              observations.	
***

