Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Metabolic Engineering of Carbon Fixation and
               Utilization by Cyanobacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9910036

Award Number: 9910036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18294              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory N. Stephanopoulos gregstep@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony J. Sinskey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 5921,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9910036
Stephanopoulos

This award supports a three-year collaborative
              research project between Professor Gregory Stephanopoulos of the Massachusetts
              Institute of Technology (MIT) and Professor Kazuhisa Ohtaguchi of the Tokyo
              Institute of Technology in Japan.  The researchers will be undertaking a study
              of metabolic engineering of carbon fixation and utilization by cyanobacteria. 
              Cyanobacteria have evolved efficient pathways for the fixation of carbon
              dioxide and its conversion to various metabolites.  This property can be
              exploited in processes for the biological CO2 sequestration in combination with
              the production of useful products. The general objective is to test the
              hypothesis that increasing the intrinsic carbon utilization rate can drive
              similar increases in CO2 fixation rates.  The goals of the project are:  1) to
              establish transformed strains of cyanobacteria with increase PHA production
              levels and  2) to carry out basic kinetic studies of CO2 fixation and PHA
              formation in batch as well as continuous culture systems for wild type and
              transformed cyanobacteria strains.

The project brings together the efforts
              of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
              capabilities.  It is anticipated that the research will contribute to the
              development of a platform for the production of chemical products from an
              essentially free raw material -- atmospheric carbon dioxide.  The chemical
              industry has an acute interest in agricultural means for the production of
              specialty and commodity chemicals, and this research could impact in a profound
              way the technological base that could be used towards this goal.  The project
              advances international human resources through the participation of postdoc and
              graduate students. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project
              will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.   Results of the research will be published in
              international scientific journals and also presented at scientific meetings in
              the U.S. and abroad.

