Title       : State Workshops on Ethics in the Science Classroom, Summer 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a9910872

Award Number: 9910872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan E. Sieber                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80206              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore D. Goldfarb tgoldfarb@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Pritchard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This pilot project will develop and implement a workshop model for nationwide
              dissemination of guidelines and instructional materials for incorporating
              topics on science and ethics and values in secondary school science classrooms.
              The project will develop a three-day instructional workshop to help teachers
              determine ways to include ethics and values in high school science classes,
              conduct two pilot workshops, in Florida and Washington, in summer 2000, and
              revise the workshops and the text on which they are based in light of
              observations and evaluations.  The investigators will maintain active contact
              with the participants to determine the impact the workshop experience has on
              their science teaching and the extent to which they influence other teachers to
              incorporate ethics and values in their science teaching, and develop plans for
              similar workshops in other states. The proposed project draws on results from
              two previous NSF-supported projects. The first involved summer workshops for
              science teachers in Long Island; the second involved the development of a text
              that used some of the materials from the summer workshops. This text includes
              educational materials on the important roles of ethics and values in the
              practice and the social use of science, six illustrative case studies and
              twenty-three model classroom lessons.  These materials will be used in the
              pilot three-day workshops.  Each workshop will have 25 participants. Planning
              for and execution of both workshops is being done with the collaboration of
              science program specialists in the offices of the public schools in those
              states. 

