Title       : Quantification and Individuation Processes in Infants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2000   
File        : a9910781

Award Number: 9910781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Karen Wynn karen.wynn@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,8888,9178,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This research project investigates the initial nature and development of
              numerical and quantificational abilities in humans. Three central issues are
              addressed, using infant looking-time methodology. These will be described in
              turn.
     Many studies have now shown that infants can discriminate small
              numbers of different kinds of entities. Further studies show that infants can
              determine the numerical outcome of the addition or subtraction of an object
              from a small collection of objects. We do not yet know the precise nature of
              the mental structures that underlie these capacities. One possibility is that
              infants' numerical competence derives from general cognitive abilities, such as
              specific components of the visual system, or the ability to track objects and
              make one-to-one correspondences. An alternative possibility is that it derives
              from a mental structure dedicated specifically to representing and reasoning
              about number, the accumulator mechanism, which has been proposed as the basis
              for numerical competence in some non-human animal species. This project
              investigates three aspects of infants' numerical competence that can inform
              this debate. (i) The extents and limits of infants' enumeration capacities: If
              infants' enumeration abilities result from processes not specific to number,
              the nature of the underlying processes would be expected to constrain the
              numerical discriminations infants can make. For example, if infants'
              enumerative ability derives from object-tracking processes, we would expect
              limits on these processes to apply also to infants' enumeration. (ii) Infants'
              ability to measure duration: The accumulator is able to determine not only
              number, but also temporal duration. Therefore, if this mechanism constitutes
              part of infants' cognitive system and provides the basis for their early
              numerical competence, infants should be able to measure temporal duration as
              well as number. Moreover, there should be strong similarities in infants'
              ability to represent these two kinds of values. (ii) Limits and extent of
              infants' numerical reasoning: We do not yet know the extent and limits of
              infants' ability to compute the results of addition and subtraction operations.
              Different theories of the processes that underlie these abilities make
              different predictions as to the patterns of success and failure that should be
              observed in infants.  
     The second issue is concerned with whether infants
              possess an ability to quantify continuous amounts of substance. Adults can
              quantify continuous amounts (e.g., how much beverage to pour in a glass, or
              which of two slices of cake is larger). What are the origins of these
              abilities, and what is their relationship, if any, to our quantification of
              discrete values (i.e., numbers of things)? This project investigates the nature
              of infants' ability to quantify amount of substance, and examines how closely
              the extent and limits of this ability mirror those of infants' quantification
              of discrete values. 
     The third issue involves determination of  what
              constitutes a discrete, countable "unit", or individual for infants? In order
              for a thing to be enumerated, it must be conceived of as an individual. The
              human mind seems constructed to perceive the world in terms of discrete units,
              even when provided with continuous input: We parse the continuous layout of
              material surfaces into distinct objects, the continuous sound stream into
              distinct acoustic events, the speech stream into distinct syllables and words,
              and ongoing motion into distinct actions. While much is known about the
              principles underlying infants' segmentation of the material world into distinct
              physical objects, we know little about how they determine boundaries for other
              kinds of individuals. By investigating how infants parse different aspects of
              their world into countable units, we can begin to address the issue of what
              defines a "unit".  This project will study the processes by which infants parse
              motion into distinct actions. The outcome of the research is expected to have
              implications for our understanding of children's reasoning abilities and for
              education.

