Title       : VLF Holographic Imaging of Lightning-Induced Disturbances of the Lower
               Ionosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9910532

Award Number: 9910532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Umran S. Inan inan@nova.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910532
Inan, Umran S.

An experimental investigation is proposed of
              localized and transient disturbances of the lower ionosphere which occur in
              association with lightning discharges. The overall purpose of the proposed
              program is to understand the physical mechanisms of lightning-ionosphere
              interaction, which lead to rapid conductivity changes, and to determine the
              global effects of lightning-induced electron precipitation on the radiation
              belts. The disturbances are imaged remotely using the Holographic Array for
              Ionospheric Lightning (HAIL) which measures the amplitude and phase of very low
              frequency (VLF) signals propagating in the nearby Earth-ionosphere waveguide. 
              The HAIL system was established under the predecessor grant to this proposal
              and has already led to the discovery of precipitation of radiation belt
              electrons by obliquely propagating (nonducted) whistler waves.  It provides
              high-resolution measurement of localized disturbances, and thus enables the
              capture of a sufficient number of events needed to investigate several science
              questions.  The ionospheric disturbances are believed to be produced by direct
              interaction of lightning radiation and quasi-static fields with the ionosphere
              or by bursts of energetic electrons precipitated out of the radiation belts by
              whistler waves originating in lightning discharges.  Both of the phenomena are
              now known to regularly occur; however, assessment of their global significance
              requires that the spatial extent and distribution of events be determined. 
              HAIL consists of VLF receiver systems deployed at nine high schools in Wyoming,
              Colorado, and New Mexico.  The data from the HAIL sites is transmitted back to
              Stanford over the Internet, and is made available to the scientific community
              over the Internet within 12 hours of acquisition.  The proposed program
              provides important educational outreach opportunities, the students and
              teachers from the HAIL schools and others are encouraged to work with the data
              and interact with the Stanford investigators.

