Title       : Idealization and Idealized Models in Thermostatistical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9910889

Award Number: 9910889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38172              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chuang Liu cliu@phil.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
SES 99-10889 - Chuang Liu (University of Florida) 
"Idealization and
              Idealized Models in Thermostatistical Physics"

The goal of this project is
              develop of a philosophical theory of idealization in light of a study of the
              intricate practice of model-building in thermostatistical physics. The
              structure of the overall argument goes as follows. The existing theory of
              idealization and its relation to approximation is found to be inadequate. The
              problem is then shown to be caused by a misunderstanding of the purpose (and
              therefore the measure) of idealization. It is therefore argued that
              idealization is not necessarily to postulate conditions which are themselves
              approximate or whose gradual removal guarantees approximate laws and/or models,
              but to carve nature at its joints -- obtaining theoretical models as a result
              -- so that genuine laws of nature can be either applied (if they are already
              known) or discovered (if they are not yet known). While such an intuitive
              notion of idealization gives the right, albeit inarticulate, characterization
              of the widespread practice of model-building in science, it defies an exact and
              universal formulation. To understand the rich content of this notion, one must
              conduct detailed analysis of its different guises in different fields of
              science. Thermostatistical physics is chosen for this project because it is the
              best understood branch of science which cuts across the microscopic and the
              macroscopic divide. The project provides a detailed study of various models in
              the explanation of phase transitions and critical phenomena. By examining the
              kind of ideal conditions going into the making of what the PI calls the
              approximate and the exact models, he shall develop a glimpse of how the notion
              of carving nature at its joints is put to work. The PI hopes that this project
              will motivate himself and others to study the practice of idealization- and
              model-making (since they always go hand--in-hand) in other areas of physics (or
              science).



