Title       : Abundance, Dynamics and Coexistence of Interacting Damselfishes: Quantifying the
               Contributions of Causal Processes Across Spatial Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a9910677

Award Number: 9910677
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700121             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Schmitt schmitt@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sally J. Holbrook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this study is to understand the causes of variation in abundance of
              reef fishes whose local populations are linked via exchange of reproductive
              output. Research over the past two decades has revealed that the size of a
              local population of these organisms typically is determined by several
              processes that operate simultaneously, and that the key to understanding the
              relative importance of these processes is the interplay between larval supply
              and density -dependent interactions. There also has been growing appreciation
              that a local population cannot be considered in isolation of other
              sub-populations or species, and that multiple spatial scales need to be
              examined to fully understand the dynamics of the system. Finally, several
              frameworks now exist that can allow the contributions of various processes in
              setting local abundance to be quantified and the consequences of patterns of
              covariation in environmental features (e.g., larval supply of potential
              competitors, habitat availability, food supply, predation pressure) to be
              evaluated. These quantitative frameworks need to be applied to real systems to
              resolve several fundamental - and largely unanswered - questions for reef
              fishes. These include the relative importance of the multiple processes that
              affect local abundance and dynamics, the degree of variability in their
              importance, the determinants of relative abundance and coexistence of
              competitors, where and how population regulation occurs, and whether the
              dynamical behavior of the system as a whole differs from that predicted from
              dynamics at smaller spatial scales. Quantifying the effects of various
              processes for multiple species will enable ecologists to ask how the intensity
              of these processes varies as a function of general characteristics of species
              (e.g., life history traits, trophic status, types of environments). Examining
              covariation between environmental features and density dependence will deepen
              our insight into the structure, regulation and behavior of such
              systems.

This study will focus on two pairs of co-occurring species of
              damselfishes that inhabit lagoons of French Polynesia. These planktivores
              compete intra- -and inter-specifically for shelter space from predators. Using
              short- and long-term experiments and observations, the variety of data needed
              to apply two different quantitative approaches to understanding dynamics of
              stage--structured, demographically open populations will be obtained. In
              particular, spatial variation in output (time-averaged adult density) will be
              estimated as a function of input (larval supply per unit suitable habitat) and
              relevant parameters that determine local abundance (density-independent
              survivorship; adult saturation or peak density; density dependence in
              settlement from conspecifics and heterospecifics; density dependence in
              survivorship from interactions with conspecifics and heterospecifics). In
              addition to larval supply, variation in other environmental features that will
              be estimated include microhabitat availability and predation pressure. These
              variables will be measured across several spatial scales (from -5 in to 200
              km). Data from empirical work will be used in the quantitative frameworks to
              compare the relative importance of various processes among species and spatial
              scales, to address issues related to coexistence of competing species with open
              populations, and to examine whether dynamics at larger scales differ from that
              predicted from local dynamics.

