Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Faith in
               Liberalism-Exploring Religious Pluralism and Liberal Democracy in the State of
               Israel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9910903

Award Number: 9910903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7983               (Estimated)
Investigator: Don Herzog dherzog@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Recent  normative political theory suffers from a deficit of empiricism.  The
              project aims to correct this shortcoming, with respect to the study of
              contemporary liberalism, by testing the theory in a real-world political
              context.  The research assesses specifically the success of liberal principles
              in addressing challenges facing a polity that straddles the fence of liberal
              democracy and religiosity:  the State of Israel.  By examining the historical,
              religious, and legal foundations of Israel's precarious balance, the research
              illuminates and scrutinizes today's prevailing faith in liberalism as a
              political doctrine, and it pinpoints the role, if any, that religious faith has
              in a liberal state.  Central to the research are in-depth interviews with
              Israelis belonging to divergent religious groups.  In elucidating the links
              between Israeli citzens' religious beliefs and their political attitudes --and
              the ways in which the attitudes of various groups conflict or cohere --the
              project considers opportunities for social consensus in a polity split by
              inter-and intra-religious cleavages.  Beyond its concern with questions of
              religion and state in Israel, the dissertation presents a challenge to modern
              accounts of liberalism, and it presents a model for new interdisciplinary
              research in the fields of comparative politics and political theory.  The
              project aids scholars who study the role of religion in modern polities while
              highlighting the importance of context in the study of political theory.    
