Title       : A Philosophic and Scientific Assessment of the Use of Scientific Evidence in
               Toxic Tort Law
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a9910952

Award Number: 9910952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl F. Cranor carl.cranor@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Eastmond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The question of what admissibility standards should govern the introduction of
              scientific evidence in toxic tort litigation raises major ethical, legal,
              institutional and science policy issues.  Moreover, how much scientific
              evidence is demanded before a case can go forward is a philosophical issue
              requiring consideration of the nature of scientific evidence and the tort law's
              evidentiary procedures, as well as the effects of these decisions on ordinary
              citizens and on affected firms.  Addressing these issues will contribute to
              discussion conceming the institutional procedures that judges follow and the
              nature and amount of scientific evidence required for toxic tort law.  This
              interdisciplinary proposal brings together PIs from the disciplines of
              toxicology and philosophy to pursue scientific and philosophic research that
              examines how courts address the admission and exclusion of evidence. First, the
              investigators propose to address empirical questions for about 10 leading
              federal appellate court cases and their district court antecedents since the US
              Supreme Court decision in Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., where
              the human toxicity of a substance was in question: (i) What was the disposition
              of the scientific evidence in the case on issues of admissibility of expert
              testimony? And, ii) What reasons did the judges give for their decisions? iii)
              What can be inferred about the accuracy of rulings on scientific evidence?
              Preliminary work on the leading appellate cases addressing i) and ii) is done;
              work on iii) is in progress.  Second, they propose a substantive inquiry about
              scientific inferences--at the time of trial, what was the scientific evidence
              on which the challenged expert proposed to testify? This breaks into at least
              two separate issues. a) From a legal point of view what does the expert's
              inference from her own evidence show; was it sufficient as presented to satisfy
              admissibility considerations on scientific grounds, taking account of
              respectable minority views in the field? b) Given the scientific evidence
              available at the time of trial in the literature could an expert have
              respectably testified as did the expert in question? The answers to these
              questions will be checked against the peer judgment of independent scientists.
              Third, the researchers seek to assess judges' accuracy in ruling on the
              scientific issues in the cases: i) whether their rulings suggest they are
              relatively sensitive to the various reasoning errors that might exist in
              drawing scientific inferences, ii) whether their rulings asymmetrically favor
              one side or another in their decisions, and iii) what is the effect of their
              rulings for admitting and excluding evidence that affects the litigants and the
              fairness of the process.  Finally, the investigation will return to the
              pertinent philosophic issues concerning the science-law interaction. Answering
              these important questions at the interface of science and law will shed light
              on a number of critical issues: on the impact of the science/law interaction on
              the just treatment of toxic tort litigants, on the sensitivity of toxic tort
              law to the evidentiary subtleties of science, and on institutional ethics
              issues in tort law.
