Title       : Perceptual Categorization and Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2000       
File        : a9910756

Award Number: 9910756
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108387             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Palmeri thomas.j.palmeri@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Palmieri, Thomas
BCS-9910756
Perceptual Categorization and
              Memory



	Any time we decide that some visually presented object is a
              terrier rather
than a collie, a bottle rather than a jar, or a tree rather
              than a shrub, we are making categorization decisions by comparing the
              perceptual attributes of an object with information about categories that have
              been acquired previously through experience. Developing psychological theories
              of perceptual categorization requires an understanding of what information is
              provided by the perceptual system, how that information is compared with
              category information that has been previously acquired, what kinds of
              representations are stored in memory, how category representations change with
              experience, and how classification decisions are made on the basis of evidence
              for various categories. Perceptual categorization forms a fundamental interface
              between basic perceptual processes and higher-level cognition. By comparing the
              relative abilities of various formal models to account for qualitative and
              quantitative aspects of observed data, this theoretical work will test
              well-specified hypotheses about the fundamental mechanisms of perceptual
              categorization. The present work focuses on the role of specific remembered
              category instances (referred to exemplars) in perceptual categorization as
              formalized by a proposed exemplar-based diffusion model (EBDM). This model
              combines elements of Nosofsky's generalized context model of categorization,
              Nosofsky and Palmeri's exemplar-based random walk model of categorization and
              automaticity, Logan's instance theory of automaticity, and Ratcliff's diffusion
              model under a single theoretical framework. According to the proposed model,
              categories are represented in terms of stored exemplars, evidence for a
              particular category is a function of the relative summed similarity of a
              presented item to stored exemplars, and category responses are determined by a
              continuous-time diffusion process driven by retrieved exemplar information.
              Preliminary work shows the model able to qualitatively and quantitatively
              account for both categorization accuracy and categorization response times
              under a variety of conditions with relatively few free parameters. Several
              empirical studies are planned to contrast the predictions of the EBDM with
              other competing frameworks centered around category representations based on
              prototypes, rules, and decision boundaries. New theoretical advancements are
              also outlined that specify how perceptual information might evolve overtime
              within a particular categorization episode.

