Title       : REU: SGER: Stratified Robotic Manipulation Experimental Platform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9910602

Award Number: 9910602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99996              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Goodwine jgoodwin@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
 
IIS-9910602
Goodwine, John W. 
University of Notre Dame
$99,996
              - 12 mos.

SGER: Experimental Study of Stratified Robotic Manipulation
              

The subject of this project is experimental research concerning stratified
              systems with a main goal of experimentally determining the practical extent to
              which theoretical stratified control methodologies are effective to control
              real robotic systems.  Essentially,
stratified systems are systems which can
              have multiple physical contacts (such as robotic hands or legged robotic
              locomotion), which results in a generic structure characterizing  the
              configuration space for the robot.  This generic structure can be exploited for
              control purposes.  This project will implement coordinated manipulation of
              objects by multiple robotic manipulators allowing for intermittent engagement
              of the objects by some or all of the manipulators.  The novelty of the approach
              is that it is formulated in sufficient mathematical generality so that the
              control algorithms are applicable to a broad class of objects to be
              manipulated. The PI has previously developed motion planning algorithms for
              stratified systems; however, they are fundamentally open loop. Because of the
              difficulty of accurately modeling the mechanics of a manipulator engaging or
              disengaging an object, very fine and precise motion will be difficult with a
              purely open loop control methodology.  Also, because of the highly nonlinear
              nature of stratified systems, small initial errors in motion will tend to grow
              with time making accurate large scale motions difficult as well. The goals of
              the experiments are to determine the practical extent and nature of these
              difficulties and to incorporate sensory information
(both vision and contact
              sensors) in a discrete feedback control sense to improve the effectiveness of
              the stratified control methodology. Additionally, adaptive control
              methodologies will be used to supplement the stratified motion planning
              algorithms to enhance their robustness.

