Title       : Collaborative Research: WinDSSOcK: Winter Distribution and Success of Southern
               Ocean Krill
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a9910092

Award Number: 9910092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2082652            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Beardsley rbeardsley@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Limeburner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1308,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project is a contribution to a coordinated attempt to understand the
              interactions of biological and physical dynamics by developing relationships
              among the evolution of the antarctic winter ice and snow cover, biological
              habitat variability, and the seasonal progression of marine ecological
              processes.  The work will be carried out in the context of the Southern Ocean
              Experiment of the Global Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics Study (Globec), a large,
              multi-investigator study of the winter survival strategy of krill under the
              antarctic sea ice in the vicinity of Marguerite Bay on the western side of the
              Antarctic Peninsula.

The objective of this project is to develop and deploy
              a series of moorings on the continental shelf off Marguerite Bay.  These will
              include current meters, salinity and temperature sensors, zooplankton
              concentration, upward-looking acoustic sounders to track ice motion, and
              acoustic doppler current profilers.  The proposed mooring design will quantify
              and characterize the inflowing and outflowing water masses and provide the
              physical component for the integrated modeling effort.  The mooring data will
              be supplemented by instrumented drifters that track surface flow.

The water
              masses on the continental shelf off Marguerite Bay consist of inflowing Upper
              Circumpolar Deep Water, which is relatively warm, salty, oxygen-poor, and
              nutrient-rich.  In winter atmospheric processes cool and freshen this water,
              and recharge it with oxygen to produce Antarctic Surface Water which is
              diffused seaward, and supports both a sea ice cover and a productive
              krill-based food web.  The observations produced by this project will quantify
              the spatial and temporal variability of the presumed clockwise flow through the
              bay, and define the tidal and transient flows driven by storms and southward
              meanders of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current.
***

