Title       : Dissertation: Social Complexity, Religious Organization, and Mortuary Ritual at
               the Prehispanic Site of Paquime', Chihuahua, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1999  
File        : a9910504

Award Number: 9910504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8022               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane E. Buikstra buikstra@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Scholes Hall, Room 102
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Under the direction of Dr. Jane Buikstra Mr. Gordon Rakita will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his research is to examine the role
              of religious control and associated ritual in the organization of prehistoric
              complex societies. Archaeologists have recognized that as groups changed from a
              hunting and gathering to an agricultural subsistence base a more abundant food
              supply resulted in increase in group size and population density. This pattern
              occurs on a world wide basis. In the Southwest early complex societies had
              relatively short life spans. Villages lasted for only several generations and
              were followed by population redistribution. Only when evidence for religious
              activity increases does longer term stability appear. It is unclear however
              what control such religious structures held over individuals and to what degree
              religious practice affected daily life. Based on ethnographic data and
              theoretical work Mr. Rakita believes that religious specialists fostered a
              uniform structure of beliefs and practices which served to incorporate
              individuals into a controlled functioning unit. He believes that the result was
              a hierarchical structured society with defined divisions between levels and
              uniformity within each. To test this idea he will study a large group of human
              burials from the US Southwest and adjacent Northern Mexico. Excavated my
              multiple researchers the largest group derives from the prehispanic site of
              Paquime in Chihuahua Mexico. This large complex city represents the height of
              Southwest complexity. Mr. Rakita will add to this sample earlier as well as
              post contact materials from adjacent regions to monitor change over time. He
              will examine records in relevant depositories in both Mexico and the U.S. and
              record a range of variables such as position and treatment of the body as well
              as associated grave offerings. By examining variation it should be possible to
              determine whether distinct in site groupings emerge over time and whether
              variation within each decreases as he predicts.

This research is important
              for several reasons. It will help to understand the role of religion and ritual
              in the organization of prehistoric societies and how this changes as group size
              increases. It will provide insight into the archaeology of the New World and
              yield a useful analytic tool of potential applicability in many archaeological
              situations. It will also assist in training a promising young scientist.

