Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: The Relation Between Foreshocks and the Initiation of
               Large Earthquakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  2002  
File        : a9910066

Award Number: 9910066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Vidale vidale@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heidi Houston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1057,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9910066
Vidale

This award supports the participation of American scientists
              in a U.S.-Japan seminar on the Relation Between Foreshocks and the Initiation
              of large Earthquakes, to be held in Kyoto, Japan from October 1-2, 2000.  The
              co-organizers are Professors John Vidale at the University of California, Los
              Angeles and Professor James Mori at Kyoto University in Japan.  The purpose of
              the seminar is to investigate the relationship between foreshocks and their
              subsequent mainshock, with special focus on how foreshocks can (or cannot) be
              used for earthquake prediction.  Recently, research on the observed statistics
              of foreshocks has advanced in both the U.S. and Japan.  Also, there have been
              improved observations of the details of the initiation process of earthquake
              ruptures on high-quality seismic instruments in both countries.  Finally,
              theoretical studies on the nucleation and growth of ruptures are being actively
              pursued.  

The seminar will consist of two parts.  The first purpose is to
              integrate and organize observation of foreshock occurrence.  With consistent
              data compilation, they will compare spatial and temporal distributions of
              foreshocks and relate them to the ruptures of the subsequent large events.  The
              second purpose is to explore what can be learned about  the physical processes
              at the beginning of earthquakes, using the foreshock observations and related
              theoretical models of rupture initiation.  The goal is to develop a better
              understanding of the mechanisms of rupture initiation, and a strategy to
              evaluate the feasibility of earthquake prediction.  Seminar organizers have
              made a special effort to involve younger researchers as both participants and
              observers.  The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in this field
              will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work, and will set the stage
              for future collaborative projects.  Dissemination of information from the
              meeting will be pu

