Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Algorithms for Linear Programs Over Symmetric
               Cones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9910084

Award Number: 9910084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22774              (Estimated)
Investigator: Renato D. C. Monteiro monteiro@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9910084
Monteiro

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Renato Monteiro of the Georgia Institute of
              Technology and Professor Takashi Tsuchiya at the Institute of Statistical
              Mathematics in Tokyo, Japan.  The researchers will be undertaking a study of
              algorithms for linear programs over symmetric cones.  Since large-scale
              semidefinite programming (SDP) problems arise in many applications in
              continuous optimization, matrix analysis, engineering, statistics and
              discrete/combinatorial optimization, it is of paramount importance to develop
              fast and reliable algorithms to solve them.  The goal of the proposed research
              is to provide new insight into the behavior of primal-dual interior-point
              algorithms and to develop novel computational tools that will enable
              practitioners to solve large-scale SDP problems.  The researchers will
              investigate nonlinear-programming-type algorithms for solving large-scale
              specially structured SDP problems.  They will also be researching new
              methodologies to enhance the computational performance of interior-point
              methods towards solving large-scale SDP problems.  Finally they plan to develop
              and implement efficient interior-point methods for solving nonlinear SDP
              problems.  

The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that
              have complementary expertise and research capabilities. This research project
              has excellent potential to have a strong impact on the growing literature about
              (SDP) problems and on the development of efficient methods to solve them.  It
              will also lead to new or improved algorithms to find exact or approximate
              solutions to large-scale optimization problems arising in diverse applications
              in industry, finance science, and engineering.  The project advances
              international human resources through the participation of a graduate student. 
              Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our
              base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.   Results of the research will be published in international
              scientific journals and also presented at scientific meetings in the U.S. and
              abroad.

