Title       : The Albert Einstein Distinguished Educator Fellowship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a9910911

Award Number: 9910911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Conrad G. Katzenmeyer                   
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77400              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Patrick White whitep@triangle-coalition.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter L. Purdy  (Principal Investigator former)
              Arthur H. Livermore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Triangle Coalition Tech
	      1840 Wilson Boulevard
	      Arlington, VA  22201    703/516-5960

NSF Program : 7261      PROGRAM EVALUATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Triangle Coalition for Science and Technology Education is an organization
              consisting of education associations, businesses, scientific, mathematics and
              technology societies, and a network of local and state alliances.  It has a
              fifteen year history of fostering science, mathematics and technology education
              initiatives.  An important element of the Coalition's work is to inform members
              of Congress, federal agencies, and their staffs about the importance of
              preparing, passing, and funding legislation that provides support for programs
              directed at the preservice training and inservice professional development of
              science, technology, and mathematics teachers.

In 1990, the Triangle
              Coalition initiated the Albert Einstein Distinguished Educator Fellowship
              program for outstanding science and mathematics teachers.  Fellows demonstrate
              exceptional expertise in teaching science, technology and/or mathematics in
              elementary or secondary schools and have an interest and willingness to be
              involved in public policy areas.  All candidates have been recognized for
              excellence through the Presidential Awards for Excellence in Mathematics or
              Science Teaching or some similar award.  Einstein Fellows bring to Congress and
              selected federal agencies involved in education the insights, extensive
              knowledge and practical experience teachers working in science and mathematics
              classrooms.

This project supports one Einstein Fellow assigned to NSF's
              Division of Research, Evaluation and Communication(REC) for an 11 month period
              and who works with program directors in REC on teacher education and classroom
              issues and programs.  The Fellow serves as a valuable resource by assisting in
              programs focusing on effective mathematics and science teacher development,
              preservice teacher preparation, projects that link teachers with classroom
              practices and student learning, and national teacher organization
              activities.

The project provides personal support for the Fellow while
              working at NSF in addition to a variety of supporting activities and programs
              designed specifically for all Fellows in the DC area.

 


