Title       : Conference on Social Psychology of Prejudice, Seattle, Washington, August 11 -
               12, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a9910732

Award Number: 9910732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18306              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christian S. Crandall crandall@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In some fields of science, new and beginning investigators spend little time
              with older research articles, books, or work that was done more than a few
              decades in the past. This strategy may pay off in the short run for the
              individual scientist, who must publish new research, obtain grants, and
              establish a reputation. But this strategy is bad for the field as a whole,
              because excellent historical ideas, research, and theory can be overlooked or
              reinvented. This problem is compounded by the fact that many ideas, research
              techniques, and experimental manipulations contain a certain amount of subtle
              or even tacit knowledge that is not communicated in research reports. This
              "loss of the past" for contemporary research is a significant problem for the
              social psychology of prejudice. Because research on prejudice is strongly
              affected by current events, social history and the scientific zeitgeist, the
              kinds of research carried out during and following WWII and the Holocaust, the
              days of Jim Crow, the response to Brown v. Board of Education, and South
              African apartheid had a different flavor and focus than research found in
              contemporary journals. It may be that research and theory has changed toward
              more subtle manifestations of prejudice because scientists have continued to
              base theoretical and empirical developments upon research on race and gender
              prejudices - prejudices that have lost much of their social acceptability in
              the past few decades. But the earlier ideas and theories have direct relevance
              to the problems of prejudice today, both in terms of scientific theory and of
              practical application. As a partial remedy for this, a conference will be held
              on the psychology of prejudice, where senior and very well-established
              researchers can interact with junior investigators. Because face-to-face
              interaction, over the course of several days, is the best way to have a
              sustained and meaningful exchange of ideas and information, a small conference
              will bring scholars at several levels together for a few days, to exchange
              ideas, to share history, and to encourage a new generation of scholars in the
              study of prejudice.


