Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Solar Explosive Phenomena with
               YOHKOH/SOHO/TRACE/Solar-B
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a9910067

Award Number: 9910067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40297              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry G. Forbes INTERNET: T FORBES.UNHH.UNH.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9910067
Forbes

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor Terry Forbes of the University of New Hampshire in
              Durham and Professor Saku Tsuneta of the National Astronomical Observatory in
              Tokyo, Japan.  The researchers will be undertaking a study of the solar
              explosive phenomena with YOHKOH/SOHO/Trace/Solar-8.  They will investigate
              several basic science issues that address the dynamic relationship between
              surface magnetic field structures and their counterparts in the chromosphere
              and corona.  The investigations will include both theoretical and empirical
              modeling, and coordinated analysis of contemporaneous ground-and space-based
              observation data of the sun.  The researchers will combine observations in
              different temperature bands made by YOHKOH, SOHO and TRACE to construct a
              comprehensive view of solar active phenomena.  The significance of this
              research is that the expertise of the actual investigators involved in
              different missions can be coordinated for a consensus observational view of the
              sun.

The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have
              complementary expertise and research capabilities.  Results of the research
              should provide a more complete temperature structure of the solar corona.  This
              is important because the magnetic field structure and the reconnection site are
              all obtained from the temperature profiles.  These data can provide vital
              information in guiding theoretical studies of corona heating mechanisms.  The
              project advances international human resources through the participation of
              postdocs.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
              broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation

