Title       : LTER COERCE-Coastal Oligotrophic Ecosystems Research, the Everglades. Regional
               Controls of Population and Ecosystem Dynamics in an Oligotrophic
               Wetland-dominated Coastal Landscap
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a9910514

Award Number: 9910514
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Childers childers@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel Trexler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Boyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald D. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rudolf Jaffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Fourqurean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1195,1316,4444,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9910514
Childers
Estuaries and coastal landscapes experience a range of
              stresses, both natural and anthropogenic. Among these, cultural eutrophication
              affects most US coastal ecosystems. As a results, most coastal ecological
              research has been conducted in systems that are experiencing eutrophication.
              This coastal Everglades LTER will investigate how variability in regional
              climate, freshwater inputs, disturbance and perturbations affect land-margin
              ecosystems. This coastal site is particularly appropriate for studying these
              questions because the entire systems is oligotrophic, it is the focus of the
              largest watershed restoration effort ever implemented, and freshwater flow is
              controlled in different ways by the highly variable precipitation regime and
              water management. The long-term research program will focus on the central idea
              that regional processes mediated by water flow control population and ecosystem
              level dynamics at any location within the coastal Everglades landscape. This
              phenomenon is best exemplified in the dynamics of an estuarine oligohaline zone
              where fresh water draining phosphorus-limited Everglades marshes mixes with
              water from the more nitrogen-limited ocean. This central idea along with a
              series of specific hypotheses will be tested along freshwater to marine
              gradients in two Everglades drainage basins. A clear productivity peak has been
              observed in the low salinity zone of one basin, but not the other. This peak
              appears to be the result of low P, high N freshwater meting higher P, lower N
              marine water. Nutrient generation from dissolved organic matter (DOM) will be
              quantified because it is expected to be a major contributor to this oligohaline
              production peak. The role of the microbial loop in affecting secondary
              production will also be investigated. Essentially, his LTER project will focus
              on how changes in freshwater flow and climatic variability control the relative
              roles that nutrients and organic mater play in regulating estuarine and coastal
              productivity. 
The transect design is conceptually analogous to a Lagrangian
              approach in which parcels of water are followed as they flow through freshwater
              marshes and mangrove estuaries to offshore. Along the way, patterns and
              processes in the water and in the wetlands though which it is flowing will be
              quantified using long-term sampling and short-term mechanistic studies. Primary
              production, concentrations and turnover dynamics of inorganic nutrients and
              organic matter (particularly DOM), organic mater accretion and turnover in
              soils and sediments, and consumer dynamics and productivity will be measured.
              Process based simulation models will be used to link key components, such as
              relationships between DOM quantity and quality, microbial loop dynamics, and
              higher trophic levels. Data synthesis will also include hydrologic models to
              simulate water residence times along the transects, and a GIS-based project
              database that will integrate data from this LTER research with information from
              other related projects. The GIS database will be linked to the coastal
              Everglades LTER web site to maximize the exchange and dissemination of
              information within the LTER Network and with the scientific community in
              general.


