Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY: Collaborative Research: Microbial and Nutrient Controls in
               Mangrove Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a9981535

Award Number: 9981535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joann P. Roskoski                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1742268            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilka C. Feller feller@SERC.SI.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marilyn L. Fogel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine E. Lovelock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1366,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT


This project, which is being supported by the Directorate for
              Biological Sciences, the Directorate for Geosciences, the Directorate for
              Computer and Information Science and Engineering, and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences, will fund research on mangrove forests that dominate the world's
              tropical and subtropical coasts, paralleling the geographical distribution of
              coral reefs. Ecological processes here are influenced by inputs from the land,
              sea, and sky, which result in extreme fluctuations of flooding, salinity,
              temperature, light, and nutrient availability. Mangrove-associated organisms
              have specialized physiological and structural adaptations that sustain them in
              this variable environment. Human-caused enrichment is one of the major global
              threats to these coastal ecosystems. Experiments show that nutrients are not
              uniformly distributed among or even within mangrove forests. Soil fertility can
              switch from nitrogen to phosphorus limitation across narrow gradients. This
              study will explore the relationships among physical and chemical factors,
              nutrients, microbes, trees, and elemental cycling on off-shore mangrove islands
              in Belize.

We will examine the  interactions between the environment and
              organisms to determine how changes in nutrient inputs from natural,
              agricultural, or urban sources might alter the delicate balance among these
              ecosystem components. Mathematical models will help us predict the contribution
              complexity makes to the ability of mangrove ecosystems to survive both natural
              and anthropogenic disturbances. The results of the study will help scientists
              understand how to better manage and conserve mangrove ecosystems and will
              contribute to our understanding of biocomplexity in other ecosystems. 

