Title       : Implementing Problem Based Learning in the Introductory Biology Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2000     
File        : a9981145

Award Number: 9981145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85187              (Estimated)
Investigator: Staria S. Vanderpool svand@navajo.astate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack D. Wilhide  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger A. Buchanan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AR State U Main Campus
	      P O Box 790
	      State University, AR  724670790    501/972-2100

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) The major objective of this project is to improve
              student learning in an introductory biology course for non SMET (Science, Math,
              Engineering and Technology) majors at Arkansas State University (ASU) by
              including problem-based (PBL) and collaborative learning experiences. All ASU
              undergraduates are required to complete two lab science courses as part of
              their general education requirement. Biological Science and Laboratory is a
              preferred option for freshman and has an annual enrollment of about 1500
              students in 50 sections. The laboratory currently follows a traditional
              introductory model that is instructor-centered, with students individually
              responsible for completing a set of discrete lab activities that correspond to
              lecture topics taught by multiple instructors in multiple sections. Our course
              evaluation data show that the desired student outcomes including (1) retaining
              appropriate content by the non SMET student, (2) developing informed decision
              making skills about scientific issues, (3) enhancing critical thinking skills,
              and (4) familiarizing students with education enhancing technologies are not
              satisfactorily met using present pedagogical techniques. Considerable evidence
              from other institutions indicates that using collaborative, Problem Based
              Learning to introduce content in the context of complex real-world problems,
              and group learning can produce these desired outcomes. However, restructuring
              this course requires training instructors in techniques for facilitating PBL
              and collaborative learning as well as the development and adaptation of
              laboratory exercises so that students have opportunities to learn basic
              biological principles through discovery. To accomplish this, two adjoining
              classrooms are being equipped with 12 workstations allowing simultaneous data
              accumulation, data analysis, information acquisition, and reporting by 12
              student workgroups. When fully implemented these changes will affect about
              15,000 students within five years. The results of the laboratory experience are
              being evaluated to verify that student understanding of science processes and
              retention of biology content is improved. The effort is built upon and will be
              an adaptation of descriptions of Problem-based and collaborative learning in
              the science education literature.
