Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY: Integrating Genomic and Ecological Analysis of Symbiotic Bacteria
               that Mediate Insect Herbivory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a9981432

Award Number: 9981432
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2218180            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy A. Moran nmoran@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Baumann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1366,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Moran
9981432

Many plant-feeding insects are dependent on bacterial
              symbionts to
supplement their nutrition: without symbionts, these insects
              cannot grow or
reproduce. In some cases, transmission of symbionts occurs only
              from mother
to progeny; these bacteria possess specialized genetic traits that
              allow
them to better nourish their hosts. Other symbionts infect hosts
              through
other routes and appear less specialized. Approaches from modern
              genomics
will be used to explore how gene content and gene expression of
              long-term
symbionts affect host nutrition and growth under different
              environments,
such as host plants differing in nutritional quality. In
              addition, the
effects of facultative symbionts on insect growth and survival,
              currently
unknown, will be explored. Experiments will test whether these more
              mobile
symbionts are vectored by parasites of the insect hosts or
              confer
resistance to these parasites.

Although bacterial symbionts are
              central in insect-plant interactions,
including those affecting agricultural
              crops and forests, their biology is
little known. The proposed work would
              exploit recent developments in
molecular biology to reveal the full range of
              symbiont effects on the
biology of plant-feeding insects. Results have the
              potential of exposing
novel, specific methods for insect control that might be
              less costly or
hazardous than commonly used chemical control measures. This
              project, which is being supported by the Directorates for Biological Sciences
              and and by the Division of Chemistry and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities, will impact several scientific fields, and the findings may provide
              basic information useful for both environmental and biotechnological
              applications.




