Title       : Human Evolution: Building an image database and associated materials for
               instructional use.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a9981112

Award Number: 9981112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Wood bwood@gwis2.circ.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alison S. Brooks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Anthropology (81)

The subject of human origins engenders universal interest,
              but its potential as an aid for science education has been relatively neglected
              by the academic community. Humans represent an excellent example of how the
              biology and natural history of an organism can be shaped as a result of the
              processes of adaptation and evolution. Thus, the study of human evolution
              (paleoanthropology) is a potentially powerful instrument for communicating the
              nature of scientific evidence and the principles of scientific inquiry to a
              wide audience. This 'Proof-of-Concept' project is part of an initiative by
              George Washington University, in collaboration with the 'Human Origins Program'
              of the National Museum for Natural History of the Smithsonian Institution, to
              establish a comprehensive Human Evolution Database (HED) that will support
              education and research in several different ways. Namely, the HED will 1)
              introduce general users to the basic principles and evidence of human
              evolution, 2) provide an on-line or CD-ROM-based reference that can supplement
              traditional educational materials, 3) provide problem-based learning
              experiences that teach research methodology for a range of undergraduate
              courses, and 4) archive advanced data sets suitable for use by graduate-level
              researchers.  A lack of teaching materials has been a major factor limiting the
              teaching of human evolution. Accordingly, the finished HED will be posted on
              the Internet, and thus will be accessible to students both at home and in the
              classroom. As such, HED represents the most extensive plan yet attempted to
              integrate computer technology into the teaching of human evolutionary studies.
              The HED will be designed primarily for use by undergraduates, but ultimately
              its flexibility and accessibility will make it suitable for use in educational
              settings ranging from secondary school (grades 9 - 12) up through doctoral
              programs.

