Title       : Incorporation of Experiential Components and Cooperative Learning into an
               Introductory Problem Solving Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a9981060

Award Number: 9981060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113236             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally J. Steadman steadman@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce R. Dewey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Marquard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond G. Jacquot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)
Undergraduate engineering education has undergone
              considerable reform in the last decade in order to make engineering more
              relevant to students and more attractive to underrepresented populations.
              Incorporation of Experiential Components and Cooperative Learning into an
              Introductory Problem Solving Course addresses these audiences as well as
              pre-service teachers and two-year college students. 

The goal of this
              project is to provide an introductory course to develop a set of the
              characteristics in the students that define the "best UW graduate": project
              design and execution, experimental capabilities, system analysis and modeling
              capabilities, and communication abilities. This model will serve as a catalyst
              for modifying the engineering science curriculum to address the "best graduate"
              characteristics. Classroom activities, implemented in a web-based format, will
              be available to other institutions.

The ideas are adapted from a course,
              Engineering Problem Solving, offered to freshmen at Iowa State University, a
              member of the Synthesis Coalition. Through efforts of Synthesis faculty,
              significant courseware development has led to more active learning in the
              course by integrating traditional hands-on engineering practice with new
              technology. Through collaboration with ISU faculty, essential components of the
              Iowa State course-both experimental and technological- will be adapted to the
              UW course.

The Mosrse Alumni Distinguished Teaching Professor of Civil
              Engineering at the University of Minnesota will assist in integrating teaching
              methodologies and strategies in the course to actively engage the student in
              the learning. The course modifications will also be designed such that the
              course can be offered to Science and Mathematics Secondary Education
              majors.


