Title       : Collaboration to Integrate Research and Education between University of Texas,
               Brownsville and LIGO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2001       
File        : a9981795

Award Number: 9981795
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $785157             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph D. Romano jromano@utb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mario C. Diaz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren G. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Brownsville
	      80 Fort Brown
	      Brownsville, TX  78520    /   -

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A long-term collaboration to integrate research and education will be
formed
              between the University of Texas at Brownsville (UTB) and the
Laser
              Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO).  This
collaboration will
              incorporate four faculty members and approximately
ten students from UTB, and
              staff scientists and engineers from LIGO
laboratory.  Research activities will
              focus on three main areas
related to gravitational wave data analysis: (i)
              software development
for detector characterization, (ii) software development
              for
gravitational wave detection, and (iii) construction of a
              distributed
processing environment to analyze gravitational wave data. 
              Students
from UTB will spend approximately ten weeks each summer at the
              LIGO
observatory in Livingston, LA where they will install and test
software
              developed at UTB.  Enhancements to education will consist of
two new
              graduate-level courses and four new undergraduate
courses/modules, which will
              integrate the research activities into the
curriculum.

The activities
              listed above are important for a variety of reasons.
The LIGO interferometers
              will soon be joined by similar gravitational
wave interferometers and several
              resonant bar detectors located in the
US, Europe, Japan, and Australia.  This
              world-wide network of
gravitational wave detectors will open a new window onto
              the universe,
allowing physicists to understand better the nature of
              strong
gravitational fields and astronomers to "see" objects and
              catastrophic
astrophysical events that cannot be studied by more
              traditional
electromagnetic-based astronomy.  The commissioning of the
              LIGO
interferometers is scheduled for the year 2000, and a two
              year
science-data run is planned for the end of 2002.  Thus, it is
              essential
for the success of LIGO and the world-wide network of detectors
              that
software for analyzing the performance of gravitational wave
              detectors
and for searching for astrophysical sources must be developed
              and
tested within the next two or three years.  The addition of new
              courses
at UTB and the opportunity for students to spend time at the
              LIGO
observatory should attract more students into science and
              engineering,
and consequently increase the number of minority students
              graduating with
science-related degrees.

