Title       : Development of a Guided-Inquiry, Collaborative Physical Chemistry Laboratory
               Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9981017

Award Number: 9981017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45895              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcy H. Towns 00mhtowns@bsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ball State University
	      
	      Muncie, IN  47306    317/289-1241

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)  A guided-inquiry, collaborative physical chemistry laboratory
              course is being developed.  Motivated by a concern that our physical chemistry
              laboratories should reflect the way measurements are carried out in modern
              laboratories, and inspired by the successful reforms of general chemistry, we
              are adapting and implementing the accepted pedagogical strategies of
              guided-inquiry and collaborative learning in a problem based approach in a
              physical chemistry laboratory course.  Pedagogical strategies used in the New
              Traditions systemic chemistry initiative, and more generally discussed by the
              NSF report on Curricular Developments in the Analytical Sciences, are being
              adapted.

Our primary goals are: 1) to develop two guided-inquiry,
              collaborative projects where the students learn to develop laboratory
              procedures, gather samples and obtain data, analyze and interpret data, and
              effectively communicate their results and 2) to equip our physical chemistry
              laboratory with instruments which allow us to develop a guided-inquiry,
              collaborative project which centers on a problem facing the pharmaceutical
              industry, polymorphism of drug substances.  The methodology of the laboratory
              projects themselves will be adapted from the pharmaceutical research literature
              and from experiments published in the chemical education literature.  New
              instruments include a differential scanning calorimeter and a polarized light
              microscope with a hot stage The projects are being developed, implemented,
              evaluated, and revised during a two-year time frame.

Changing the way the
              physical chemistry laboratory is taught is having a significant impact on the
              entire chemistry curriculum.  Adapting and implementing a guided-inquiry
              approach begins a reform of the chemistry laboratory curriculum because none of
              our laboratory courses previously used that approach. The development and
              implementation of two guided-inquiry collaborative physical chemistry
              laboratory projects is promoting changes in the laboratory courses across the
              chemistry curriculum, injecting a problem based approach into our laboratory
              curriculum, and providing instruments which can be integrated into our
              courses.



