Title       : Reactivity and Catalysis at Sulfur-Rich Metal Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a9981979

Award Number: 9981979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Rauchfuss rauchfuz@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research on inorganic sulfido complexes by Dr. Thomas B. Rauchfuss of
              the Chemistry Department, University of Illinois.  The thioanion ReS4- has been
              found to react with alkenes, alkynes and nitriles.  This chemistry will be
              investigated further and extended to include other substrates, atom- and group
              transfers, mechanism, and applications to organic synthesis and cluster and
              solid state chemistry.  Of particular interest will be investigation of the
              binding of unsaturated organic substrates to S=M=S in the presence of H2S, thus
              mimicking the reaction conditions found in HDS catalysis.  Odd-electron metal
              sulfides, electropolymerization routes to novel sulfur-rich solids, and the
              generation of reduced metal sulfides capable of binding to HDS-relevant
              substrates will be investigated.  Studies of the catalytic properties of ReS4-
              will focus on the mechanism of H2 activation, routes to 1,2-dithiols, and the
              ability to bind nitriles and isonitriles through
              sulfur.

Hydrodesulfurization (HDS) is a large scale industrial process to
              remove sulfur from petroleum.  The process is catalyzed by metal-based
              compounds, often containing MoS2. Strong C-S and H-H bonds are activated in the
              presence of H2S.  The design of future catalysts that will effectively and
              efficiently remove sulfur from deteriorating fossil fuel reserves depends on
              better fundamental understanding of the structural and electronic features that
              confer high reactivity on the MSx species generated during the catalytic
              process.  Metal sulfides that affect many HDS-relevant reactions will be
              studied by this research group, which includes undergraduate and graduate
              students.

