Title       : Computational Studies of Statistical-Mechanical Models in Electrochemical
               Materials Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2001    
File        : a9981815

Award Number: 9981815
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Per Arne Rikvold rikvold@csit.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9981815
Rikvold

This grant supports a numerical study of a class of problems
              in Electrochemistry.  The problems are chosen to address the intellectual needs
              of a computational bridge over a wide range of time scales, from the phenomena
              at microscopic time scales such as adsorption, desorption and diffusion to the
              real catalyzed chemical reactions taking place over seconds or longer.  The
              specific systems studied are Copper coadsorbed with sulfates on gold, halides
              on Silver and Gold and chalcogenides on noble metal electrodes.  The projects
              include the specific considerations of properties of these systems as well as
              development of algorithms for the vast range of time scales.   The problem is
              addressed in a hierarchical manner, using simulations of small continuum
              systems over a few pico or nanoseconds to determine parameters for input in
              Monte Carlo simulations of lattice gas systems that can reach macroscopic times
              with the use of modern algorithms.  It is expected that this research will
              result in improved understanding of non-equilibrium processes at
              electrode-electrolyte interface and will lead to the development of new,
              electrochemistry-based products and processes.
%%%
There are many ways in
              which surface electrochemistry contributes to the welfare of the society. 
              There are processes like metal production, electroplating, corrosion
              protection, energy storage systems and catalysis involving solid catalysts. 
              This grant supports research to develop tools for a study and studies the
              phenomena which occur at long times (seconds and longer) in terms of what
              happens at very short (nearly atomic scale motion) time scales.  The entire
              project is numerical where calculations at one scale feed in to calculations at
              larger time scale in the end leading to a description of electrochemical
              processes at macroscopic time scales.
***  

