Title       : Regulation of Cytokinin Metabolic Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a9981974

Award Number: 9981974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $445000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. S. Mok mokd@science.oregonstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Machteld C. Mok  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Cytokinins are plant hormones mediating cell division and differentiation.
              The most prevalent naturally occurring cytokinin is zeatin, a compound with
              high biological activity. Various zeatin metabolites are found in plant
              tissues, some of which are active, others not; therefore, it is important to
              understand how zeatin metabolism is regulated. The long-term goal of the
              project is to isolate genetic elements exerting such controls. Studies of
              zeatin metabolism in seeds of beans led to the identification of four
              zeatin-specific enzymes, zeatin O-glucosyltransferase, O-xylosyltransferase,
              reductase and cis-trans isomerase. Gene cloning was initiated with the
              O-glycosyltransferases, and a family of genes has now been identified in beans
              and soybean. The sequences of the genes are very similar but encode enzymes
              with distinct affinity to different cytokinins and sugar donors. Since
              O-glycosylated zeatin occurs widely in plant tissues and functions as a
              reversible storage form of cytokinin (via hydrolysis) and as metabolites
              resistant to enzymatic breakdown, the activity of these genes is likely to have
              significant impact on the level of active cytokinins. Therefore, these genes
              are important targets for further molecular and physiological studies. The
              proposed work will seek to isolate other members of the gene family and
              determine their expression. The influence of cytokinin O-glycosylation on plant
              growth will be investigated by generating transgenic plants harboring selected
              members of the cloned genes. In addition, amino acid sequences on the enzymes
              critical to recognizing specific substrates will be determined by constructing
              hybrid genes. The proposed work will define the properties and the effects of a
              set of cytokinin-specific genes governing a metabolic process ubiquitous in
              plants. These genes are potential targets for genetic modification and crop
              improvement.


