Title       : Enhancing the Mathematical Understanding of Students in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2000      
File        : a9981144

Award Number: 9981144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238911             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erica L. Flapan eflapan@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred J. Grieman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Adolfo J. Rumbos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. O'Leary  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shahriar Shahriari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexander Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8328

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary  (99)

The objective of this project is to bring
              mathematicians and chemists together to increase chemistry students' knowledge
              of mathematics and its role in chemistry, so that they will be able to use the
              tools and language of mathematics to solve scientific problems. The project has
              the following specific components: development of a new type of chemistry
              placement exam which will identify those students who cannot solve multi-level
              non-algorithmic word problems; development of  a pre-calculus level mathematics
              course on problem solving in science; development of a new structure for the
              Organic Chemistry laboratory component that reinforces skills from General
              Chemistry and Mathematics; development of  laboratory modules on Linear Algebra
              and Differential Equations in Physical Chemistry; and development of one upper
              division elective courses on mathematical chemistry.

This project will
              address several important themes and areas. A more accurate placement exam
              coupled with a problem-solving course for those who need it will help all
              students to have the confidence and skills necessary to succeed in General
              Chemistry and to continue studying science. The mathematics and chemistry
              faculty will each learn more about each other's disciplines as a result of
              working closely together on this project, stimulating both teaching and
              research. The project integrates technology where appropriate into all levels
              of the chemistry curriculum. Its overall objectives are to provide students
              with the mathematical skills to succeed in chemistry and as well other
              sciences. It has the potential to produce models and materials that can be used
              nationally and have a broad national impact on science instruction.





