Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY: Collaborative Research: Microbial and Nutrient Controls in
               Mangrove Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a9981457

Award Number: 9981457
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joann P. Roskoski                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380501             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc E. Frischer frischer@skio.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2400

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1366,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT


This project, which is being supported by the Directorate for
              Biological Sciences and by the Directorate for Computer and Information Science
              and Engineering, will fund research on mangrove forests that dominate the
              world's tropical and subtropical coasts, paralleling the geographical
              distribution of coral reefs. Ecological processes here are influenced by inputs
              from the land, sea, and sky, which result in extreme fluctuations of flooding,
              salinity, temperature, light, and nutrient availability. Mangrove-associated
              organisms have specialized physiological and structural adaptations that
              sustain them in this variable environment. Human-caused enrichment is one of
              the major global threats to these coastal ecosystems. Experiments show that
              nutrients are not uniformly distributed among or even within mangrove forests.
              Soil fertility can switch from nitrogen to phosphorus limitation across narrow
              gradients. This study will explore the relationships among physical and
              chemical factors, nutrients, microbes, trees, and elemental cycling on
              off-shore mangrove islands in Belize.

We will examine the  interactions
              between the environment and organisms to determine how changes in nutrient
              inputs from natural, agricultural, or urban sources might alter the delicate
              balance among these ecosystem components. Mathematical models will help us
              predict the contribution complexity makes to the ability of mangrove ecosystems
              to survive both natural and anthropogenic disturbances. The results of the
              study will help scientists understand how to better manage and conserve
              mangrove ecosystems and will contribute to our understanding of biocomplexity
              in other ecosystems. 

