Title       : Interfacial Control of Deformation Modes in TiAl and Other Lamellar Materials:
               Experimental and Theoretical Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a9981023

Award Number: 9981023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $542000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vaclav Vitek vitek@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Pope  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9981023
Vitek 

In this research program deformation in titanium aluminide,
              TiAl, is followed in detail in order to see how coordinated generation and
              motion of dislocations and twins occurs, how the development of slip on one
              side of a lamellar boundary affects slip on the other side, to what extent
              interfacial shear in the lamellar boundaries is involved, and what the sequence
              of the twinning and ordinary dislocation motion is. In the theoretical portion
              of the effort the interaction of the slip modes with each other and with the
              lamellar interfaces are investigated to see how channeled flow deformation
              behavior is established in TiAl. Bond order potentials that include the
              covalent component of the bonding in TiAl are used.  This allows for a more
              complete, quantitative picture of the dislocation core structure. The effect of
              off-stoichiometry, which is known to play a very important role in TiAl, is
              investigated as well. A second direction of the research is to explore the
              possibility that this deformation mode occurs in other lamellar materials, such
              as in multilayer composites with coherent or semicoherent interfaces. The
              experiments involve deformation of Ag/Cr multilayers in the plane of the film
              while measuring lateral strains to see if channeled flow results in this
              material. The theoretical program analyzes the slip modes in the two materials.
               Since one is BCC and the other FCC, different slip systems are involved on
              either side of the interfaces. 
%%%
This research builds on a previous
              NSF-supported program on the ductility of TiAl and how deformation crosses the
              various interfaces in polysynthetically twinned TiAl.  In many cases, the
              deformation modes that dominate in this material are not those with the maximum
              resolved shear stress, but, in fact, appear to be the ones that have the most
              favorable interactions with the interlamellar boundaries, i.e., the boundaries
              do not just respond to the deformation modes in the bulk, they actually
              determine, to a surprisingly large extent, what the dominant deformation modes
              are. This deformation mode is called "channeled flow", because it is carried by
              slip vectors, the net sum of which is parallel to the boundaries themselves.
              This interaction with the interfaces commonly involves a complex coordinated
              motion of coplanar ordinary dislocations and twinning, even though the same
              deformation could be produced by a single set of super dislocations. The
              simulations of dislocation cores in TiAl have shown how these two deformation
              modes that normally occur at such different rates are closely coupled in this
              material, but many questions remain unanswered, not the least of which is: How
              general is this kind of deformation mode?
***

