Title       : Macroelectronics: A Gateway to Electronics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2000     
File        : a9981139

Award Number: 9981139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell L. Pimmel                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74987              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Dyer sdyer@eece.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Schmalzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Krchnavek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shreekanth A. Mandayam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Electrical (55)
Conventional approaches to teaching electronics
              and instrumentation present electronics with a microelectronics emphasis
              instead of providing a more general, macroelectronics systems approach. This
              project shifts the focus in the first electronics course from individual
              devices and circuits (microelectronics) to focus on the system as a whole
              (macroelectronics). Preliminary experience with this approach at Kansas State
              University and Rowan University has been encouraging. Principal objectives to
              support this goal include: Development of curriculum outlines and core
              materials for the macroelectronics curriculum, with the long-term goal of
              developing a complete textbook. In addition, a complete library of such
              macroelectronics projects are designed to encourage project-based learning.
              Finally this project is assessing and evaluating how well students perform
              compared to students in the traditional curriculum. 

Project involves
              team-teaching by professors from Kansas State University and Rowan University.
              The mixing of different institutional cultures and experiences from faculty
              with a track record of teaching excellence is a benefit to both the students
              enrolled in the course and the ultimate outcomes of the project. This project
              may lead to publication of a textbook including all the course outlines and
              project modules enabling engineering professors at many colleges and technical
              institutes to incorporate the macroelectronics systems approach in their own
              unique curriculums.
