Title       : Development of a Project-Based Microcontroller Course: A Top-Down Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1999  
File        : a9981027

Award Number: 9981027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Takoi K. Hamrita   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)

The goal of this project is to develop and implement
              a project-based advanced micro-controller (MC) course for junior and senior
              biological and agricultural engineering students at the University of Georgia.
              The course is also serving as an elective for computer science students. The
              course aims at teaching students, using a top down approach, the design
              methodology by which the MC could be used as a tool to solve practical and
              important engineering monitoring and control problems. Hence, the course
              originates with a real world monitoring and control application that serves as
              a focal point and a case study for the entire course. This application is used
              as a vehicle to learn about important MC functions, programming techniques, and
              interfacing of various devices while providing students the opportunity to
              integrate this knowledge into a meaningful control design experience. In
              developing this course, the PI is relying heavily on a course developed by
              another NSF funded PI at the University of California at Berkeley
              'Microprocessor Control of Mechatronic Systems'. This course is based on the
              same top down approach at Berkeley however,  it takes a complementary approach.
              Whereas the course in Berkeley is concerned with control systems in a broad
              sense and handling complex control problems using off-the shelf hardware and
              software modules.  This project aims to give students a deeper, more focused
              experience with the MC within the context of a fairly complex control problem.
              Developing expertise in MCs is crucial for biological and agricultural
              engineers since several instruments in their fields are becoming increasingly
              complex with multiple MCs embedded in them. This course is bringing together
              teams of students and faculty with diverse backgrounds. Approximately 100
              students a year will benefit from this course/laboratory.

