Title       : Development of Remote Observing Capabilities in the Undergraduate Astronomy
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9981180

Award Number: 9981180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69936              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryan E. Penprase bpenprase@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander L. Rudolph  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexander Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8328

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Astronomy (11) The development of computer controlled telescopes has enabled the
              possibility of remote observing sessions for astronomy education that greatly
              expand the accessibility of telescopes to students. Several examples of K-12
              astronomy education programs exist in which networked telescopes allow students
              from a diverse audience to conduct astronomical observations. This project is
              developing a new curriculum of astronomy laboratory activities with remote
              observing capabilities for undergraduate education using a larger aperture
              (1.0-meter) telescope controlled through a fast internet link and video
              conferencing. Based on others' work with remote telescopes and other observing
              projects, this project is developing a set of undergraduate astronomy labs that
              go beyond simple CCD imaging exercises to include spectroscopic observations of
              planetary nebulae, polarimetetric observations, photometric monitoring of
              quasars and AGNs, and astrometry of the moon and other solar system objects. A
              Remote Observing Center is being developed in the new Andrew Building at Pomona
              College to allow groups of students to control the Pomona College 1-meter
              telescope in Wrightwood, CA, and a small cluster of computer-controlled
              telescopes at Brackett Observatory on the campus of Pomona College in
              Claremont, CA. The development of these laboratory activities greatly extends
              the capabilities available to a much broader class of students in astronomy.
              The project is improving astronomy education for the large number of liberal
              arts students attending introductory astronomy classes, by greatly improving
              the depth and breadth of the observational astronomy component of the class.
              The class activities are also designed to allow use in advanced undergraduate
              classes. In both cases, remote observing capability extends the access to the
              telescopes by simplifying scheduling and logistics of observing, in an improved
              atmosphere of both small and large group collaborative learning.
