Title       : Characterization of 5'-translational Blockage in E.coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2000      
File        : a9981879

Award Number: 9981879
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196839             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emanuel Goldman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Med&Dent of NJ/Newark
	      New Jersey Medical School, MSB C
	      Newark, NJ  07103    973/972-7090

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1158,1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The 61 sense codons in the universal genetic code encode 20 amino acids,
              leading to a redundancy such that, for most amino acids, a given amino acid is
              encoded by multiple, or synonymous, codons. The usage of synonymous codons in
              protein-coding sequences is highly non-random within any given organism and
              varies widely from organism to organism.  There have been a number of studies
              in recent years assessing the impact of this codon bias on protein synthesis. 
              It appears that high-usage codons facilitate maximal rates of protein
              synthesis, while some low-usage codons are inhibitory, at least when they are
              consecutively placed.  In some of the studies on effects of low-usage codons,
              an unexpected phenomenon was observed: the extent of inhibition of protein
              synthesis conferred by these low-usage codons was much greater the closer these
              codons were to the translation start site.  Because of the proximity of
              translation start sites to 5' ends of messages, this phenomenon has been termed
              "5'-translational blockage".  
     This project is concerned with
              characterization of 5'-translational blockage in E. coli.  The working
              hypothesis is that 5'-translational blockage is a result of ribosomes and/or
              the translational apparatus behaving differently during elongation near
              translation starts compared to downstream.  To begin the process of determining
              the basis of this phenomenon, the investigators will develop second-generation
              codon usage vectors that encode mRNA with reduced stability, with the
              prediction that such vectors will exacerbate the phenomenon (thereby making it
              easier to study).  This prediction is based on theoretical considerations;
              however, even if the prediction does not prove true, the question of effects,
              if any, of varying mRNA stability is of intrinsic interest.  The implication of
              5'-translational blockage is that ribosomes and/or the translational apparatus
              are functionally different near translation starts compared to positions
              downstream on the message.  Understanding this surprising and exciting
              phenomenon will not only further our knowledge of the mechanism of protein
              synthesis, but may also have important implications for bioengineering
              expression of heterologous genes.
