Title       : Workshop Physics with Health Science Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9981031

Award Number: 9981031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190637             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann Marie P. Eligon eligona@gvsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beth Ann Thacker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grand Valley State Univ
	      1 Campus Drive
	      Allendale, MI  494019401    616/331-7105

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) The algebra-based introductory physics course in most universities
              is a two-semester sequence, whose major population are health science majors.
              Very little attention has been paid to this course either by researchers or
              curriculum developers. This project is aimed at making physics concepts more
              understandable to these students and more applicable to their interests. The
              Workshop Physics method of instruction is a way to address these issues. The
              Workshop Physics curriculum is being adapted to the needs of the algebra based
              class and new units with applications to health science topics are being
              developed. Another major objective of the project is to encourage the Workshop
              Physics method of instruction at the home institutions of the principal
              investigators of this project, other colleges and universities, and at high
              schools. This is being addressed by offering professional faculty development
              workshops. The Workshop Physics method of instruction is a calculus-based
              curriculum that involves a hands-on, computer-based laboratory environment that
              replaces the typical lecture-lab-discussion format. First the curriculum is
              being adapted from a calculus- to an algebra-based course. Next new units will
              be developed with applications to the health sciences. The adaptation and
              implementation is taking place over a three-year period, with continuous
              evaluation and revision. In the third summer a faculty development workshop
              will be held to introduce faculty to the Workshop physics method by working
              through the newly developed units. This and other workshops will be used to
              disseminate a complete algebra-based version of Workshop Physics, including the
              newly developed units. This project will result in an algebra-based curriculum
              that will give students a solid understanding of physics concepts, make them
              aware of relevant physics applications to health science, and introduce them to
              a new pedagogy. In addition, more faculty will be introduced to Workshop
              Physics and new units will be developed.


