Title       : Integration of Computer Technology into the General Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1999  
File        : a9981040

Award Number: 9981040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94945              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy R. Wagner trwagner@cc.ysu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Mike  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Youngstown St University
	      One University Plaza
	      Youngstown, OH  445550001    330/941-2377

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) The overall goal of this project is to provide students with a
              technology enhanced laboratory experience throughout their first year of
              chemistry. This is  accomplished by the use of 28 workstations, each consisting
              of a LabWorks Il Interface system and PC. These systems are  distributed
              between two dedicated general chemistry laboratories where ports for connection
              to the Internet are available. The computers in the two labs are linked on an
              Intranet and they are networked to an already existing computer lab facility
              (undergraduate) in place in the department. The LabWorks system  permits the
              computer data acquisition of temperature, pH, conductivity, and colorimetric
              data, and is enhancing existing experiments. Fast computer data acquisition and
              analysis frees up more time during the laboratory sessions for students to
              focus on the critical-thinking aspects of the experiments. Also, the computers
              allow for the efficient compilation of data for class discussions.  In this
              project, the goals are accomplished by adapting discovery-based experiments and
              experimental modules.  These are drawn, in large part, from the NSF sponsored
              ChemLinks and ModularChem web based materials and modules and also from the
              MADCAP project (Middle Atlantic Discovery Chemistry Project).  Students access
              websites sponsored by the NSF supported initiatives and have some choice as to
              the projects on which they work.  A collaborative learning environment fosters
              a teamwork approach as an invaluable experience in real world chemistry.   The
              technology rich, discovery-based laboratory environment created through
              implementation of this project totally revitalizes the general chemistry
              curriculum.   Positive effects from the project are expected to spill over into
              an already technology-rich upper-level curriculum as a result of more
              enthusiastic and better technologically prepared students emerging from first
              year chemistry.

