Title       : The Ligase and Acetyltransferase Enzymes of Mycothiol Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2001  
File        : a9981850

Award Number: 9981850
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Fahey rcfahey@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A novel antioxidant, mycothiol, has recently been shown to be  produced by most
              actinomycetes, a class of bacteria encompasing a major  fraction of soil
              bacteria.  These include disease-producing mycobacteria,  such as Mycobacterium
              tuberculosis, and the streptomycetes, a major  source of antibiotics. 
              Mycothiol has been shown to be unusually resistant to autooxidation and
              chemical mutants of M. smegmatis blocked in 
mycothiol biosynthesis have been
              found to exhibit enhanced sensitivity to  hydrogen peroxide.  Whether these
              enhanced  sensitivities result solely from blockage of mycothiol biosynthesis
              or from other mutations which might also be present is uncertain.  The present
              studies will test the hypothesis that mycothiol, although not essential for
              laboratory survival of mycobacteria, plays a key role in protecting
              actinomycetes against oxidative and antibiotic challenge.
	Mycothiol
              biosynthesis involves the assembly of a  pseudodisaccharide (GlcN-Ins) by
              linking of glucosamine (GlcN) with myo- inositol (Ins).  Cysteine (Cys) is then
              ligated to GlcN-Ins in an ATP- dependent reaction to produce Cys-GlcN-Ins.  The
              latter is acetylated by a  acetyl CoA-dependent transacetylase to produce
              mycothiol (AcCys-GlcN-Ins).  This research will investigate the ligase and
              transacetylase steps of  mycothiol biosynthesis.  The enzymes will be purified
              and characterized  with respect to their catalytic functions.  The genes coding
              the enzymes  catalyzing these reactions will be identified and mutants blocked 
              specifically in these enzymes will be produced in the model organism M. 
              smegmatis .  These mutants will be studied to ascertain the effects of 
              blocking mycothiol biosynthesis upon the ability of the organism to resist
              oxidative and antibiotic stress.
	These studies will provide fundamental
              biochemical information  about two key steps in the biosynthesis of mycothiol. 
              They will also test  the role of mycothiol in the protection of mycobacteria
              against damage by  hydrogen peroxide and other oxidants, and will establish the
              extent to  which mycothiol can protect against antibiotics.  The results could
              prove important in the design of new drugs directed against mycobacteria and
              will provide insight concerning the natural function of mycothiol in
              
actinomycetes.

