Title       : Fundamental Investigations of Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9981948

Award Number: 9981948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Cole rcole@uno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Guangdi Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/280-7154

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9151,9152,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The research entitled "Fundamental Investigations of Electrospray Ionization
              Mass Spectrometry"  is a collaboration between Dr. Richard Cole at the
              University of New Orleans and Dr. Guangdi Wang at Xavier University (an HBCU)
              and focuses on fundamental studies related to the electrospray ionization
              process.  The study will include the development of a unique electrochemical
              cell inside of an electrospray probe, and will  investigate electrospray
              ionization enhancements provided by chloride attachment.  There are three
              scientific objectives to this research.  First, a novel
              electrochemical/electrospray cell will be used to study electrochemically
              generated reaction products and intermediates in real time.  The cell
              performance will be validated by comparison of the experimental results with
              known, well characterized systems.  Two systems which will be tested include
              the reactions of polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAH's) with DNA and catecholamines
              with nucleophiles.  The second goal is to map the potential gradient existing
              in the Taylor cone formed as part of the electrospray process.  This
              fundamental study could result in improvements to interface design which will
              significantly enhance capillary electrophoresis (CE) coupled to liquid
              chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS).  The third study will examine, in
              detail, the use of chloride ion attachment as a means to enhance sensitivity
              and structural information about negative ions formed in electrospray
              LC/MS.

The results of this study could potentially impact both
              electrochemical science and mass spectrometry.  This research will lead to a
              clearer understanding of the ionization process which may result in new
              instrumentation and new analytical procedures.  Additionally, this research
              collaboration will greatly enhance minority participation in the analytical
              sciences.




