Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY: Collaborative Research: Oceanic N2 fixation and Global climate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1999 
File        : a9981662

Award Number: 9981662
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Carpenter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Oceanic nitrogen (N2) fixation has recently been identified as a significant
              part of the
oceanic nitrogen (N) cycle and may directly influence the
              sequestration of atmospheric CO2 in
the oceans by providing a new source of N
              to the upper water column. The prokaryotic
microorganisms that convert N2 gas
              to reactive N are an unique subcomponent of planktonic
ecosystems and exhibit
              a variety of complex dynamics including the formation of microbial
consortia
              and symbioses and, at times, massive blooms. Accumulating evidence indicates
              that
iron (Fe) availability may be a key controlling factor for these
              planktonic marine diazotrophs.
The primary pathway of Fe delivery to the upper
              oceans is through dust deposition.
N2 fixers may therefore be directly
              involved in global feedbacks with the climate system
and these feedbacks may
              also exhibit complex dynamics on many different time-scales. 

The
              hypothesized feedback mechanisms will have the following component parts: The
              rate of N2
fixation in the world's oceans can have an impact on the
              concentration of the greenhouse gas,
carbon dioxide (CO2), in the atmosphere
              on time-scales of decades (variability in surface
biogeochemistry) to
              millennia (changes in the total NO3 - stock from the balance of N2
              fixation
and denitrification). CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere influence
              the climate. The climate
system, in turn, can influence the rate of N2
              fixation in the oceans by controlling the supply of Fe
on dust and by
              influencing the stratification of the upper ocean. Humans also have a direct
              role
in the current manifestation of this feedback cycle by their influence on
              dust production, through
agriculture at the margins of deserts, and by our own
              production of CO2 into the atmosphere.
The circular nature of these influences
              can lead to a feedback system, particularly on longer time-scales.

This 
              collaborative and interdisciplinary group of investigators, led by Dr. Anthony
              Michaels, will study each of the components of this system and then to model
              the hypothesized feedback processes. Because of the interaction of the various
              parts of this system, keyed around the unique behavior and biogeochemistry of
              the prokaryotic microorganisms that can fix N2, this feedback loop should
              exhibit complex behaviors on a variety of time-scales. In this research, we
              will conduct a targeted series of experiments and field observations to
              understand and parameterize each of the pieces of this global process including
              the direct control of marine N2 fixation by dust deposition. This understanding
              will then feed a modeling process that examines the complex dynamics of this
              system on time-scales of years to millennia. The modeling process will be
              evaluated by comparison with data on the time-dependent behavior of ocean
              biogeochemistry 

