Title       : Long-term Observations of the Arctic Upper Atmosphere Using the Kodiak, Alaska
               SuperDARN Radar: Environmental
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a9981866

Award Number: 9981866
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Simon Stephenson                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $724248             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Bristow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5205      ARCTIC RESRCH SUPPRT & LOGISTI
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 
OPP-9981866

The principal investigator is seeking funds to support
              the long-term operation of new radar called the Super Dual Auroral Radar
              Network (SuperDARN).  SuperDARN is a network of (high frequency) HF Doppler
              radar located in the high latitude regions of the Northern and Southern
              hemispheres.  The radar is sensitive to backscatter from ionspheric electric
              fields that produce this drift.  SuperDARN is the only currently available
              experimental technique capable of providing continuous, large scale, direct
              observations of the high-latitude electric field.  This field is of interest
              because of its role in the transfer of energy and momentum from the Earth's
              magnetosphere to the upper atmosphere.  The electric field is a consequence of
              the interaction between the solar wind and the magnetosphere and many plasma
              processes occurring within the magnetosphere.  Knowledge of its global
              structure and dynamics are fundamental to understanding large-scale plasma
              processes in the near Earth space environment, and in deter mining the
              importance of electrodynamics energy input to the high-latitude regions of the
              Earth's upper atmosphere.

The Kodiak SuperDARN radar is a new facility that
              was constructed under a grant from the National Science Foundation's Office of
              Polar Programs.  It will act as an integral part of the SuperDARN radar network
              and will address the goals of U.S. Arctic research in the high-latitude upper
              atmosphere and near-Earth space.

A construction of the Kodiak SuperDARN
              radar nears completion, it is important that a base of support be established
              for its operation.  This project demonstrates the importance of the
              measurements that this new facility will provide and the vitality of the
              research community that has been built up around the SuperDARN network. 
              Operations of the Kodiak radar will enhance the already significant
              contributions of SuperDARN to arctic research.

