Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Integrated Research on Magnetic Reconnection in
               Solar Corona and Magnetosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9981508

Award Number: 9981508
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23375              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ken-Ichi Nishikawa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,5983,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9981508
Nishikawa

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Ken-Ichi Nishikawa of Rutgers University in New
              Jersey and Professor Kazunari Shibata of Kyoto University in Japan.  The
              researchers will be undertaking a study of integrated research on magnetic
              reconnection in solar corona and magnetosphere.  Magnetic reconnection is
              widely believed to be a crucial process in solar, magnetospheric, and
              astrophysical plasmas, being the means by which their magnetic topologies are
              determined and by which energy stored in magnetic fields is released rapidly to
              produce such phenomena as magnetospheric storms, solar flares, and particle
              acceleration in astrophysical jets.  Recent solar physics missions launched
              into space provide the ability to observe magnetic reconnection in the solar
              atmosphere to a degree not before possible. The goal of the U.S. and Japanese
              researchers is to directly compare results from particle simulations with (1)
              MHD simulations, (2) low dimensional dynamic models, and (3) direct
              observations.  These studies will reveal unsolved problems in magnetosphere,
              solar corona, and astrophysical jets.  Simulation studies for the research will
              require intensive computing resources, which the researchers have available to
              them in both countries.

The project brings together the efforts of two
              laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities.  The
              ability to use such simulation techniques would be critical to a full
              understanding of the physics underlying important processes in space weather. 
              The project advances international human resources through the participation of
              postdoc and graduate students.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology,
              this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.   Results of the research will be published in
              international scientific journals and will also be presented at scientific
              meetings in the U.S. and abroad.   The research will also be available on their
              Web site as follows: http://www.physics.rutgers.edu/~kenichi     

