Title       : Undergraduate Information Systems Security Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1999  
File        : a9981035

Award Number: 9981035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nasir Memon memon@poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Phyllis Gail Frankl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31)  This project establishes an information systems security
              laboratory at Polytechnic University. The primary goal of the project is to
              assist in meeting the national demand for qualified security professionals that
              can help meet the security challenges facing our national information
              infrastructure. This will be achieved by establishing a laboratory that becomes
              a national model for an experimentation environment providing hands-on
              experiences in topics related to information systems security at the
              undergraduate level.

The proposed laboratory supports a pair of project
              oriented courses; the first an introductory survey course in computer security
              and the second, a course in network security. The project adapts laboratory and
              course material  from the Information Systems Security Laboratory (ISSL) at
              Iowa State University which initially started with an NSF-ILI grant and has
              subsequently been recognized as center of excellence in information security
              education by the National Security Agency (NSA).  ISSL has agreed to help in
              the adaptation by sharing their experiences and courseware. The two teams will
              exchange visits to each other's facilities to facilitate the proposed
              adaptation.

Polytechnic University will establish a Web site which will
              include curricula, laboratory manuals, and other course materials. The
              university is committed to maintaining and updating the site after the
              completion of the project for national dissemination and use of the models that
              are developed.
