Title       : Performance Evaluation and Selection of Optimization Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9981984

Award Number: 9981984
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans D. Mittelmann mittelmann@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will extend the state of the art in evaluating optimization
              software. Beginning with a number of subclasses of continuous local
              optimization problems and progressing to global as well as suitable selected
              discrete optimization problems a careful evaluation and comparison of available
              implementations will be done. One essential part of this is the systematic
              collection and generation of test problems. Next, a group of programs will be
              chosen in each category and the issue of comparability, for example with
              respect to termination criteria, will be addressed. The results of applying
              codes to the test sets will be documented and published both on the web and in
              print. It is expected that this will lead, just as in the previous work,
              indirectly to an improvement of many of the programs by their authors. In
              addition, there will be direct improvements through the PI's experiences and
              suggestions. This work will complement related activities such as NEOS, netlib,
              etc. A second product of the proposed work is a guide in the form of a
              collection of webpages through which a prospective user of optimization methods
              is directly offered a concrete avenue, typically including appropriate
              software, to solve the problem at hand. Based on the success of the earlier
              work, the proposed research may be anticipated to have a substantial impact on
              both the production of high-quality software for modern architectures and the
              utilization of that software by the user community, both academic and
              non-academic.
