Title       : Online Teaching and Learning in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9981054

Award Number: 9981054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis E. Davenport                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Idris Assani assani@math.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sue E. Goodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol E. Malloy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21)

A group of faculty in Mathematics and Education
              propose to design and pilot an online support system for first year mathematics
              courses at UNC-CH and for math teachers in the public schools. Appropriate
              software, readily used by math students and teachers, will be identified and
              negotiations for further development begun. The primary themes addressed are
              teacher preparation and integration of technology, with other themes
              intrinsically included. The Online Math Help Center for freshman courses
              extends a new and successful walk-in help center to provide broader access to a
              more diverse group of the 4500 students enrolled annually in these courses. In
              the first year of this grant, the basic website will be designed and tested in
              pilot sections of two first-year math courses. Through the pilot program, the
              effect on student learning, performance and satisfaction can be measured. With
              the implementation of the University's requirement for laptops, every student
              will have a direct link to support services offered by the Department. The
              second component of this project is the Math Connections site, through which
              public school teachers will browse applications developed to suit their
              curricular needs; discuss mathematics, direct questions and exchange ideas or
              materials with faculty, graduate students and other teachers. It provides a
              crucial direct link between the public school teachers and professional
              mathematicians. During the grant period, the site will be developed and work
              with pre-service teachers begun; contacts with in-service teachers established.
              An assessment of the effect on student teaching will be completed. The
              partnership with LEARN NC provides an essential connection with schools across
              the state.

