Title       : Experiential Learning about Psychological Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1999  
File        : a9981004

Award Number: 9981004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Bradshaw glb2@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Psychology - Cognitive (73)

The realm of the mind is mental processes:
              thinking is not an object, but an intricate activity carried out by the brain.
              Traditional educational vehicles (classroom lectures, books) cannot depict the
              dynamic character of human thought processes. Instead, they merely describe
              mental processes. Here we are developing modules for a new web site,
              Psychological Processes, that provide students with interactive demonstrations
              and experiments designed to reveal our current understanding of the dynamics of
              thinking. In this proof-of concept proposal, our goal is to develop two modules
              covering "The Descriptive Mind" and "The Adaptive Mind."  Each module is being
              designed as a set of numerous Java programs that allow students to conduct
              experiments, interact with psychological models, and experience demonstrations
              about psychological processes.  From these experiences, we expect students to
              acquire a better understanding about how human thinking works, as well as a
              better appreciation for the role of experimentation in illuminating
              psychological processes.

Each of the areas is based on a functional schema
              of human thinking designed to provide a unified framework that encompasses many
              seemingly distinct phenomena. The development process is based on staged
              deployment, with considerable beta testing using college undergraduates and
              gradual introduction into our existing Introductory Psychology course. 
              Evaluation of the modules will include a comparison of a traditional text-based
              treatment against the new form of presentation.  National distribution will
              occur initially through the web.  Instructors nationwide will have access to a
              mailing list that shares new developments, bug reports, comments, and
              invitations to participate in beta testing of new modules or provide comments
              about modules under development.



