Title       : SGER: Multiple Agents and Distributed Language Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  2000  
File        : a9981797

Award Number: 9981797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99539              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie G. Gasser gasser@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 6857      SPECIAL PROJECTS (IIS)
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
This is a twelve month SGER award. Heterogeneity is a major issue in building
              distributed (e.g. multi-agent) information systems, and in communication in
              general. To get effective answers to queries or to develop a productive ongoing
              information-based interaction, participants have to build and maintain global
              correspondences between their respective local representations of information
              and activities. The dominant approaches to this (standards for representation
              and interchange, and translation to and from common base interlingua) depend on
              pre-established languages and rules for representing information and exchanging
              it. More importantly, theories that underpin these approaches depend on the
              prior existence of these structures and standards. Consequently, most effort
              goes into designing the standards and rules, rather than questioning the
              validity of these approaches as a whole or looking for a truly new and more
              flexible alternative. This project investigates a new, exploratory, dynamic
              approach, based on the evolution of interaction languages. The idea is to
              reverse the dominant picture described above, and to use interaction as the
              vehicle for creating emergent, dynamic bridges among information worlds. The
              eventual aim is to provide robust theories and techniques for the co-evolution
              of lexicons, syntaxes, grammars, semantics and eventually even higher-order
              social structures such as organizational forms and cultures (treated as
              information processing media) in distributed interaction. The new approach will
              improve the handling of openness, and will detail mechanisms and limits of
              language evolution, so we know just how heterogeneity will be bridgeable with
              limited resources or time. The research will a) investigate language
              generation/evolution in human collaborative settings, b) investigate
              computational theories of the limits and mechanisms of language evolution, c)
              hypothesize bounded mechanisms to explain the observed and theoretically
              possible processes, and d) build preliminary computational models as proofs of
              concept and to explore actual mechanisms that can be useful in fully-automated
              contexts. 
 

