Title       : Computer Based Teaching in Epidemiology and Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1999  
File        : a9981001

Award Number: 9981001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erika Friedmann erikaf@brooklyn.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Tomita  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary  (99)
A hands-on technology-based approach to teaching
              epidemiology and statistics to undergraduates is made possible by the use of
              large national data sets, research data bases, the Internet, and appropriate
              software packages. Successful efforts from other institutions in the teaching
              of statistics using large, real-world data sets have been applied to a variety
              of disciplines and have been published in a variety of journals on statistical
              education.  These approaches are being adapted and applied to the teaching of
              epidemiology. An  update of the curricula and facilities enhances our largely
              minority students' learning and computer skills and contributes to the
              achievement of their goals and potential. Student interaction with meaningful,
              real data helps develop the facility to understand and interpret quantitative
              data. Real health data is obtained and analyzed using the Internet/World Wide
              Web and PC-based statistical software. Collaborative and active learning are
              integral components of the approach used in teaching.  These strategies promote
              greater quantitative reasoning and problem-solving skills, information
              retention, and the development of computer skills essential for minority
              graduates to be competitive in the job market.  The goals of the project are 1)
              to develop faculty computer skills necessary to teach the new statistics and
              epidemiology courses; 2) to integrate computer technology into the statistics
              and epidemiology curricula; 3) to construct a computer laboratory for
              undergraduate instruction in the newly developed courses; 4) to evaluate the
              impact of the new curriculum and disseminate the project findings.  DUE themes
              of integrating technology into undergraduate education, faculty development,
              and diversity are key components of this project.

