Title       : Radio Astronomical Studies with the BIMA Array
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a9981289

Award Number: 9981289
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard E. Barvainis                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $805074             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart N. Vogel vogel@astro.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee G. Mundy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew I. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1211      UNIV RADIO FACILITIES PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

AST 9981289
Vogel, Stuart N.

The
              Berkeley-Illinois-Maryland-Association (BIMA) array consists of ten
              6.1-meter-diameter telescopes operating as an interferometer at millimeter
              wavelengths.  It is located at U.C. Berkeley's Hat Creek Observatory in
              Northern California. The current proposal requests continued funding for the
              next three years for array operations, staff and student support, and
              instrumentation development.  Proposed areas of research include studies of
              molecular gas in galaxies, high-resolution imaging of circumstellar disks, and
              measurements of magnetic fields in molecular clouds.  In addition, imaging of
              the microwave background decrement toward clusters of galaxies at long
              millimeter wavelengths will be used to determine fundamental cosmological
              parameters. New instrumentation projects include water line monitors for active
              atmospheric phase correction, dual polarization MMIC receivers, broadening the
              IF bandwidth, and a new wideband digital correlator.

In terms of its broader
              societal impact, BIMA has over the years encouraged the participation of women
              graduate students and postdoctoral fellows at a rate much higher than the
              average for the field of astronomy.  In addition, BIMA maintains an extensive
              public outreach effort at its Hat Creek Observatory site, including a walk-in
              visitor's program, formal tours for groups, media tours and interviews, public
              lectures, a job-shadow program for high school students, and an annual open
              house for the general public. BIMA staff estimate that 1000 visitors come to
              the observatory per year.  

The Principal Investigators for the three BIMA
              awards are Dr. Leo Blitz (University of California at Berkeley), Dr. Lewis
              Snyder (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign), and Dr. Stuart Vogel
              (University of Maryland at College Park).


