Title       : Immunoglobulin Genetics in Non-Eutherian Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a9981960

Award Number: 9981960
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Miller rdmiller@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1112,1136,5978,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The study of immunoglobulin (Ig) genetics in a wide range of vertebrate species
              is essential for understanding the evolution and diversity of the adaptive
              immune responses in vertebrates. Until very recently, information on mammalian
              Igs has been limited almost exclusively to one of the three mammalian Orders,
              the eutherians or placental mammals.  The overall goal of this study is to
              describe the genetic organization and mechanisms of expression that shape the
              antibody repertoires in metatherians (marsupials) and to extend these studies
              into prototherians (egg laying monotremes).  The first specific aim is to
              determine those sequences in the opossum germline that code for the variable
              (V), diversity (D), joining (J) and constant (C) regions for Ig heavy chains,
              and V, J, and C regions for each family of light chains.  This will be achieved
              using cosmid and phage-based cloning strategies.  Resulting data will provide
              necessary information to determine the contributions of combinatorial
              diversity, somatic mutation and gene conversion for generation of Ig diversity
              in this species. In addition, although IgM, IgG, IgE, and IgA have been
              identified in marsupial species, IgD has not.  Therefore, the presence and
              expression of IgD will be determined for the opossum using cosmid based genomic
              walking.  The second specific aim is to characterize the Ig genes of two
              monotreme species, the platypus and echidna.  No Ig gene sequences or their
              heavy and light chain organization are currently available for these species. 
              Emphasis will be placed on light chains since patterns of light chain
              duplication are among the most variable across vertebrate orders.  The third
              aim is to analyze Ig sequences from a wide range of marsupials from both the
              Americas and Australasia to determine patterns of evolution.  Preliminary
              analyses of heavy chain variable region sequences from three marsupial species
              show an unusual pattern of sequence homogeneity or convergence. The project
              will provide information on the evolution of the mammalian immune system and
              will help resolve questions on the systematics of the three mammalian Orders.
              The results as a whole will provide insights into the genomic evolution of Ig
              genes in mammals not possible with comparisons of only humans and common
              laboratory species. The project will involve students at all levels of
              training: postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate.  Students will gain
              research experience, will participate in the publication and presentation of
              the results, and will have the opportunity to collaborate with colleagues in
              Australia, New Zealand, and the United States.


