Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Sources, Acquisition and Use of Algal Lipids by
               Herbivorous Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9981677

Award Number: 9981677
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27550              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Linn Montgomery Linn.Montgomery@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0521700   Marine Resources                        
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9981677
Montgomery

This award supports a two year collaborative research
              project between Professor Linn Montgomery of Northern Arizona University in
              Flagstaff and Professor Heisuke Nakagawa of Hiroshima University in Japan.  The
              researchers will be undertaking a study of the sources, acquisition, and use of
              algal lipids by herbivorouos fishes.  In spite of multiple important functions
              served by lipids (fats and oils), nutritional studies of herbivorous animals
              tend to focus on either provision of energy through digestion of carbohydrates
              or on acquisition of protein required for growth.  Lipids constitute a large
              fraction of biological membranes, served as efficient energy-storage molecules,
              "spare" protein for growth and enzyme synthesis (rather than protein being
              degraded to meet energy demands).  They even reduce the overall cost of
              digesting and processing food, relative to protein-rich diets, because they are
              easy to digest and metabolize.  The researchers will test various hypotheses in
              a single geographic area and oceanographic system (the Japanese islands).  In
              addition, most studies of lipid composition of fish tissues focus on muscle and
              frequently provide no information about seasonal changes.  This research would
              compare lipid composition in transport (plasma), storage (fat depots),
              metabolizing (liver) and other tissues (muscle, nerve), and would do so in both
              summer and winter to detect likely maximum differences.  Finally, the
              collaborators will survey subsistence and commercial fishers to identify
              herbivorous fish taken and document any general or seasonal preferences which
              might relate to lipid quality or quantity.    

The project brings together
              the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
              capabilities.  Results of the research will assess, in a preliminary way, how
              variation in lipid composition among species, seasons or geographic locations
              may be reflected in differential use of these fishes for food among local
              subsistence or small-scale commercial fisheries.  Results will also have
              implications for dietary recommendations for humans, particularly those
              relating to intake of various long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids known to
              affect cardiovascular disease, certain cancers, and other health conditions. 
              This research advances international human resources through the participation
              of a postdoc and graduate student.  Through the exchange of ideas and
              technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote
              international understanding and cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish
              results of the research in scientific journals and on their web page
              (HTTP://www2.nau.edu/~wim).


