Title       : WebScience: Creating an Active Learner Classroom with WWW Technology to Improve
               Introductory Science and Mathematics Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1999  
File        : a9981111

Award Number: 9981111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149697             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew D. Gavrin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey X. Watt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen Marrs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Blake, Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Other Sciences NEC  (99)
PROJECT SUMMARY

Problem: Despite calls for reform
              in science and mathematics education, most students sit passively while
              professors' lecture. This "sage on stage" mode of education is known to be less
              effective than active-learner methods. As a result, many college-educated
              people lack the scientific literacy needed to keep up in the workplace and to
              participate in public debate. This problem is especially damaging as it affects
              pre-service teachers. Poor teacher preparation creates a "cycle of illiteracy"
              as underprepared teachers promote new generations of underprepared
              students.

Objectives: We are using a classroom tested strategy that fosters
              active learning and communication among faculty and students in five
              introductory and upper division courses using the World Wide Web (WWW).  During
              the 3-year implementation period, we will benefit over 8,000 students including
              SMET majors, pre-service teachers, and students satisfying general science
              requirements.  The project is focusing on increased learning by both weak and
              strong students, increased retention, and improved problem-solving, critical
              thinking, teamwork and communication skills.  It is also focused on pre-service
              teachers, exposing them to new pedagogies, and encouraging them to begin
              teaching as student mentors.

Methods: This project is a large scale
              adaptation of Just-in-Time Teaching (JiTT), a system that integrates technology
              with active learning. JiTT was developed for physics courses at IUPUI and the
              US Air Force Academy with support from the NSF Division of Undergraduate
              Education (DUE 975 2365) and has been adopted at 12 other institutions as of
              Spring, 1999.  In this project, JiTT is being adapted and implemented in
              chemistry, biology and mathematics courses. In the JiTT approach, students use
              the WWW to receive and answer preparatory questions a few hours before each
              class.  Participating members of the faculty use these student responses to
              structure lessons for the next class meeting. Thus, students participate in a
              class that is based on their own prior knowledge.  JiTT also uses the web to
              deliver enrichment materials and to increase interaction among students and
              faculty.  The project is working with other members of the faculty to help them
              to learn the JiTT system, and the project will institute further faculty
              development efforts as the project matures. 

