Title       : Development of Active-Learning Curricular Materials in Thermodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a9981140

Award Number: 9981140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149479             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Meltzer dem@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Greenbowe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) This project is creating new active-learning curricular materials
              for the study of thermodynamics, which would have a direct impact on
              instruction both in physics and chemistry at the introductory and intermediate
              juniors level. The motivation for the creation of these new materials is
              research on student learning which suggests that instruction utilizing only
              lecture classes and standard recitations and labs results in relatively small
              increases in most students' understanding of fundamental concepts in physics
              and chemistry. The materials being developed can be described as guided-inquiry
              problem sets. They are carefully designed both to elicit common student
              difficulties regarding the subjects under study, and then to lead students to
              confront these difficulties head-on with a tightly focused and strategically
              sequenced series of questions and exercises. An integral feature of these
              exercises is to require students to explain their reasoning process with short
              written statements. In the course of working through these questions and
              exercises, students are guided to resolve their difficulties and confusion and
              to attain a firm grasp on the targeted concepts. The material consists of a
              tightly linked set of (1) brief textual expositions in highly "interactive"
              format, (2) multiple-choice, concept-oriented questions for use with classroom
              communication systems in large classes, (3) structured series of questions that
              lead students to elicit and then resolve conceptual difficulties, and finally
              (4) exercises to strengthen understanding. The emphasis throughout will be on
              qualitative reasoning and mastery of fundamental concepts. A great deal of
              pictorial, diagrammatic, and graphical material is incorporated. The
              effectiveness of the materials being rigorously assessed by continual in-class
              use and redesign, in conjunction with evaluation of student learning gains.
              Undergraduate students who plan to become high-school teachers are involved in
              the design and testing process, thereby gaining valuable preparation for their
              future professional activities.


