Title       : SGER: Development of a Novel Fiber-Optic Vorticity Probe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1999  
File        : a9981285

Award Number: 9981285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60235              (Estimated)
Investigator: Penger Tong ptong@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce J. Ackerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9981285
Tong

This SGER project from an EPSCoR state describes a new approach
              to fiber-optic laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV). An LDV probe will be developed
              to measure one component of the time- and space-resolved vorticity vector in a
              classical or quantum fluid.  The project will build a compact and robust
              fiber-optic probe consisting of four sets of optical fibers and couplers, which
              can simultaneously measure different velocity components of four closely spaced
              locations in the flow. The vorticity probe will be very much like commercial
              fiber-optic LDV probe and has all their advantages. The new scheme will have
              the important additional advantages of high spatial resolution, fast temporal
              response, and ease of use. The probe will be non intrusive and should be
              capable of measuring the flow vorticity with a spatial resolution down to 5 mm.
              The project, if successful, might be commercialized and could have a
              significant impact on the study of turbulence phenomena. The high-risk,
              high-payoff project offers excellent training opportunities for students and
              involves state-of-the-art instrumentation in the area of the physics of
              turbulence.
%%%
This SGER project from an EPSCoR state will develop a new
              fiber optic technique to measure the vorticity, or whirlpools, that arise in
              fluids because of turbulent motion. The approach has all the advantages of
              currently available fiber-optic methodology but in addition provides high
              spatial resolution, fast temporal response, and ease of use. It is non
              intrusive and capable of measuring the flow vorticity with a spatial resolution
              down to 5 mm. The project, if successful, might be commercialized and could
              have a significant impact on the study of turbulence phenomena. The high-risk,
              high-payoff project offers excellent training opportunities for students and
              involves state-of-the-art instrumentation in the area of the physics of
              turbulence.


