Title       : Evolution of Host Plant Use by Hawaiian Planthoppers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a9981513

Award Number: 9981513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200054             (Estimated)
Investigator: George K. Roderick roderick@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9981513
Roderick

When organisms colonize or invade new habitats, their
              biology can change in dramatic ways.  This process, called adaptation, is often
              critical to the success of biological organisms when faced with new
              environments.  One way that plant-feeding insects can change when entering new
              habitats is to switch to feeding on new and different types of plants.  A
              striking example of this type of change is seen in a group of sap-feeding
              insects called planthoppers in the family Delphacidae.  Most delphacids
              world-wide are specialized to feed solely on grasses and sedges (both
              monocots).  Planthopper species in this group include notable pests of rice and
              maize.  After colonizing the islands of the Pacific, where there are relatively
              few native grasses and sedges, these insects have evolved to feed on an amazing
              variety of host plants.  In fact, different species of planthoppers now feed on
              plants in a total of 28 plant families, mostly dicots, in Hawaii alone. 
              Similar patterns are found on other Pacific archipelagos, including the Society
              Islands and the Marquesas in French Polynesia.

This project will use
              information from DNA sequences to understand the pattern of changes that must
              have taken place for these insects to switch hosts.  In addition, the results
              will shed light on the so-called adaptive radiation of insects which have now
              diversified in concert with these hosts within Hawaii and the insular Pacific. 
              The project takes advantage of the historical temporal "snapshots" provided by
              the geological history of Pacific archipelagos such as Hawaii.  The research
              also focuses on the diverse, yet little studied, endemic terrestrial fauna of
              this region.

As part of this research, a graduate student and a postdoctoral
              fellow will be trained in the biology and systematics of this group of insects
              (the Delphacidae) and in particular, the tribe Delphacini, a taxonomic group of
              both great economic and scientific importance.



