Title       : Microbial Processes at Interfaces Affect NAPL Distributions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a9981494

Award Number: 9981494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345137             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stefan J. Grimberg grimberg@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan E. Powers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9981494  Grimberg  The remediation of dense non-aqueous phase liquids (DNAPLs)
              in subsurface environments is often limited by the heterogeneous distribution
              of the organic fluid.  The overall goal of this research is to quantify the
              nature, extent and significance of changes in NAPL-water interfacial processes
              that result from the presence of an active microbial community.  It is
              hypothesized that interfacial phenomena in NAPL-water-mineral systems undergo
              dynamic changes as biological exudates are produced or microorganisms adhere at
              interfaces.  For example, reductions in adhesion tension would reduce the entry
              pressure for a nonwetting NAPL to enter a pore, resulting in the potential
              distribution of NAPL in smaller pore spaces than would otherwise be expected. 
              Due to the transient nature of the microbial growth and overall adsorption
              reactions, it is expected that capillary flow could also be very transient. 
              Results of this effort could potentially be used to increase the accessiblility
              and, therefore, the recovery of DNAPL during remediation efforts.  Three
              specific tasks have been identified: (1) Quantify the rates and define
              conditions under which dynamic changes in the interfacial processes occur in
              the presence of biological activity, (2) Characterize the primary mechanisms of
              the biological effects and (3) Quantify the significance of these dynamic
              processes on the flow of NAPLs in porous media.  The research work to be
              conducted will provide a 
better understanding of the mechanisms governing the
              migration of NAPLs under environmentally significant conditions, which will
              allow for an improved assessment of potential environmental impacts and public
              risk of NAPL release to the environment.  Modeling results will provide a
              framework for quantifying complexities asssociated with NAPL mixtures, the
              presence of natural surface-active materials, and bacterial adhesion.  Results
              will therefore improve predictive tools, such as multiphase contaminant
              transport models that might predict conditions that result in drainage of NAPL
              into areas of higher permeability, thereby increasing the potential
              effectiveness of remediation efforts.***

