Title       : CONFERENCE: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Conference on The Cell Cycle to be
               held on May 17-21, 2000 in Cold Spring Harbor, NY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9981194

Award Number: 9981194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory meeting on the Cell Cycle is held bi-annually
              and is widely considered to be the most comprehensive ongoing meeting devoted
              exclusively to developments in the field of cell cycle control. The Cold Spring
              Harbor series of cell cycle meetings have been uniformly successful and have
              become one of the most important international forums for the discussion and
              criticism of progress in the cell cycle field. The 2000 meeting will highlights
              progress in understanding the controls of initiation of DNA replication, as
              well as initiation of and exit from mitosis into the succeeding cell cycle or
              resting state. The conference will also highlight the impact that cell cycle
              research has on understanding mechanisms that control cellular differentiation,
              programmed cell death, senescence, tumorigenesis, and transcription. The nexus
              between cell cycle control and these other biological processes continues to be
              a focus of these meetings. Platform presentations will be selected entirely
              from submitted abstracts, and strong emphasis will be placed upon participation
              by graduate students and post-doctoral fellows.


