Title       : National Dissemination of Field-Tested Classroom Assessment Techniques in
               Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology for Postsecondary Faculty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a9981155

Award Number: 9981155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $538992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Zeilik zeilik@la.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Mathieu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) Assessment drives learning. But teachers cannot assess
              effectively unless they can access and implement proven techniques. In
              1998-1999, a team of science faculty and education researchers worked together
              at the National Institute for Science Education (NISE) and created the
              Field-tested Learning Assessment Guide, or the FLAG. This Web-based resource is
              aimed at "jump starting" the implementation of alternative classroom
              assessments. The target audience is teachers in science, mathematics,
              engineering, and technology (SMET) courses at all types of post-secondary
              institutions. Efforts to disseminate information about FLAG are especially
              focused on reaching those who are eager to improve their courses and
              incorporate assessment of student learning outcomes in that process. An
              easy-to-use classroom assessment resource coupled with nationwide distribution
              will empower current and future SMET faculty to catalyze change on a national
              level.

This project aims at three key goals. One is the national
              dissemination of the FLAG. The project plans to capitalize on natural outlets
              in SMET professional societies, national education organizations, workshop
              developers, and faculty development organizations. The ongoing network of
              alliances between the NISE and such organizations provides a foundation from
              which to build these relationships. The second objective is a major expansion
              of the FLAG. The current FLAG contains an excellent set of classroom assessment
              techniques (CATs) but only a limited set of tools. The project is in the
              process of acquiring an extensive population of field-tested tools from a
              diverse set of SMET disciplines. The FLAG team is also working to upgrade the
              FLAG resource to a highly interactive environment so as to incorporate users in
              this process. The third goal is to provide a permanent, funded home for the
              FLAG and its development team at the University of New Mexico, with an ongoing
              collaboration with the NISE.
