Title       : Design and Implementation of Rich Frameworks for Web-Based Learning in
               Introductory Earth Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2000  
File        : a9981150

Award Number: 9981150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74799              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce E. Herbert   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah W. Bednarz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Gibson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew G. Stricker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42) This proposal addresses the need to increase our understanding of
              the relationships between Web-based learning, the development of higher-order
              skills, and an understanding of the nature of science among students enrolled
              in introductory Earth science classes.  We hypothesize that Web-Based Learning
              (WBL) is most effective in supporting the development of higher-order skills in
              learners when WBL modules employ learner manipulation of data, the development
              and testing of conceptual models based on available evidence, learner exposure
              to authentic, complex and ill-constrained problems; and contain explicit
              instruction in cognitive and metacognitive strategies.  The project objectives
              include (1) the design of two interactive, intelligent, database-driven WBL
              modules based on problem-based learning and explicit instruction in cognitive
              and metacognitive strategies, (2) the implementation of the WBL modules in
              introductory Earth science classes, and (3) the evaluation of the efficacy of
              WBL to support the development of higher order skills in learners and increase
              student understanding of the nature of science.
Both modules ask students to
              pose hypotheses, acquire, organize, and analyze Earth science data and model
              results, and solve authentic, ill-constrained problems.  Design elements
              incorporated within the modules help students with the exercises.  These
              elements include web-based concept mapping software to develop cognitive and
              metacognitive skills and intelligent tutor systems that individualizes
              instruction.  The first module has students explore the interactions of seismic
              waves with typical Earth structures and how these waves have been used to
              develop models for the internal structure of the Earth.  Exercises are
              organized around student manipulation of simulations of seismic waves behavior
              in various models of Earth structures.  Finally, students are also introduced
              to the global networks of seismic stations that form the basis for modern data
              acquisition.  The second module has students explore the relationships between
              geology, human activities, and water quality in the South Platte River of
              Colorado, Wyoming and Nebraska.  In this module, students are asked to organize
              and interpret USGS water quality observations within the watershed based upon
              maps of geology and land-use.  The modules are evaluated using qualitative and
              quantitative techniques, including the analysis and review of (1) online
              student surveys, (2) student progress through the modules using server logs,
              (3) student portfolios that include answers to problem sets and metacognitive
              exercises, and (4) student responses collected in small focus groups of
              students interviewed after completion of the modules. Dissemination of the
              modules developed in this Proof of Concept project is through the Internet.
