Title       : A Virtual GIS Laboratory for Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1999   
File        : a9981045

Award Number: 9981045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42349              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stacy Warren stacy.warren@mail.ewu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Washington Univ
	      
	      Cheney, WA  990042444    509/458-6200

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42)   
This project adapts four recommendations by the 1995 First
              National Conference on the Education Applications of GIS in the implementation
              of our Virtual GIS Laboratory by making specific improvements in curriculum
              materials, equitable access to data, teacher training, and interdisciplinary
              collaboration. Curriculum revisions and technological improvements have
              occurred through the integration of GIS into the classroom by introducing a
              four-course sequence within the Geography Department.  This shifts the focus
              toward the interdisciplinary development of GIS problem-solving applications by
              adapting recent pedagogical innovations including: 1) WEBGIS as conceptualized
              by Kenneth E. Foote and Anthony P. Kirvan, 2) the virtual classrooms
              illustrated by the Virtual Geography Department developed by the University of
              Texas at Austin, 3) the NCGIA home page that forms part of the revised Core
              Curriculum, and 4) project-oriented GIS.  A newly instituted state-wide site
              license with the ESRI Corporation guarantees all students and faculty easy
              access to GIS software.  Faculty workshops presented in this project aid
              faculty across campus in incorporating GIS technology and Virtual GIS
              Laboratory products into their curricula.  The equipment is used to adapt the
              existing GIS laboratory, housed in the Geography Department, to host a web
              server for a Virtual GIS Laboratory home page and to enable GIS students to
              make available data sets using ARC/INFO and ArcView software.  From the Virtual
              GIS Laboratory home page, users can request (1) advanced GIS data collection
              and analysis in the form of a finished product ready for classroom use and (2)
              GIS data access and consulting support for those already working on their own
              GIS projects.  The home page also includes additional local data sets, a FAQ
              appropriate to university concerns, a discussion list, and sample GIS
              demonstrations.  A GIS Advisory Panel oversees management, use, and assessment
              of the Virtual GIS Laboratory.  This project is a pedagogical model for
              interdisciplinary GIS education adaptable at regional comprehensive
              universities nationally. 
