Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY:Common Mycorrhizal Networks - Active or Passive Channels?
               Interacting Roles of Mycorrhizal Fungi, Plants and Soil Resources in Carbon &
               Nutrient Transfers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a9981711

Award Number: 9981711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Knute Nadelhoffer                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3219499            (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline S. Bledsoe csbledsoe@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Rizzo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Zasoski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Horwath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1366,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Bledsoe
9981711

Researchers at the University of California at Davis and
              Riverside and from Southern Oregon University will examine how the spatial and
              temporal distributions of soil resources interact with mycorrhizal fungi and
              plant roots to form networks belowground (common mycorrhizal networks, CMNs). 
              The central hypothesis is that flows of carbon and nutrients in CMNs are not
              wholly determined either by plants or fungi.  The magnitude and direction of
              flows are determined by interactions between plant species, mycorrhizal fungal
              species and soil resources -- resources whose availability changes in complex
              ways in space and time.  Changes in any one of the 3 components will result in
              altered CMN structure and function.  The researchers predict that changes in
              the 3 components will significantly alter fungal and plant species composition
              and soil resource distribution, resulting in long-term changes in plant
              community dynamics, soil stability, nutrient cycling rates, and ecosystem
              production. 

Research activities, which are being supported by the
              Directorate for Biological Sciences, and the Division of Mathematical Sciences,
              and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for
              Mathematics and Physical Sciences, among institutions will be coordinated using
              three innovative approaches. These include student and post-doctoral researcher
              rotations among institutions, annual field campaigns integrating participants
              from all institutions, and web sites to disseminate information. This approach
              will train students to think broadly about complex systems and about the value
              of applying multiple skills and tools to complex problems.

The research will
              enhance understanding of the dynamic interactions between oaks and grasses in
              oak woodlands in California, perhaps allowing more successful preservation and
              restoration of these woodlands. By comparing biocomplexity above and
              below-ground in a model system, the researchers expect to learn general
              principles about how above and below ground systems are linked. 

