Title       : Surface Nucleation and Growth of Silicides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2002   
File        : a9981779

Award Number: 9981779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $353206             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Bennett peter.bennett@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses atomic level nucleation and epitaxy of silicides with
              emphasis on Co and Ti/Si(100). The nucleation and growth of silicide surface
              structures in the early stages of overlayer/interface formation on silicon will
              be characterized using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), low energy electron
              microscopy (LEEM) and surface X-ray diffraction (SXRD). The aim is to quantify
              the fundamental parameters that affect overlayer growth including surface
              diffusion, binding energies to steps and islands and interlayer transport. STM
              will be used to measure island nucleation density over a wide range of
              temperature and flux, with the aim to link atomic scale behavior at low
              temperature and flux with macroscopic behavior at higher temperatures and flux
              closer to practical growth conditions via modeling with the classical
              nucleation theory. Multilayer growth and associated interface roughness and
              island coarsening will be monitored in real time using LEEM and SXRD. 
%%%
              
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials
              science with high technological relevance. These studies will improve the
              fundamental understanding of metal/silicon surface reactions, which are key to
              several issues in silicon-based microelectronics, including shallow junction
              contacts and nanoscale interconnects. Experimental tools are now available to
              allow atomic level observation of elementary surface processes which when
              better understood allow advances in fundamental science and technology. An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area. 
*** 

