Title       : Molecular Population Genetics of Coat-Color Variation in Pocket Mice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9981810

Award Number: 9981810
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Nachman nachman@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9981810
Nachman

The primary objective of the proposed research is to
              identify
mutations responsible for naturally occurring coat-color variation
              in
populations of light and dark rock pocket mice that live on light and
              dark
substrates.  In particular, the proposed research will (1)
              document
variation in coat color of mice and environmental heterogeneity in
              soil
color for six paired localities in New Mexico and Arizona where each
              pair
consists of one light and one dark locality, (2) conduct a screen
              to
identify genes contributing to the observed phenotypic differences,
              (3)
characterize mutant alleles at the loci implicated in
              phenotypic
differences, and (4) characterize genetic variation at coat-color
              loci in
population samples from dark and light localities.  Together, these
              studies
will (1) identify the number and relative effects of different
              genes
contributing to coat color variation, (2) determine whether
              pigmentation
differences are due primarily to structural changes, regulatory
              changes, or
both, (3) determine whether dark coat-color has evolved
              independently in
different populations, and if it has, determine whether the
              same or
different mutations are involved, and (4) determine the extent to
              which
selection at one site in the genome has shaped patterns of
              genetic
variation at linked neutral sites.
     A central goal in biology is
              to explicitly connect genotype with
phenotype for traits that are ecologically
              important.  This has been an
elusive goal because the genetic basis of most
              traits is not well
understood.  Coat-color variation in rodents is a classic
              example of
phenotypic variation in response to local adaptation: in many
              species,
dorsal pelage color closely matches the color of the soil on which
              the
animals live.  A century of research on the genetics of coat color in
              house
mice has produced a rich database of candidate genes and mutant
              effects.
The combination of striking phenotypic variation in coat-color of
              pocket
mice (Chaetodipus intermedius) and candidate pigmentation loci cloned
              in
the laboratory mouse presents an unparalleled opportunity to
              investigate
the genetic variation underlying a key morphological trait in
              nature.


