Title       : The Roles of Aerosols and Entrainment and Mixing in the Warm Rain Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a9981937

Award Number: 9981937
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193139             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Raymond raymond@kestrel.nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. Blyth  (Principal Investigator former)
              Sonia G. Lasher-Trapp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      801 Leroy Place
	      Socorro, NM  878014796    505/835-5690

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               A substantial amount of the rain in the tropics and midlatitudes falls from
              clouds that are not cold enough to contain ice crystals.  This so-called "warm
              rain" is produced by the collision and coalescence of cloud droplets, which are
              formed by condensation.  The time required for precipitation to develop is
              determined by the concentration of cloud droplets and their tendency to come
              together.  A typical droplet in a non-precipitating cloud has a diameter of
              about 10 mm.  Drops this small do not collide with each other frequently enough
              to account for the formation of rain.  The creation of drizzle drops (100 mm)
              in the times observed (about 20 min after the cloud appears) requires the
              presence of some drops of about 20 mm diameter.  These fall fast enough
              relative to the smaller droplets to collide with them and form still larger
              drops.  In general, the cloud droplet populations that promote collisions and
              coalescence and can thereby initiate precipitation are those containing a
              spread of droplet sizes: the greater the spread the greater the collision rate
              and the faster the conversion of cloud to drizzle and rain.  A classical
              problem in the theory of warm rain is that condensation acting on what are
              thought to be realistic populations of condensation nuclei does not produce the
              broad droplet spectra that are conducive to collisions and coalescence.  This
              problem is approached by a combination of numerical modeling and the analysis
              of observations.  The guiding hypothesis is that the broadening of droplet
              spectra may be explained by the mixing of cloudy air parcels with different
              histories.  The research plan includes computing an ensemble of trajectories of
              droplets that start from different positions within a developing cloud but
              reach the same place at the same time.  Because of turbulence and different
              growth histories, the source region can be large.  The analysis combines the
              idea of turbulently-perturbed growth trajectories with the airflow and
              parameterized precipitation generated by large eddy simulation.  A novel aspect
              of the work is that the calculations are performed backwards in time: the
              history of a drop of a given size is traced back from a prescribed starting
              point to an original position at cloud base.  Not all sizes will turn out as
              originating at cloud base.  An iterative procedure is used to determine which
              sizes can be ascribed to droplets that form at cloud base.  These, then, are
              the sizes that are consistent with the model.   The model is evaluated by
              comparing the predicted drop sizes with those measured by aircraft in the Small
              Cumulus Microphysics Study conducted in Florida in 1995. 
