Title       : Collaborative Research: Responses of Mammalian Herbivores to Spatial
               Heterogeneity Expressed at Multiple Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2002  
File        : a9981368

Award Number: 9981368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349998             (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Thompson Hobbs nthobbs@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Wunder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Collaborative Research: Responses of Mammalian Herbivores to 
Spatial
              Heterogeneity Expressed at Multiple Scales

Project Summary

Vertebrate
              herbivores (animals like deer and cattle and prairie dogs) are important parts
              of the earth's natural systems.  These animals affect the types of plants that
              grow on landscapes, they influence the way that materials are cycled between
              soil and plants, and they control the behavior of important, large-scale
              processes like wildfire.  Many of these effects of herbivores on ecosystems
              depend on the way they move while they are foraging.  Herbivore movement, in
              turn, seems to respond to spatial patterns in vegetation.  However, although
              responses of herbivores to spatial heterogeneity in plants is fundamental to
              understanding the role of herbivores in nature, these responses remain poorly
              understood.  We propose experiments to understand how herbivores of various
              sizes (ranging from mice to elk) respond to complex patterns in the spatial
              arrangement of foods.  These experiments will answer 3 basic questions:

Are
              there particular sources of heterogeneity that exert a predominant influence on
              herbivore movement patterns?
Does heterogeneity in foods allow herbivores to
              forage more efficiently, that is, to obtain more energy and nutrients per unit
              of foraging effort?
Are there simple mathematical models that can faithfully
              represent the responses of herbivores to spatial patterns in plants?

This
              work promises to reveal an important interaction in ecological systems. 
              Describing this interaction will advance understanding of nature and will
              enhance our ability to manage processes that are vital to human economies.

