Title       : Solvation and Reaction Dynamics in Heterogeneous Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a9981539

Award Number: 9981539
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $464000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Branka M. Ladanyi bl@bibm.MFBL.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Branka Ladanyi of Colorado State University is supported by a grant from the
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to investigate solvation and
              reaction dynamics in the polar solvent pool of reverse micelles and in polar
              solvent clusters.  In both cases research will focus on how the number of polar
              molecules within a cluster or a reverse micelle affects solvation and
              reactivity.   The primary goal is to explain observations of large differences
              from bulk solvation.  In the case of reverse micelles, Ladanyi will investigate
              how the size of the water pool and other factors, such as counterion identity
              and solute location within the reverse micelle, affect solvation dynamics and
              thermodynamics. This will be done using molecular dynamics simulations and
              analyzing the trajectory data to identify the important solvation mechanisms
              and their dependence on the heterogeneity of the solvent environment.   A
              hierarchy of models, starting from an atomistic representation of only the
              interior region and progressing to a fully atomistic representation of the
              surfactant tails and the nonpolar solvent, will be used in these studies.  In
              the case of solvation and reactivity in polar clusters, Ladanyi will extend her
              previous work on solvation and photodissociation dynamics of solvated sodium
              iodide to other alkali halides, primarily to sodium chloride, and to other
              polar solvents, in particular acetonitrile and ammonia.  The goal of this work
              is to determine, at the molecular level, how interactions with varying numbers
              of polar solvent molecules affect the electronic states of the solute and the
              consequences of this for equilibrium solvation and photochemistry.  Monte Carlo
              and nonadiabatic molecular dynamics simulation methods will be used in this
              work.  Much of the work will be used to interpret the experimental results
              obtained by Nancy Levinger on reverse micelles. 

Since most chemical
              reactions happen in the presence of solvents, understanding and predicting the
              effects of solvents on reactions has been a longstanding goal of chemical
              research.  In recent years there has been a great deal of progress towards the
              molecular level understanding of solvent effects on chemical reactivity. 
              Theoretical and computational methods are now making it possible to study
              increasingly complex systems and phenomena.  Theoretical models are extending
              to heterogeneous chemical environments that occur in biological and
              technologically important processes.  Ladanyi will perform simulations on polar
              solvation in reverse micelles that have significant technological importance,
              and that serve as model systems for understanding solvation in biological
              systems.
