Title       : Undergraduate Electronic Materials Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9981055

Award Number: 9981055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57432              (Estimated)
Investigator: Toby J. Cumberbatch toby@cooper.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cooper Union
	      Albert Nerken School of Engrg
	      New York, NY  100037120    212/353-4177

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Electrical (55)

The role of materials science in our society
              has grown dramatically in recent years. Since the 1960s, it is in electrical
              engineering that materials (i.e., solid state) have had their most significant
              impact. For future engineers, understanding electronic materials is a vital yet
              difficult undertaking. It entails learning complex new concepts, which should
              be introduced early in engineering studies through simple, sophisticated, yet
              well-designed projects and classroom demonstrations. To that end, The Cooper
              Union is creating an undergraduate Electronic Materials Laboratory portable,
              modular, and adaptable - to serve as a platform for a new electronic materials
              curriculum.

Much of the new laboratory's equipment is often found in applied
              physics laboratories, yet it has clear application to electronic engineering.
              Equipment includes a thin-film deposition system, sensitive electrical
              measuring equipment, an optical analysis system, and cryostats. Students will
              thus be able to fabricate simple solid state devices, such as solar cells, and
              characterize their behavior together with that of the bulk material over a wide
              range of temperatures. Cooper Union faculty can then evaluate the role of the
              instrumentation in relevant new interdisciplinary coursework, and demonstrate
              applicability at other schools of engineering. The laboratory is an integral
              part of chemistry and physics courses, thereby reaching every Cooper
              Union-engineering student.

To accommodate students' varying skill levels and
              different instructional purposes, the equipment is specially selected for its
              operation under automatic or manual control. Students are able to experiment
              freely and complete innovative projects that now only can be discussed. With
              the new lab, students can explore electrical and optical properties of varied
              crystalline and non-crystalline electronic materials, including the
              relationship between temperature and conductivity, and investigate principles
              of radiative recombination and band structure. The new lab is crucial in
              preparing students for the next millennium.

