Title       : Dynamics of Rotation and Scale Selection in Deep Convective Storms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9981130

Award Number: 9981130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $472935             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelvin K. Droegemeier kkd@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yvette P. Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is focussed on study of deep convective storm dynamics with
              emphasis on three related yet scientifically distinct problems.  The first
              concerns the tendency for some severe (supercell) storms to develop a
              succession of mesocyclones at fairly regular intervals.  This "cyclic
              mesocyclogenesis" has been observed in real storms and noted in some numerical
              simulations.  It is proposed to identify the conditions (both environmental and
              storm-induced) that delineate cyclic from non-cyclic storms.  In addition, the
              Principal Investigators will extend their previous work down to the tornado
              scale to study cyclic tornadogenesis with emphasis on multi-scale linkages
              between the tornado vortex circulation and that of the parent mesocyclone.
              

The second study seeks to understand the dynamics of storms and storm
              systems which, during all or part of their lifetime, move though environments
              comprising large horizontal and/or temporal variations in shear and/or
              stability.  Although environmental variability is known to play a key role in
              storm lifecycles, previous cloud model simulations have utilized a horizontally
              uniform base state environment.  The Principal Investigators will extend prior
              research by further investigating the dynamics associated with storm
              environmental transitions and, by combining variations in instability and shear
              as well as imposing temporal variations in the environment.  Additionally,
              comparisons will be drawn between model results and real storms, which
              demonstrated clear changes in behavior due to environmental
              variability.

Finally, the Principal Investigators will build upon their
              recent work in helicity dynamics and the turbulent nature of both shallow and
              deep convection in an effort to understand the dynamics of scale selection,
              organization and predictability within deep convective storms.  In prior
              research, simulated deep convection at various scales of initial forcing were
              used to determine whether convective storms evolve at the spatial scale of the
              initial forcing or instead evolved to some other preferred scale.  These
              "scale-forced" simulations were compared to other results in which convection
              was initiated by a field of random disturbances.  Preliminary findings, based
              on spectral and other analysis techniques, confirm that updrafts in the most
              supercell storms tend to be considerably larger in size then their less severe
              counterparts.  When the initial storms are forced at a particular spatial
              scale, they tend to retain a memory of that scale, with the retention time
              proportional to the scale of forcing.  Even when forced at scales much larger
              than the "natural or preferred scale," the supercell storms eventually settle
              into a scale larger than storms forced in weaker or zero shear.  The Principal
              Investigators will expand the simulation data set with emphasis on identifying
              the most significant theoretical length scales of the flow and relating their
              structure and energetics to simulated storm behavior.  Further, the Principal
              Investigators will seek to understand fundamental limits to storm and storm
              system predictability via a systematic analysis of error growth and propagation
              among scales.  The latter is of particular importance to future operational
              prediction models. 

