Title       : Systematics and Evolution of Nematode Family Rhabditidae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a9981632

Award Number: 9981632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Fitch david.fitch@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-9981632
David H. Fitch
Dr. David H. Fitch at New York University has been
              awarded a grant to study the evolutionary relationships among species in the
              nematode family Rhabditidae.  Habitat diversity and sheer abundance alone make
              Rhabditidae an important taxon, yet it is one of the most poorly understood
              animal groups in terms of biodiversity, phylogeny and evolution.  Recent
              evidence suggests that some agriculturally important parasites arose within
              Rhabditidae, elevating the importance of these otherwise "free-living"
              nematodes for research on the origins of parasites or directing searches for
              free-living models closely related to parasites.  Moreover, the family includes
              Caenorhabditis elegans, whose use as a model in developmental genetics has made
              that species one of the most intensively studied animals on Earth.  A phylogeny
              is required to test generalizations from this model and to bootstrap
              information on genome functionality from C. elegans to other Rhabditidae and
              other metazoan systems.  The phylogeny will also be required to test possible
              correlations between form and behavior, such as those between evolutionary
              changes in male tail morphology and male copulatory behavior.  Such
              correlations may to provide insight into possible preadaptations and modes of
              selection resulting in the diversity of rhabditid forms.

Morphological and
              molecular data will be used to infer a phylogeny for Rhabditidae.  Robust
              homology criteria derived from recent developmental and ultrastructural studies
              will be used in the analysis of morphological characters, such as features of
              the male copulatory bursa ("male tail").  Morphological data for all known (and
              some still-undescribed) taxa will be compiled in a collaboration with renowned
              rhabditid zoologist Walter Sudhaus (Freie Universitat Berlin).  Molecular data
              will be collected for at least two loci known to be phylogenetically
              informative at this taxonomic level, nearly complete sequences of 18S ribosomal
              RNA genes and partial sequences from the RNA Polymerase II locus.  Preliminary
              data suggest that all three data partitions provide congruent phylogenetic
              information, thus allowing a "total evidence" approach to reconstruct rhabditid
              phylogeny.


