Title       : Many-Body Information From Small-System Eigenstates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2001    
File        : a9981744

Award Number: 9981744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher L. Henley clh@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9981744
Henley

This grant supports projects in many-body theory and in
              frustrated 
antiferromagnets, all having a geometrical flavor.  Most
              importantly, 
a blocking renormalization group for general systems, using a
              
density-matrix truncation, will be tested in one and two dimensions.  
A new
              method will be developed for reducing quantum Hamiltonians, 
defined for
              blocks of a lattice, to noninteracting quasiparticles.  Nontrivial 
test
              models include a one-dimensional model with fractionally-charged
excitations,
              and free fermions in two dimensions.  Another many-body
project will study
              spinless fermions on the square lattice, with (large)
nearest-neighbor
              repulsion. Its phase diagram is surprisingly ill understood, 
considering that
              it is a sort of toy Hubbard model.  The first step will be 
analytic study of
              the charged antiphase stripes which seem to form when 
the half-filled system
              is lightly doped.  Finally, we will continue ongoing 
studies of (1)
              Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization of systems of a few spins 
(for large spin S); 
              (2) the critical state of the quantum dimer model, in 
which an interface
              representation yields all the low-energy states; and 
(3) dilution disorder
              which is perfect screened in classical Kagome
antiferromagnets and related
              magnets.
%%%
When the electrons are slowed down by the effects of very
              strong
electron-electron interactions, they show anomalous properties. 
              High
Tc superconductors and many other materials of current interest
              share
this property.  One part of this project is intended to bridge the gap
              
existing between purely theoretical frameworks and numerical simulations 
of
              these properties.  The idea is to explore what is referred to as a density
              
matrix renormalization group, limited so far to structures in which the
              electrons
are confined to move along chains, and generalize it  to the case
              (relevant 
to high-Tc's) in which they move within planes.  The initial
              exploratory work 
will concentrate on simplified test cases.  A separate
              project, using other 
methods, is to study a model of electrons with only one
              kind of spin; it is 
a simplified case of the Hubbard model of high-Tc
              materials,  and is 
expected to shed light on the way positive charges arrange
              themselves into 
"stripes" in underdoped high Tc's . Finally, we will continue
              ongoing studies 
of magnets (antiferromagnets, to be exact) with
              "frustration", meaning that 
the geometric arrangement of the atomic magnetic
              moments puts conflicting 
demands on their ordering pattern.  All projects in
              this grant  involve the 
application of geometry and spatial
              visualization.
***







