Title       : Computational and Visualization Laboratories for Chemistry, Biology, and
               Geography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9981161

Award Number: 9981161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81931              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hassimi Traore TraoreH@uww.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              P. T. Johns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Travis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sibdas Ghosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven W. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Whitewater
	      800 West Main
	      Whitewater, WI  531901705    414/472-1027

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99); Chemistry (12); Biological Sciences (61); Geography
              (88)

The primary aim of this project is to introduce Computational Chemistry
              into the science curriculum in order to rectify a major void in our current
              instructional programs. The importance of Computational Chemistry (Molecular
              Modeling) in the pharmaceutical and other chemical industries, as well as in
              academic research and teaching, has grown significantly in recent years. It is
              important that undergraduate students in the sciences learn about this
              fast-developing field. Therefore, a multipurpose computational chemistry
              laboratory is envisioned that impacts students from the freshman to the senior
              level. The major emphasis is in the Chemistry and Biological Sciences
              Departments, where several new experiments with computational experiences are
              being introduced; the Geography Department is also using the facility. The
              laboratory facility provides a large number of students on the campus an
              opportunity to complete a combination of visualization, mathematical and
              molecular modeling experiments as part of the chemistry curriculum, as well as
              curricula in Biological Sciences and Geography. The design of an advanced
              course in modeling offers to students a deeper understanding of underlying
              principles. The facility is also to be used by the other science departments
              and impacts science education across the curriculum. The PIs are modifying
              exercises from the science education literature and from contemporary research
              for adaptation and implementation at their institution.

The goal of the
              project is to provide students with the opportunity both to learn a variety of
              computational and modeling packages, some which are being taught through the
              existing Computer Center, and to use these packages as an aid to understanding
              chemical concepts. Specific modeling exercises being introduced into the
              participating Chemistry, Biology, and Geography classes are based on
              experiments identified from the literature on science education and from use of
              the World Wide Web, recent scientific advances, and emerging new
              methodologies.

In general, lower-level students in Chemistry and Biological
              Sciences use the laboratory to visualize concepts they learn about in their
              classes. Upper-level students also use the lab in this way but benefit further
              from an advanced course, devoted specifically to Molecular Modeling. This
              course is designed to examine molecular modeling theory, underlying assumptions
              and equations of molecular mechanics, semi-empirical and ab-initio quantum
              mechanics, and molecular dynamics/Monte Carlo methods. The course also
              investigates advanced problems such as the multiple minimum problem with
              flexible peptides, using both calculations and experimentation. Students in the
              Geography Department enrolled in remote sensing, meteorology and climatology
              courses use the computer for mathematical calculation and climate visualization
              activities.

A web-site is being created to make modeling software and
              databases available for at-home and in-lecture use by all participating
              departments. Capabilities afforded by the cluster are being made available to
              faculty members from across campus.


