Title       : SGER: Vertical Migration in Trichodesmium as a Mechanism for Phosphorus
               Acquisition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9981778

Award Number: 9981778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Garrison                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40611              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tracy A. Villareal tracy@utmsi.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The nitrogen-fixing prokaryote Trichodesmium is a widely distributed
              cyanobacteria in all warm oceans and is the dominant known source of planktonic
              nitrogen fixation in the ocean. Recent work has documented higher levels of
              nitrogen fixation by these cyanobacteria than historically reported, but these
              levels are still inadequate to meet the inputs required by geochemical budgets
              at oceanic sites.

The requirement for phosphorus to support nitrogen
              fixation is an understudied aspect of this problem. There is little evidence of
              phosphorus limitation in Trichodesmium despite low inorganic phosphorus
              concentrations (nanomolar range) at both oceanic time series stations (BATS and
              HOTS). Trichodesmium can use organic phosphorus, but concentrations are low as
              well and little is known about Trichodesmium's use of these pools.

One
              possible phosphorus source is migration to pools beneath the nutricline.
              Vertical migration has been documented in several non-flagellated eukaryotes in
              the open sea to provide access to subsurface nitrogen sources. Trichodesmium is
              known to buoyancy regulate and has the ascent/descent rates to accomplish such
              a migration for phosphorus. However, there is contradictory evidence as to
              whether migration occurs from both in physiological and compositional
              data.

The objective of this project is to examine the characteristics of
              Trichodesmium spp. in the field to determine if migration is actually
              occurring. Composition and rate measures to determine this include respiration
              rates, carbohydrate, protein, polyphosphate, CHN, particulate P, trichome
              buoyancy, and fluorescence yield via PAM fluorometry. Based on models of
              vertically migrating eukaryotes, these measures should vary predictably and
              significantly between ascending and descending cells if P-replenishment is
              occurring at depth. The program will utilize a Trichodesmium cruise previously
              funded off of Australia, and 1 cruise in the Gulf of Mexico to compare
              different populations. The project is not site specific, but rather is
              evaluating a behavior that has significant implications at both the BATS and
              HOTS stations.

At the conclusion of the project, the migration capacity of
              Trichodesmium will be confirmed or refuted. This will permit direct assessment
              of the role of vertical migration for P acquisition in supporting nitrogen
              fixation in the ocean and will be a significant advance in understanding the
              ecology of this important genus.

