Title       : Transformation of General Biology: Creating a Model for the 21st Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2000   
File        : a9981147

Award Number: 9981147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49977              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn A. Larsen llarsen@pcc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              April A. Fong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marc H. Walters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Micah Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susanne M. Christopher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland Comm Col
	      12000 SW 49th Avenue
	      Portland, OR  972197132    503/244-6111

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 

This project provides learner-centered instruction
              for non-science majors that promotes critical thinking, problem-solving skills,
              and creativity among students through the use of "high technology" (multimedia,
              virtual lab activities, and web-delivered instructional materials) and "high
              touch" (collaborative learning, active learning, directed wet laboratory
              activities, and small group sessions).  The focus of this project is on lecture
              and laboratory curriculum development, equipment acquisition, faculty
              development, and laboratory improvement.  The revitalized curriculum, enhanced
              teaching, and improved laboratory setting prepare students better for advanced
              science courses, teaching careers, technical training and, most importantly,
              improve science literacy and application in the home, workplace, and world. 
              The major project outcomes are:  (a) a revitalized, transformed General Biology
              Curriculum that includes a "high technology" and "high touch" approach leading
              to higher student retention and success in biology; (b) hands-on student and
              faculty experience with computers, the Internet, distance learning, WebCT,
              CD-ROM, DVD, and other advanced technology; (c) a Faculty Teaching and Learning
              Biology Resource Library for part-time and full-time faculty; (d) faculty
              development in application of current teaching and learning practices; (e)
              enhanced preparation of potential K-12 teachers by increasing knowledge of and
              access to technological resources (Penick, 1995); and (f) improved science
              literacy among students (Uno & Bybee, 1994).  This project builds on and adapts
              the NSF-funded Workshop Biology program at the University of Oregon that
              incorporated active and collaborative learning into the classroom.  The PCC
              model adapts elements of Workshop Biology into a community college setting with
              an added emphasis on student group work.


