Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY: Bacterial and Computational Experiments to Identify General
               Principles that Govern the Evolution of Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1999 
File        : a9981397

Award Number: 9981397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4050077            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Lenski lenski@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret A. Riley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christoph C. Adami  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1366,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Lenski et al.
9981397

The principal investigators define biocomplexity as
              the dynamic web of interactions among genes, organisms, and environments.  They
              will investigate the emergence of biocomplexity and examine its consequences
              for the performance of living organisms and ecological communities.  Parallel
              experiments will be performed with two very different systems, in order to
              study general principles.  One system employs bacteria, and the other system is
              digital.  The latter consists of special computer programs that self-replicate,
              mutate, and evolve novel sequences of instructions to solve problems.  One set
              of experiments will monitor the evolution of ecosystem complexity, in which a
              single progenitor diverges into multiple types that perform distinct functions
              by exploiting different resources.  Follow-up experiments will examine the
              effects of removing member species on the remainder of the community.  Another
              project will develop the software used for studying digital organisms into an
              educational tool.
This project, which is being supported by the Directorates
              for Biological Sciences, Computer Information Science and Engineering,
              Engineering, and by the division of Mathematical Sciences and the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities, will impact several scientific fields, and the
              findings may provide basic information useful for both environmental and
              biotechnological applications.  For example, ecologists may find principles
              useful for improving the performance of beneficial organisms in the
              environment.  Computer scientists may discover computational strategies,
              evolved by real organisms that can be employed in developing more complex
              software.  


