Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Optical Crystals for High-Power Nonlinear
               Optic and Laser Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9981422

Award Number: 9981422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14679              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas A. Keszler douglas.keszler@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0106000   Materials Research                      
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5918,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9981422
Keszler

This three-year award for U.S.-France collaboration in solid
              state chemistry and materials involves Douglas Keszler of Oregon State
              University, Gerard Aka of the Ecole Nationale Superieure de Chimie de Paris and
              an exchange of their graduate students.  The project, supported under the joint
              program of the National Science Foundation and the French National Center for
              Scientific Research (CNRS), focuses on the synthesis, crystal growth and study
              of optical crystals for generation of high-power coherent light.  A portion of
              the effort will be directed to the development of a borate family of nonlinear
              optical and laser materials.  These compounds can function as two crystals in
              one, i.e., as self-frequency doubling lasers.  They will study the
              structure-properties relationship and further tune physical properties through
              synthesis and crystal growth of appropriate derivatives.  In addition, the
              investigators will explore new, complex aluminum borates and their potential
              for the realization of direct conversion of laser light to shorter
              wavelengths.
 
This award represents the U.S. side of a joint proposal to the
              NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS).  NSF will
              cover travel funds and living expenses of the U.S. investigator and U.S.
              graduate students.  The CNRS will support the French researchers' and students'
              visits to the United States.  The U.S. investigator brings to this
              collaboration expertise in exploratory synthesis, flux-based crystal growth,
              structural characterization, and modeling studies.  This is complemented by the
              French team's expertise in laser spectroscopy, laser-material development, and
              theory.  Their collaboration will improve understanding of the
              structure-property relationships in nonlinear optical and laser materials, and
              may lead to new optical crystals for lasers.  The development of high-power
              laser and nonlinear optical materials is an important technology for the
              manufacture of microprocessors, for medical diagnostics and therapies, in
              flat-panel displays, food processing, and laser radar.

