Title       : Catalysis by Metals: Dynamics, Kinetics, and Mechanistic Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a9981769

Award Number: 9981769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Henry Weinberg whw@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to make quantitative connections between UHV
              surface studies and applied chemical catalysis.  Two related research projects
              are supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the laboratory
              of Professor Weinberg at the University of California-Santa Barbara. Studies of
              the mechanism of energy transfer during chemisorption are pursued using
              Schottky barrier sensors.  Chemisorption of H, O, H2, O2,  CO and N2O on
              transition metal surfaces is examined.  The influence of condensed multilayers
              on surface reactions is also being considered.  In particular, possible
              enhanced reactivity of alkanes in the presence of condensed multilayers is
              examined on clean and potassium promoted single crystal surfaces of ruthenium,
              iridium, and platinum.  The results of this work will further our understanding
              of the detailed dynamics of heterogeneous catalysis. 

The understanding of
              the catalysis of hydrocarbon and small molecule reactions on transition metal
              surfaces is the focus of this research project supported in the Analytical and
              Surface Chemistry Program.  Professor Weinberg and coworkers at UCSB are
              investigating the mechanisms of energy transfer in chemisorption and the effect
              of condensed multilayers on the reactivity of hydrocarbon molecules at well
              characterized catalytic surfaces.   The information from this research will be
              useful in designing improved systems for heterogeneous catalysis.  
