Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Heating and Transport Study for Next Generation
               Plasma Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a9981978

Award Number: 9981978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheun-Lan Liu                           
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20076              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger McWilliams mcw@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5942,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9981978
McWilliams

This award supports a 3-year collaborative research
              between Dr. Roger McWilliams, University of California, Irvine and Professor
              Hong-Young Chang at Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST).
                The proposed collaboration aims to exchange ideas on plasma sources and
              diagnostics between U.S. and Korean plasma physicists and to develop next
              generation plasma sources.

Collaborative experiments at the University of
              California, Irvine and KAIST will work to characterize and develop next
              generation plasma sources.  Plasma processing and basic physics laboratory
              plasmas are increasingly reliant on larger diameter plasma sources.  The ion
              and electron distributions created by these sources are central to their
              usefulness, for either industry or basic science studies.  Professor Chang's
              group in the Physics Department at Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
              Technology has extensive experience with electron diagnostics and particularly
              close connections with next generation plasma sources needed and planned for
              semiconductor industry use.  Professor McWilliams' group in the Physics
              Department at the University of California, Irvine has extensive experience
              with ion diagnostics and has developed many plasma sources for basic plasma
              science use.  The two groups wish to collaborate to merge diagnostic and plasma
              source capabilities to benefit plasma processing and basic plasma
              science.

This project will be performed in conjunction with Professor
              Chang's group at Korea under the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program.   By
              personnel visits to both laboratories, the full complement of next generation
              plasma sources and diagnostics will be used together swiftly for technological
              and scientific advance.  Additionally, people at both labs will be trained in
              the experimental expertise of the other lab, thereby expanding each
              laboratory's capabilities by the end of the collaboration.

This project is
              relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program, which
              seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists
              and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills,
              and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  Korean
              participation is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation
              (KOSEF).
***

