Title       : Math Matters: Improving Elementary Mathematics Teacher Education in Nebraska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a9981106

Award Number: 9981106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199911             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth M. Heaton rheaton@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patience O. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. J.  'Jim' Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21) Math Matters is redesigning the UNL elementary
              teacher education curriculum in mathematics to increase the number and
              diversity of elementary (K-6) teachers with strengths in mathematics that
              enables them to teach mathematics grounded in best practices as defined by NCTM
              Standards. In this adaptation project mathematics faculty in the College of
              Arts and Sciences are collaborating with education faculty in Teachers College
              to develop a challenging 15-hour, yearlong block of courses combining
              mathematics content, pedagogy, and field experiences. In addition, three new
              mathematics courses are slated to be created and a second methods course
              redesigned to challenge students to develop a deeper understanding of the
              mathematics taught in elementary schools and how to teach it. Special attention
              is being paid to integrating technology into all courses developed by the
              project. Material from a variety of sources is being adapted, including results
              from NSF-DUE sponsored projects at Kansas State (#9050015) and the Oregon
              Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher Preparation (#9653970), and
              instructional materials from several NSF-ESIE projects: "Math Trailblazers",
              "Everyday Mathematics", and "Investigations in Number, Data, and Space". Each
              year a cohort of 22 students (one-sixth of the students admitted annually to
              the elementary education program) is being recruited to take the 15-hour Math
              Matters block and to pursue a mathematics concentration. The recruitment plan
              pays special attention to increasing the diversity of students who enroll.
              Working with cooperating K-6 teachers, a mentoring and induction program is
              being implemented to support the program's graduates as they begin their
              teaching careers. The Math Matters block is expected to be fully implemented
              into elementary teacher education at UNL after the end of NSF support. A
              conference in the third year of the grant is planned to help disseminate
              results of the grant to other colleges. The primary DUE themes addressed are
              teacher preparation with attention paid to the integration of technology in
              education and increasing the diversity of elementary teachers with strengths in
              mathematics.

