Title       : Structure-Composition-Property Relationships in Complex Intermetallic Phases:
               Experimental and Theoretical Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a9981766

Award Number: 9981766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355631             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon J. Miller gmiller@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to use both experiment and theory to systematically search for
              new intermetallic compounds with potentially interesting physical and chemical
              properties.  Since subtle changes of composition can lead to drastic effects on
              structural and physical properties in intermetallics, theoretical calculations
              of electronic structure will play a significant role in a complete and
              systematic study of these phases.  The synthesis and detailed characterization
              of new multinary compounds will involve (i) an electropositive alkali, alkaline
              earth, or rare earth metal; (ii) a transition metal; and (iii) a group 13
              element (aluminum, gallium, indium), or magnesium or manganese.  The group 13
              elements are selected because their position in the periodic table of elements
              is at the border between metals and nonmetals.  These combinations of elements
              are anticipated to create beautifully complex structures involving
              interconnected and interpenetrating clusters of atoms that will allow a
              thorough investigation of the relationships among composition, structure,
              properties, and chemical bonding.
%%%
Materials with possible applications as
              thermoelectrics, or as strong, high temperature conductors that are anticipated
              to be environmentally benign will be synthesized and characterized.  The
              project will involve students of chemistry, physics and materials science
              working through Iowa State University and the Ames Laboratory to advance these
              areas of materials science of significant interest to industry.  Students will
              learn methods in high temperature chemistry, analysis, diffraction and
              electronic structure theory.  Fundamental results from this research regarding
              the structure and bonding of solids are being incorporated into courses being
              offered at Iowa State University.
***  

