Title       : Introduction to the Foundations of Chemical Engineering: Synthesis, Modeling,
               Analysis of Products and Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9981048

Award Number: 9981048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194483             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Stephanopoulos geosteph@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Chemical (53)

The traditional focus of instruction in the core
              undergraduate chemical engineering curriculum has been analysis, i.e. the
              deduction of the behavior of a given process. In associated exercises, few
              decisions are required of the student other than selection of which predefined
              model equations and analytical solution techniques are to be used. As a result,
              students are left unprepared to face the inherent freedom of decision-making
              and do not have the opportunity to cultivate creativity as required in their
              professional careers. The objective of this project is to develop and
              disseminate the educational material necessary to revamp and update the
              pedagogical approach of the introductory course, and with this initiative, set
              the stage for subsequent revamping of the scope of the entire core chemical
              engineering curriculum.

To meet this objective, the project is developing
              the following educational material: (a) A textbook that introduces the
              fundamental chemical engineering concepts, contextually, through a series of
              process and product design case studies, which helps students develop the
              necessary skills (i.e., synthesis, modeling and analysis) for solving
              engineering problems, and (b) A software system, which is integrated with the
              educational material of the textbook, and which broadens the range of the
              students' synthetic-modeling-analytic abilities by providing to them: a virtual
              laboratory to gain intuition regarding microscopic phenomena and observed
              macroscopic behavior, a collaborative problem-solving environment, and help in
              coordinating the vast resources of data available for engineering
              design.

Evaluation is being carried out at MIT and at several test sites,
              including the University of Delaware, the University of Houston, the University
              of Oklahoma, Ohio State University, and Rowan University. National
              dissemination of these materials, which integrate technology into undergraduate
              chemical engineering education, is maintained through faculty development
              workshops that train educators in the appropriate pedagogical use of these
              materials.


