Title       : Noise Investigations of Condensed Matter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9981869

Award Number: 9981869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Weissman mbw@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this proposal fluctuation techniques will be used to explore several topics
              in disordered condensed matter. Colossal magnetoresistive (CMR) transitions
              exhibit prominent non-Gaussian noise, which will be used to determine
              thermodynamic properties of the mesoscopic domains which are typically
              responsible for the magnetoresistive effect. A variety of CMR materials will be
              investigated. The design of mesoscopic CMR devices is crucially affected by
              these domain properties. Relaxor ferroelectrics, disordered materials with huge
              dielectric coefficients and non-linear piezo-electricity, will be investigated
              to determine what effects are responsible for preventing the formation of
              long-range order and hence for preserving the useful electrical properties. 
              Aging experiments and mesoscopic noise experiments should be able to determine
              the length scale on which relaxor order forms, as well as determining the roles
              of random anisotropy, random vector fields, and random transition temperatures
              in the relaxor state. The general problem of irregular motion of domain walls
              (Barkhausen noise) in response to external fields has been familiar for many
              years, but only recently have there been good theoretical approaches to the
              interplay between disorder and systematic domain-wall forces. Experiments will
              be conducted to distinguish between effects of spatially correlated disorder
              and of collective effects in the domain walls, as well as to test ideas
              relating scaling properties of the noise to the strength of the disorder.
              Because such measurements are "small science", each student involved (both
              graduate and undergraduate) gets a chance to work on material preparation,
              fabrication of tiny electrical devices (using advanced facilities at the
              Materials Research Lab), sophisticated materials characterization facilities
              (at the MRL), computer programming, analog electronics, and cryogenic
              techniques.
%%%
As measurement techniques in condensed matter physics have
              improved, it has become possible to extract useful information about materials
              not only from their average properties (e.g. electrical resistance) but also
              from the small fluctuations around the average values (e.g. electrical noise).
              Such noise techniques are particularly valuable for the large number of common
              materials (e.g. glasses) which are not regularly ordered, because in such
              materials the average properties often fail to convey important information
              about the disorder. For example, in a recently developed category of materials
              whose resistance changes by a large factor in response to magnetic fields the
              average response obscures a fact revealed by the noise--that the material does
              not uniformly change its resistivity in a continuous fashion but rather
              consists of a collection of tiny domains which abruptly switch at different
              fields. Such findings are crucial in planning applications of these materials
              in small-scale computer components. Because the measurements undertaken in this
              project are "small science", each student involved (both graduate and
              undergraduate) gets a chance to work on material preparation, fabrication of
              tiny electrical devices (using advanced facilities at the Materials Research
              Lab), sophisticated materials characterization facilities (at the MRL),
              computer programming, analog electronics, and cryogenic techniques. Students
              from such backgrounds and skill levels are in high demand in industry,
              particularly in the development of magnetic storage devices.
***

