Title       : Collaborative Research: Biocomplexity of Aquatic Microbial Systems: Relating
               Diversity of Microorganisms to Ecosystem Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2002  
File        : a9981617

Award Number: 9981617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1220001            (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia M. Glibert glibert@hpl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd M. Kana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1366,1389,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
BIOCOMPLEXITY: Collaborative Research:  Biocomplexity of aquatic microbial
              systems -- relating diversity of microorganisms to ecosystem
              function

Microbial biogeochemical cycling of the elements regulates a
              dynamic environment in which the cycles of different elements are linked
              through the physiology of microorganisms. While a certain degree of
              understanding can be gained through physical/chemical approaches to measurement
              and modeling of the net transformations, these approaches necessarily rely on
              gross simplifications about the role and regulation of the various functional
              groups (guilds) involved. Recent advances in molecular microbial ecology have
              shown the microbial world to contain immense diversity and complexity at every
              level: redundancy and duplication of functional genes within a single organism;
              molecular diversity among functional genes that encode the same process in
              different organisms; large genetic diversity among different organisms
              apparently engaged in the same biogeochemical function within single
              communities; great variability in the species composition of different
              communities that apparently perform equally well. The goal of this project is
              to investigate the functional relationship between complexity in microbial
              communities and the physical/chemical environment at a range of biological and
              ecological scales. Previously, such analysis was technologically limited by the
              inability to assay large numbers of samples simultaneously for a large number
              of genes and phylotypes. Using gene array technology, the researchers will be
              able to detect the distribution and differential expression of functional genes
              in natural systems. The results of this study will constitute the first step
              towards application of DNA chip technology for gene expression of "exotic"
              (i.e., not of biomedical importance) processes and organisms in the
              environment. The gene arrays, along with a full suite of ecosystem process
              measurements, will be deployed along a transect that spans the eutrophic -
              oligotrophic gradient from the inland waters of the Chesapeake Bay out to the
              Sargasso Sea. Experiments and functional gene studies will focus on key
              transformations in the carbon and nitrogen cycles (C fixation, N fixation,
              nitrification, denitrification, urea assimilation). The diversity of guilds
              will be interpreted in terms of ecosystem function, assessed using geochemical
              data and tracer experiments. In addition to field studies designed to
              investigate and dissect the natural system, the group of collaborating
              scientists will also perform perturbation experiments using mesocosms. The goal
              of these experiments is to determine how microbial species diversity affects
              the major energy and nutrient flows within ecosystems, and to assess the degree
              of stability or instability associated with changes in redundancy within guilds
              of microorganisms responsible for major nitrogen and carbon pathways.

