Title       : Human-Computer Interaction Software Design Curriculum Using Participatory Design
               Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a9981088

Award Number: 9981088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79987              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry B. Weinberg jweinbe@siue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Edwardsvill
	      Campus Box 20
	      Edwardsville, IL  620250020    618/692-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31)

This educational materials development proof-of-concept
              project is developing materials and a laboratory setting for students studying
              principles in human-computer interaction (HCI) to perform an ethnographic
              design study using observation, interviews, and video tape analysis. Students
              in the introductory computer skills course, which teaches essential computer
              applications such as word processing, spreadsheets and web page development,
              are being used as volunteers in the design study. These students as novice
              computer users are being asked to participate in the design activities of the
              HCI course.

Through observation and interaction with novice users, the HCI
              students are developing a user's model of the tasks. They are learning and
              practicing the methodology and skills of participatory design practice. The
              project studies the effectiveness of the experience on both groups of students.
              It is expected that the HCI students will learn how to incorporate
              participatory design methods into their professional practice and the computer
              skill students will have reduced computer apprehension and a higher level of
              performance as a result of the design experience. 

Evaluation efforts
              include the assessment of performance of the HCI students in their design
              projects and their ability to analyze the qualitative data they collect. The
              results of the evaluation as well as the course syllabus, materials, and
              methodology are being disseminated on the web and at national conferences. A
              faculty tutorial, to include a videotape illustrating the lab set-up, the HCI
              design methodology, and actual student interactions as well as written examples
              of assignments and design projects, is being developed. 

