Title       : A Capstone Course in Investigative Science for Pre-Service Elementary Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a9981171

Award Number: 9981171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76834              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah Donovan donovan@biol.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph G. Morse  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)

The National Science Education Standards, developed by
              the National Research Council, and the Essential Academic Learning
              Requirements, developed by Washington State Commission on Student Learning both
              demand that students learn science in an investigative format. Elementary
              teachers are generally poorly prepared to develop or even to implement
              innovative science investigations. This project is developing a "capstone"
              course in investigative science specifically for pre-service elementary
              teachers. It is intended to complement prior student experience in formal
              science courses and draw upon that experience. The course is a "thematic"
              interdisciplinary experience with the theme varying according to the preference
              of the specific instructor. A theme successful in an experimental trial was
              "water." Its physical and chemical characteristics were investigated and
              related to the roles water plays in geology and biology. Students work in a
              "directed discovery" mode in a generally open-ended format; there is no
              specific block of subject matter to be presented. Rather, students establish
              experiment objectives, design appropriate experiments, run the experiments, and
              critique and compare results. University science faculty serve as guides and
              coaches. It is the intent of the course to induce greater confidence,
              competence, and interest in the teaching of investigative science. The effort
              is an adaptation of NSF supported projects at the University of Wyoming and Cal
              State- San Marcos. The interdisciplinary and thematic nature of the course is
              intended to serve as a model format for their own work with elementary students
              and to demonstrate the conceptual relationships among the sciences which most
              will have studied as discrete bodies of information. The effort is being
              coordinated with community colleges from which many of our students come.
