Title       : Foraging Ecology of Crabeater Seals (Lobodon Carcinophagus)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2000  
File        : a9981683

Award Number: 9981683
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183933             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Costa costa@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Crocker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1308,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The U.S. Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics (U.S. GLOBEC) program has the goal of
              understanding and ultimately predicting how populations of marine animal
              species respond to natural and anthropogenic changes in climate.   Research in
              the Southern Ocean (SO) indicates strong coupling between climatic processes
              and ecosystem dynamics via the annual formation and destruction of sea ice. 
              The Southern Ocean GLOBEC Program (SO GLOBEC) will investigate the dynamic
              relationship between physical processes and ecosystem responses through
              identification of critical parameters that affect the distribution, abundance
              and population dynamics of target species.  The overall goals of the SO GLOBEC
              program are to elucidate shelf circulation processes and their effect on sea
              ice formation and krill distribution, and to examine the factors which govern
              krill survivorship and availability to higher trophic levels,  including
              penguins, seals and whales. The focus of the U.S. contribution to the
              international SO GLOBEC program will be on winter processes. This component
              will focus on the distribution and foraging behavior of adult female crabeater
              seals, using a combination of satellite-linked tracking, specialized diver
              recorders, and stable isotopic tracers. This research will be coordinated with
              components focused on prey (krill) distribution and the physical environment.
              The results will be analyzed using an optimality model. The result of the
              integrated SO GLOBEC program will be to improve the predictability of living
              marine resources, especially with respect to local and global climatic shifts.
