Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Vibrational Dynamics of Liquids and Liquids in
               Confinement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a9981390

Award Number: 9981390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34299              (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Fourkas john.fourkas@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9981390
Fourkas

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor John Fourkas at Boston College in Massachusetts and
              Professor Keisuke Tominaga of Kobe University in Japan.  The researchers will
              be undertaking a study of vibrational dynamics of liquids and liquids in
              confinement.  They will combine experimental and theoretical collaborative
              research to develop a detailed understanding of the effects of nanoconfinement
              on the properties of liquids.  The experimental facet would involve using
              one-dimensional and multidimensional ultrafast nonlinear spectroscopic
              techniques to study the orientational and vibrational properties of liquids
              confined in nanoporous sol-gel glasses.  The theoretical portion would include
              development of realistic molecular dynamics simulations of liquids confined in
              nanoporous glasses in order to provide a more detailed interpretation of
              experimental results, as well as development of an improved theoretical
              description of multidimensional Raman spectroscopies.  


The project brings
              together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and
              research capabilities that are not available in any single laboratory in the
              world.  Results of the research could result in a significantly improved
              understanding of nanoconfinement on the properties of liquids.  This may lead
              to improvements in technologies for processes such as separations,
              heterogeneous catalysis, oil recovery and lubrication.  The project advances
              international human resources through the participation of graduate students. 
              Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our
              base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.   Results of the research will be published in scientific journals
              and also on their Web site (http://chemserv.bc.edu/fourkas/).
***

