Title       : Theoretical Problems in Condensed Matter and Statistical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  2001   
File        : a9981283

Award Number: 9981283
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bertrand I. Halperin halperin@hall.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9981283
Halperin
This award supports theoretical research and education on
              electrons in confined geometries, in metals and semiconductors, at low
              temperatures.   Of particular interest are quantum Hall and mesoscopic systems.
               Of particular interest in quantum Hall systems are discrepancies between
              theory and experiment for current vs. applied voltage data for electrons
              tunneling into the edge state of a quantum Hall system from a three-dimensional
              conducting region.  The discrepancies may arise because the electron density
              profile near the edges of the actual systems is more complicated than assumed
              in the usual models and this can effect tunneling characteristics.  The PI
              plans to investigate more realistic models of experimental systems, to
              understand better what the actual density profile is.  Fermion-Chern-Simons
              theory will be used to determine the number of localized modes at the boundary,
              and also to determine the trajectories and nonlocal response functions of
              unbound composite fermions near the edge, when the bulk of the system is in a
              compressible quantum Hall state. 
Other work will focus on the role of
              disorder in tunneling into quantum Hall systems, both at the edge and in the
              interior of the two-dimensional electron system.  Renormalization group and
              other techniques will be used to examine the extent to which nearly localized
              electron or quasiparticle states can coexist with a finite density of composite
              fermion states, in a compressible region, and how a distribution of such states
              may affect tunneling into the layer.  The role of disorder will also be
              considered for the charge-density wave state that has been postulated to occur
              in higher Landau levels, and which has been invoked to explain the highly
              anisotropic resistivities measured in these systems.  An important question to
              be addressed is whether a mixture of regions, with pinned charge density wave
              regions embedded in other regions with an unpinned electron liquid, may explain
              the magnitude of the electrical resistance observed in the anisotropic state. 
              Other work will address conceptual issues in the formation of composite fermion
              theory of the partially full lowest Landau level. 
In another project, spin
              injection and spin transport will be examined in mesoscopic systems.  This is
              important when electrons are injected from a ferromagnetic metal into a thin
              film or particle of normal metal.  Mechanisms for spin relaxation will be
              examined at the injecting boundaries and elsewhere in the metal.  The
              circumstances under which quantum interference will occur will also be
              examined. 
Other work on mesoscopic systems will be the study of noise,
              nonlinearities and dissipation effects in pumping phenomena in quantum dots in
              the Kondo regime.  Work will continue on the theory of Coulomb drag phenomena
              in bilayer systems with pinholes in the barrier between the layers. 
%%%
This
              award supports research and education at the frontiers of condensed matter
              theory.  Work will focus on electrons confined to two dimensions, e.g.
              electrons trapped in a layer of a semiconductor, in a strong magnetic field and
              how electrons in three-dimensional contacts can tunnel into and out of the
              electron layer.
Work will also focus on the electronic properties of materials
              that are small enough that there are quantum mechanical effects on conduction,
              e.g. interference effects much like those that take place for water waves. 
              These are fundamental and important physical phenomena that occur in materials;
              their understanding may lead to innovations for future electronic device
              technologies.
***

