Title       : Recombination, Dominance, and Selection on Amino Acid Mutations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9981497

Award Number: 9981497
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172367             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Rand david_rand@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel M. Weinreich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1112,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9981497
Rand

This research seeks to understand how genetic recombination and
              dominance can alter the effects of natural selection on replacement and silent
              mutations.  In general, natural selection acts more strongly on replacement
              mutations.  By sequencing many copies of a gene from each of two closely
              related species, one can document the amount of variation within, and between,
              species for silent and replacement mutations (known as the McDonald-Kreitman
              test).  To test the hypothesis that levels of genetic recombination and
              dominance alter the effectiveness of natural selection, new DNA sequence data
              will be collected from nuclear genes that lie in regions experiencing little or
              no recombination in the fruit flies, Drosophila melanogaster and D. simulans. 
              These data will be compared to existing data from regions of high
              recombination.  The issue of dominance will be addressed by obtaining data from
              low recombination genes on X-chromosome, which is haploid in males, and low
              recombination genes on the fourth chromosome, which is diploid in both sexes. 
              While studies of DNA variation have been conducted on the X- and 4th
              chromosomes, no studies have specifically focused on mutations in
              protein-coding genes in this context. 

The genetic contexts provided by the
              chromosomes of Drosophila mean that the data are very likely to be general for
              all organisms, including humans.  Since mutations in the DNA are the ultimate
              source of all genetic variation, understanding how genetic factors can alter
              natural selection's ability to eliminate deleterious mutations and preserve
              beneficial mutation is of general significance to the preservation of genetic
              biodiversity and the genetic health of the human population.
              



















