Title       : An Arctic Archival Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a9981915

Award Number: 9981915
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1099942            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin S. Winker ffksw@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark W. Oswood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon H. Jarrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roland A. Gangloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Global warming is expected to be greatest at high latitudes, causing an
              immediate need to document existing arctic conditions for present and future
              investigations.  Archiving samples is one of the few ways to effectively
              document these conditions for a broad research community.  By enabling
              retrospective and forward-looking hypothesis testing, archived samples also
              provide the crucial temporal basis from which to study these topics.  A
              functional sample repository is needed where these samples and their associated
              data are processed, catalogued, and archived in a system that enables perpetual
              accessiblity.  This project will create an Arctic Archival Observatory that
              will be a broad-based sample repository , serve as a center for sample-based
              arctic research, education, and public service, and consolidate and network
              existing archival data relating to the Arctic environment.  The Arctic Archival
              Observaotry will extend, integrate, and formalize this commitment through
              serving as a dedicated center for climate change research in the Arctic at the
              critical juncture of samples, researchers, students, and the public.  It will
              act as a clearinghouse for samples and associated data, as well as a center for
              baseline data on the Arctic biota and environment.
