Title       : Kinetic and Mechanistic Studies of Highly Reactive Species Containing
               Electron-Deficient Main Group Atoms, and the Synthesis of Novel Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a9981759

Award Number: 9981759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $504750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter P. Gaspar Gaspar@wuchem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this renewal award the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              continues its support for the work of Dr. Peter P. Gaspar in the Department of
              Chemistry at Washington University in St louis.   The goal of the work is to
              understand the factors that control the reactions of electron deficient and
              multiply bonded organic molecules containing the elements Si, P, S and Sn, in
              addition to the more common elements like C, N, and O.   It is believed that by
              making these novel molecules, and studying the mechanisms of their reactions,
              it will be possible to extend the powerful mechanistic ideas of organic
              chemistry to the prediction of bond-making and -breaking processes throughout
              the periodic table.   A powerful new apparatus has been developed which will
              simplify the identification of new reactive species which may lead to new
              materials with unusual and useful properties.

Some of the molecules to be
              investigated are (iPr3Si)2Si, which is analogous to a carbene and may have
              either a singlet or a triplet electronic ground state, PCSiMe3, with a triple
              bond between the P and the C, analogous to an organic nitrile, and BN, an
              unstable molecule which has been detected spectroscopically but whose chemistry
              is unknown.   BN will be generated in the new supersonic flow pyrolysis nozzle
              apparatus, and detected by FT ion cyclotron resonance mass spectroscopy after
              charge exchange or other ion-molecule reactions.
