Title       : Bioinformatics in the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  2002   
File        : a9981104

Award Number: 9981104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122351             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ming-Ying Leung leung@math.utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Aaron Cassill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Science (61)

This project is developing web-based teaching
              material for a one semester introductory course to the interdisciplinary field
              of Bioinformatics. This subject of study integrates mathematical and
              computational techniques with biological knowledge to extract, organize, and
              interpret information from a wealth of genetic sequence data obtained from
              various genome projects. Since Bioinformatics is a young discipline, very
              little organized teaching material, especially at the undergraduate level, is
              available. The product in this project is intended to fill this void and help
              students acquire quality training in an area of expertise which is currently in
              tremendous demand from the biomedical research community and biotechnology
              industries.

During the first year the project is developing the
              Bioinformatics course material on the Internet. Activities include constructing
              a web module, consisting of lecture notes and problem sets with links to
              appropriate sources of information and software tools, to enable students learn
              through hands-on problem solving approach. The targeted audience is junior and
              senior level undergraduate majors in Mathematics and Biology.

To test its
              effectiveness, this material is being used for a problem-based Bioinformatics
              course to be offered in spring 2001 with the principal investigators as faculty
              facilitators. An evaluation committee consisting of highly qualified
              individuals from Mathematics, Biology, and Education is providing advice during
              the development of the course material, helping to obtain feedback from
              students, and assessing project performance. Incorporating these reviews, the
              Bioinformatics module is being finalized in the fall of 2001, ready for
              national distribution by commercial publication. This project is in line with
              the DUE themes of diversity, faculty development, as well as integration of
              technology in education.



