Title       : Collaborative Research: Long Distance Dispersal of Tree Seeds by Wind:
               Underlying Mechanisms, Mathematical Prediction and Field Quantification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9981649

Award Number: 9981649
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roni Avissar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1174,1305,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
    Forests in our landscape are increasingly becoming isolated "islands" in a
              "sea" of urban, suburban, or agricultural land.  For their populations to
              persist in such a landscape, trees must disperse their seeds from one island to
              the next.  Many trees use the wind to disperse their seeds.   In strong winds,
              especially over a rugged forest canopy or near the edge of a forest,
              three-dimensional "whirlpools" form with winds that sometimes blow upwards.  If
              the upward velocity of the wind is greater than the rate of fall of the seed,
              the seed can go up rather than down.  It may even get caught in a large
              updraft, such as happens where warm air rises, or where winds are deflected by
              a hill, a forest edge, or a large building.  Such updrafts can take a seed high
              into the atmosphere, where it encounters faster winds.  Or the updraft itself
              can move for miles, as it does in a thunderstorm, before letting the seed
              settle to ground. 

This  project is a collaboration between biologists and
              atmospheric scientists to determine how often seeds go into these long-distance
              modes of dispersal.  This will require measuring how strong the wind must be
              before seeds break loose from the tree, how slowly seeds fall in still air, and
              how the upward velocity of wind changes in different settings.  Finally it will
              test experimentally whether winds can carry seeds as far as the distance
              between forest islands.  The importance of updrafts for seed dispersal and the
              frequency of long-distance dispersal will be compared for 18 wind-dispersed
              tree species of the northeastern United States.  Such information is vital for
              understanding the dynamics of forest species, and for maintaining them as
              humans increasingly fragment the landscape.   


