Title       : Enhancement Interdisciplinary Environmental Science Curriculum Using a Gas
               Chromatograph/Mass Spectrometer and Ion Chromatograph in Undergraduate
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a9981064

Award Number: 9981064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63499              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Brush ebrush@bridgew.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin D. Curry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cielito M. De Ramos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bridgewater State College
	      
	      Bridgewater, MA  02324    508/531-1242

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) 

In response to the rapid economic development in
              Southeastern Massachusetts, Bridgewater State College has made strong efforts
              to strengthen its science programs due to the increasing need for trained
              environmental professionals.  An Environmental concentration in Chemistry is
              being implemented to join concentrations in Biology, Earth Science and
              Geography, and Management Science in order to prepare teachers, technicians,
              and graduate researchers capable of dealing with the current and future
              environmental issues. This provides students with extensive hands-on experience
              in the use of state-of-the-art instrumentation for environmental analysis. To
              provide the necessary instrumentation for this program the Chemistry and
              Biology Departments are establishing a laboratory with an HP 6890 gas
              chromatograph/HP 5973 mass selective detector tandem, and Lachat Ion
              Chromatography unit, powerful instruments for environmental analysis.  A set of
              laboratory experiments that adapt active learning pedagogies are being
              developed within the different disciplines to provide students with
              collaborative, hands-on experience using the new instruments.  

The benefits
              of this project extend to students from all science disciplines, strengthening
              the links between the Environmental Concentrations in Biology, Chemistry, Earth
              Sciences and Geography, and Environmental Management. This project benefits
              faculty development by catalyzing the adoption and implementation of enhanced
              laboratory curricula, incorporating active-learning pedagogy, and thereby
              energizing the present undergraduate research program. Furthermore, this
              project advances teacher preparation by improving the laboratory skills and
              understanding of current technology for preservice teachers in chemistry and
              biology, as well as in-service teachers supported through the Bridgewater State
              College Watershed Access Lab Professional Development program.          
              

Evaluation is being conducted by an expert in environmental programs to
              assess the effectiveness of the hands-on lab in improving student learning and
              interest in the subject.  The results of the development of the new laboratory
              experiments are being reported at seminars and workshops and in the relevant
              journals.  They are also being posted on the websites of the various
              disciplines involved. 
