Title       : Integrating an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer into the Analytical
               Geochemistry and Chemistry Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1999  
File        : a9981154

Award Number: 9981154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy A. Bohrson bohrson@geology.cwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carey A. Gazis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jane M. Arrington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Hinthorne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Washington Univ
	      400 E. 8th AVE
	      Ellensburg, WA  98926    509/963-2111

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Earth Systems Science (40) The Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer has
              been adapted for use with inquiry-based learning and individual research
              projects in the undergraduate Geology and Chemistry curricula.  Collaborative
              inquiry-based learning methods are adapted from successful class projects at
              Dartmouth University (Environmental Geology class, Dr. Xiahong Feng,  and
              Isotopes as Tracers in the Environmental class described in Stern, L. A., C. P.
              Chamberlain, J. D. Blum and M. L. Fogel, Isotopic Lessons in a Beer Bottle, J
              Geoscience Ed, 45, 157-161, 1997), and other institutions (Foos, A. M.,
              Integration of a Class Research Project into a Traditional Geochemistry Lab
              Course, J Geoscience Ed, 45, 322-324, 1997).   In upper division Geology and
              Chemistry classes, students design and execute class, group, and individual
              projects gaining direct experience with methods of scientific inquiry. 
              Students identify a question of scientific merit, design and execute a sampling
              and analysis strategy, collect and interpret data, and present results.  The
              Environmental Geochemistry class has performed a class project by utilizing the
              ICP-MS in identifying local environmental problems involving water and soil
              contamination near mine sites. We are also adapting successful pedagogical
              models that integrate individual research projects into classes, including
              those of Professor Karen Harpp (Colgate University) and those based on our own
              experiences with the automated x-ray powder diffractometer purchased by NSF ILI
              Grant -DUE 9651022.  	
General education students, pre-service teachers, and
              local high school students participate in a regional water project focusing on
              water quality issues.  Through this project, they have gained exposure to the
              processes of data collection and analysis, an experience that enhances their
              ability to critically understand scientific principles (e.g., Smith G. L.,
              Using Field and Laboratory Exercises on Local Water Bodies to Teach Fundamental
              Concepts in an Introductory Oceanography Course, J Geoscience Ed, 43,480-484,
              1995).   	
Important curricular changes resulting from this grant include
              hands-on experience with the ICP-MS, collaborative student effort, multi-week
              experiments, more emphasis on analysis of authentic data, and an increased
              number of individual and group presentations.  Implementation of an
              inquiry-based approach to teaching and learning through use of state-of-the-art
              analytical instrumentation has provided opportunities for our students in
              critical thinking and problem-solving skills while preparing them for
              successful career ventures in the 21st century. 
