Title       : Biocomplexity, Common Mycorrhizal Networks -- Active or Passive Channels?
               Interacting Roles of Mycorrhizal Fungi, Soil Resources and Plants in Carbon and
               Nutrient Transfers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9981548

Award Number: 9981548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $866286             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Allen michael.allen@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1366      BIOCOMPLEXITY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1366,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Allen
9981548

Researchers at the University of California at Davis and
              Riverside and from Southern Oregon University will examine how the spatial and
              temporal distributions of soil resources interact with mycorrhizal fungi and
              plant roots to form networks belowground (common mycorrhizal networks, CMNs). 
              The central hypothesis is that flows of carbon and nutrients in CMNs are not
              wholly determined either by plants or fungi.  The magnitude and direction of
              flows are determined by interactions between plant species, mycorrhizal fungal
              species and soil resources -- resources whose availability changes in complex
              ways in space and time.  Changes in any one of the 3 components will result in
              altered CMN structure and function.  The researchers predict that changes in
              the 3 components will significantly alter fungal and plant species composition
              and soil resource distribution, resulting in long-term changes in plant
              community dynamics, soil stability, nutrient cycling rates, and ecosystem
              production. 

Research activities, which are being supported by the
              Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Office of Polar Programs, among
              institutions will be coordinated using three innovative approaches. These
              include student and post-doctoral researcher rotations among institutions,
              annual field campaigns integrating participants from all institutions, and web
              sites to disseminate information. This approach will train students to think
              broadly about complex systems and about the value of applying multiple skills
              and tools to complex problems.

The research will enhance understanding of
              the dynamic interactions between oaks and grasses in oak woodlands in
              California, perhaps allowing more successful preservation and restoration of
              these woodlands. By comparing biocomplexity above and below-ground in a model
              system, the researchers expect to learn general principles about how above and
              below ground systems are linked. 

