Title       : IM-AWARE (Instructional Meteorology - Applications of Weather for Awareness,
               Readiness and Education)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2000    
File        : a9981098

Award Number: 9981098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73848              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin A. Kloesel kevin@redrock.ocs.ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Renee A. McPherson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Atmospheric Sciences (41) To address issues surrounding tornadoes that each
              year, in every state, cause deaths, injuries, and extensive damage, an
              easy-to-use, high-tech, data-rich educational tornado module is being
              developed.  The module utilizes the Oklahoma Climatological Survey developed
              web browser plug-in software (WxScope) in an inquiry-based, web-constructivist
              learning format to harness the internet, bringing the current knowledge of
              tornado development, structure, and awareness to the student-user in a way that
              achieves curriculum goals in entry-level undergraduate meteorology courses. 
              The OCS web browser plug-in approach places the students at the cutting edge of
              both historical and national tornado data, and the latest research-quality data
              gathered by the nation's premier severe storms research unit, the Oklahoma
              Weather Center. This one-year proof-of-concept project focuses on the
              development of (1) interactive tornado data analysis software for use inside a
              web-browser environment, (2) a self-contained web-based module for the study of
              tornadoes and their effects, and (3) a series of tornado simulations using data
              from the May 3rd tornado event to assess student learning in the areas of
              tornado prediction, warning, and disaster mitigation while a tornado is in
              progress.  Each activity also contains information on how its implementation
              meets current national K-12 science and math standards and NSTA guidelines. 
              This module utilizes the tornado as a centerpiece in developing mathematical
              (graphing, frequency distributions, probability, etc.) and scientific
              (atmospheric dynamics, thermodynamics and physics) topics, and how these relate
              to societal (actuarial statistics, insurance rating structures, public safety,
              etc.) and governmental policy (federal funding, disaster declarations, etc.)
              issues.  The tornado module provides opportunities to study multi-disciplinary
              topics throughout a semester, improving the learner's appreciation for the
              critical relationship between scientific and non-scientific disciplines. This
              success of this module' development provides a model for the creation of future
              weather awareness modules (hurricanes, floods, etc.)  and will help reform the
              way in which meteorology is studied in undergraduate courses across the nation.
               The web-based nature of the module will also allow students to continue
              learning long after the semester ends, creating life-long learners, and
              ultimately, educated science policy makers.
