Title       : A Microcomputer-Based Laboratory for Introductory Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1999   
File        : a9981096

Award Number: 9981096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52677              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Duffy duffy@buphy.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bennett B. Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics  (13)  The project is adapting and implementing a microcomputer-based
              laboratory (MBL) for introductory-level physics courses. The objective is to
              provide a wide range of students access to and experience with hands-on
              activities incorporating conceptual and quantitative elements with real-time
              data collection. The implementation of existing tools such as Real-Time Physics
              will occur with the development of additional enhancements, particularly
              web-based resources such as pre-lab assignments and interactive learning
              evaluation tools.

The program exists as the second element in a planned
              three-stage enhancement for physics education at Boston University. The first
              stage is the development and application of Interactive Lecture Demonstrations
              in the classroom. This has been funded by the University and is nearly
              complete. The second stage is the MBL for the introductory courses. The third
              stage will be the development of a more advanced microcomputer-based lab in the
              intermediate and advanced physics classes, thereby integrating the MBL
              experience vertically through the curriculum.

The introductory MBL program
              consists of a set of 13 computers and workbench tools for the introductory
              physics classes, covering conceptual physics, mechanics, electricity and
              magnetism, and modem physics. The project is also enhancing existing
              educational tools with web-based resources providing greater breadth and depth
              to the individual experiments; on-line evaluations to provide rapid student
              response and a convenient basis for assessment, and using the new Interactive
              Lecture Demonstrations as a complementary student learning activity. Boston
              University is renovating a room in the central foyer of the Metcalf Science and
              Engineering building specifically for the implementation of this program and
              for maximum visibility to the greater student population.

