Title       : Late Cenozoic Evolution of North American Bats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a9981512

Award Number: 9981512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73097              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Czaplewski nczaplewski@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary S. Morgan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1571,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9981512
Czaplewski & Morgan

	Bats comprise the second largest order of
              living mammals and the only mammals that fly. They are also important because
              their ecological roles are diverse and their contributions to community
              structure can be substantial. Yet their diversity and relationships are not
              well understood. In turn, our poor understanding of their biodiversity hinders
              our efforts at their conservation. The lack of understanding of the
              relationships of bats is partly due to their poor fossil record. Fossils of
              bats of Tertiary age are particularly rare in North America, but also in most
              other continents. 
	Recently, thousands of fossils of small vertebrates have
              been collected from a series of 14 localities in Florida distributed across
              most of the latter half of the Tertiary period, spanning approximately 27
              million years of time from late Oligocene to late Pliocene (about 29 million to
              2 million years ago). The fossils originate from sinkhole deposits and are
              unusually rich in specimens of bats. In a few of the sites, hundreds of
              specimens are available, making these by far the richest localities for fossil
              bats ever found in the Tertiary in North America. The bats belong to several
              different families, some of which no longer occur in temperate North America.
              The fossils thus have important biogeographic and paleoclimatic
              implications.
	The aims of this project are: (1) to describe and name new taxa
              (at least 10 new genera and 12 new species are present) in this large series of
              Tertiary bat fossils; (2) to determine their phylogenetic relationships by
              comparison with museum specimens of modern bats using computer-assisted
              analyses, (3) to document bat species turnover during the middle-to-late
              Tertiary period in the Florida paleofaunas.
	Because the Florida localities
              preserve the best-sampled area and time period recording fossil bats in the
              entire continent, they will provide an initial model by which we may understand
              the diversification and changes in composition of bat paleofaunas during the
              middle-late Tertiary in North America. Biogeographically and
              biostratigraphically, they may also lend themselves to tests of
              intercontinental dispersals such as that already documented by other mammals in
              the late Tertiary between North and South America and the Caribbean
              islands.



