Title       : Collaborative Research: Species Delimitation and Phylogenetic Relationships
               within Isoetes (Isoetaceae) Using Multiple Data Sets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a9981460

Award Number: 9981460
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara B. Hoot hoot@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9981460
Hoot

Species Delimitation and Phylogenetic Relationships within
              Isoetes Using
Multiple Data Sets

Isoetes are a genus of nonflowering plants
              which were widespread during ancient times (Paleozoic).  They have a worldwide
              distribution and diverse ecological adaptations.  Isoetes plants may be found
              in streams , lakes, and ephemeral pools.  The form of the plant is very simple,
              consisting of narrow, elongated leaves which produce spores at their base and a
              swollen root stock.  This simple form (morphology) provides few characters,
              making the identification of species and determination of species relationships
              difficult.  In addition, Isoetes species readily hybridize with each other,
              further confusing our understanding of species limits and
              relationships.

This project has three main objectives: 1) to provide an
              evolutionary tree
(phylogeny) for the genus throughout the world, 2) to
              identify and delimit
species within Isoetes, and 3) to identify the original
              parents involved in
the formation of hybrid species.  Since morphology
              provides few characters for this group, additional molecular data in the form
              of DNA sequences will be collected.  In the past ten years, DNA sequence data
              have been an invaluable tool, helping scientists understand evolutionary
              relationships in a wide variety
of organisms.  To better understand
              relationships of Isoetes species worldwide, we will use two DNA regions, one
              located in the chloroplast genome (atpB/rbcL intergenic spacer region) and one
              in the nucleus (internal transcribed spacer regions - ITS).  To define species
              and determine the origin of hybrid species, we will use a highly variable
              region within a gene involved in plant reproduction (LEAFY second
              intron).

This work is a collaborative effort between Drs. Sara B. Hoot
              (University
of Wisconsin-Milwaukee) and W. Carl Taylor (Milwaukee Public
              Museum).  S.
Hoot will be largely responsible for the molecular work, C.
              Taylor will be
involved in plant collection (taking him to distant sites in
              South America,
Africa and other continents) and morphological studies of
              Isoetes.

