Title       : Phylogeny and Diversification of Araliales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2000      
File        : a9981641

Award Number: 9981641
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory M. Plunkett gmplunke@vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Porter P. Lowry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9981641
Plunkett and Lowry
	Two investigators, the first a young scientist
              with expertise in molecular systematics and impressive publications from his
              dissertation studies and the second an experienced field naturalist and plant
              monographer, are combining forces to study the large, mostly southern
              hemisphere plant family Araliaceae and its close relatives, to improve
              taxonomic classification of the group, construct a framework phylogeny for the
              genera, and begin to determine the historical biogeography that accounts for
              the current widespread distribution of these plants. The Araliaceae are the
              predominantly tropical relatives of the mostly temperate-zone carrot family,
              the Apiaceae or Umbelliferae. Araliaceae include numerous small (1-25 species)
              genera, and two huge genera, Schefflera (with ca. 650 described species) and
              Polyscias (with ca. 150 species). With Apiaceae and the Old World tropical
              family Pittosporaceae, the Araliaceae constitute the order Araliales, along
              with four difficult-to-place genera: Aralidium (western Malesia), Griselinia
              (disjunct in Chile and New Zealand), Melanophylla (Madagascar), and Toricellia
              (the Himalayas). Traditional morphological characters, useful in species-level
              discrimination, have proved unreliable in delimiting sublineages within the
              group, but preliminary DNA sequence data show evidence of resolving the major
              lineages and many sublineages within Araliales. With extensive samples already
              accumulated, in large part due to Lowry's personal field collecting and
              contacts with colleagues worldwide, and to be supplemented with targeted field
              work in Asia and Australasia, new data will be collected for nuclear and
              chloroplast genes, in order to assess mutational differences at species, genus,
              and family levels throughout the group. Selected anatomical, chromosomal, and
              morphological characters will be integrated to bolster phylogenetic resolution
              and improve generic classification.
	With a reliable phylogenetic framework in
              place, the investigators can begin to unravel the historical pathways of
              migration and diversification that have resulted in the current distribution of
              the group. A few aralialean fossils suggest Cretaceous origins for the group,
              consistent with an early "Gondwanan" distribution pattern, and subsequent
              expansions on all the southern hemisphere continents. Further insights rely
              upon successful resolution of the phylogenetic relationships of the genera, in
              turn upon careful taxonomic sampling of the known geographic and morphological
              variation in Araliales.


