Title       : Adaptation and Implementation of Inquiry-based and Investigative Laboratories in
               a Biotechnology Major for Liberal Arts Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1999  
File        : a9981132

Award Number: 9981132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73489              (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. DeHeer dehe@calvin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Koetje  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Calvin College
	      3201 Burton, S. E.
	      Grand Rapids, MI  49546    616/957-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              iological Sciences (61)  Calvin College is establishing a new four-year
              Biotechnology major.  To do so they are: (1) adapting laboratory curricula from
              existing biotechnology programs at four universities (Northeastern,
              SUNY-Fredonia, Ferris State and James Madison), (2) implementing the revised
              curriculum in three new laboratory-based courses, Introduction to
              Biotechnology, Cell and Tissue Culture, and DNA Technology, as well as one
              capstone course, Biotechnology Regulations and Ethics, and (3) introducing the
              use of advanced biotechnology instrumentation. This new major is firmly rooted
              in a strong liberal arts tradition, unique in that it includes both plant- and
              animal-cell culture experiences, provides hands on use of advanced equipment at
              the undergraduate level, and addresses the social context and responsibilities
              of biotechnology practitioners. Course structure reflects Calvin's focus on the
              liberal arts and emphasis on inquiry-based learning by including a progression
              of experiences from the development of basic biotechnology laboratory
              competencies using inquiry-based group activities to student-designed
              experiments and opportunities for data analysis and interpretation that extend
              over several laboratory periods. The culmination of the sequence of courses is
              a semester-long set of student-designed research projects with oral and written
              communication of results. 


