Title       : Biocomplexity in Common Mycorrhizal Networks: RUI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a9981337

Award Number: 9981337
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $663326             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darlene Southworth southworth@sou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Oregon University
	      1250 Siskiyou Boulevard
	      Ashland, OR  975205001    503/482-3311

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1366,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Southworth
9981337

Researchers at the University of California at Davis and
              Riverside and from Southern Oregon University will examine how the spatial and
              temporal distributions of soil resources interact with mycorrhizal fungi and
              plant roots to form networks belowground (common mycorrhizal networks, CMNs). 
              The central hypothesis is that flows of carbon and nutrients in CMNs are not
              wholly determined either by plants or fungi.  The magnitude and direction of
              flows are determined by interactions between plant species, mycorrhizal fungal
              species and soil resources -- resources whose availability changes in complex
              ways in space and time.  Changes in any one of the 3 components will result in
              altered CMN structure and function.  The researchers predict that changes in
              the 3 components will significantly alter fungal and plant species composition
              and soil resource distribution, resulting in long-term changes in plant
              community dynamics, soil stability, nutrient cycling rates, and ecosystem
              production. 

Research activities, which are being supported by the
              Directorate for Biological Sciences, among institutions will be coordinated
              using three innovative approaches. These include student and post-doctoral
              researcher rotations among institutions, annual field campaigns integrating
              participants from all institutions, and web sites to disseminate information.
              This approach will train students to think broadly about complex systems and
              about the value of applying multiple skills and tools to complex
              problems.

The research will enhance understanding of the dynamic
              interactions between oaks and grasses in oak woodlands in California, perhaps
              allowing more successful preservation and restoration of these woodlands. By
              comparing biocomplexity above and below-ground in a model system, the
              researchers expect to learn general principles about how above and below ground
              systems are linked. 

