Title       : Multidisciplinary Lab-Based Undergraduate Controls Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2000   
File        : a9981009

Award Number: 9981009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70570              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory L. Plett glp@eas.uccs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David K. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Colo Springs
	      1420, Austin Bluffs Parkway
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80933    719/262-3153

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Electrical (55)
This project is establishing and reforming a
              cross-disciplinary, lab-based, undergraduate control curriculum within the
              College of Engineering and Applied Sciences at the University of Colorado at
              Colorado Springs. One of the main focuses of the lab is that it be a
              multidisciplinary facility. It is shared by the Electrical and Computer
              Engineering (ECE) and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering (MAE) students. This
              is similar in theme to the outstanding control-systems laboratory at the
              University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. 

Another main focus of this lab
              is that it include physical devices to control.  The ideas are being adapted
              from a paper by Dennis S. Bernstein, where he describes the control-systems
              laboratory at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, and the necessity of
              physical experiments, and devices to be controlled. The laboratory is being
              incorporated into the curricula of four additional junior and senior level
              control courses.  These courses teach classical analog and digital control
              methods, and modern multi-variable analog and digital control methods.  The
              digital control courses, in particular, are redesigned to be heavily lab-based.
               Laboratory experiments and demonstrations are designed for the other courses
              as well.

This control systems laboratory is comprised of four work centers. 
              These centers are used to study control of "magnetic Levitation,"
              "Control-Moment Gyroscope" and "Flexible Beam" dynamic mechanism.  These
              devices are configured to study control of liner or non-linear, single-variable
              or multi-variable, minimum-phase or nonminimum-phase systems.  The lab is being
              used by two control courses which teach classical analog and digital control
              methods, respectively.  Learning is greatly enhanced as the students are now be
              able to control a physical apparatus (rather than just simulate performance). 
              Unexpected disturbances and unmodeled dynamics are encountered, and so the
              students are forced to design a controller that will work acceptably in a real
              implementation.  The curricula for these two laboratory courses are redesigned
              to incorporate extensive weekly experiments and design projects using the
              equipment purchased for this project. 


