Title       : Experimental and Model Analysis of Large Disturbance Consequences for Forest
               Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a9981392

Award Number: 9981392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Clark jimclark@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9981392
Clark
Understanding how forests respond to environmental change
              requires models that extrapolate from short-term observations to long-term
              dynamics. The current gap dynamic paradigm does this extrapolation under the
              assumption that recruitment is governed by conditions within canopy gaps 30
              meters in diameter. Much empirical evidence and experimental tests of the
              paradigm suggest that diversity in many forests may depend on much larger
              canopy gaps than assumed in the models now used to forecast forest response to
              global change. If the underlying assumptions of the models are unrealistic,
              then predictions under novel environments of the future are likely misleading.
              In this project, a series of field experiments and model test will be conducted
              to test (1) gap sizes at which recruitment limitation is severe, and (2)
              whether maintenance of forest diversity depends on large gaps. Field studies
              will both test for specific life history stages at which recruitment limitation
              occurs and the factors responsible for limitation, while also providing
              parameter estimates for modeling studies. The extent to which fecundity, seed
              dispersal, predation in seed banks and availability of soil microbes affect
              recruitment in the closed forest understory and in gaps will be tested. Two
              modeling approaches will be used to determine the population and community
              consequences of experimental results. To determine the effects of demography
              observed in experimental and natural gaps on growth rates the PIs will use
              parameters in a stage structured population model. Analysis of the model will
              provide rate estimates implied by demography for each gap type and the
              contributions of each life history stage to population growth. An individual
              based model will be used to incorporate spatial elements, including seed
              dispersal and competition for light. Analysis of this model will provide
              estimates for the effects of gap size on forest diversity. Together, field
              experiments and modeling studies will allow the assessment of the contribution
              of disturbance to forest dynamics and thus, assessment of how forests may
              respond to novel environments in the future.

