Title       : A Test of Phylogenetic Versus Biological Species Concepts in the Fungus
               Neurospora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9981987

Award Number: 9981987
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Taylor jtaylor@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9981987
Taylor
	Working with colleague Dr. David Jacobson at University of
              California-Berkeley, Dr. John Taylor aims to challenge the existing Biological
              and Morphological Species Concepts in the filamentous fungus Neurospora
              (Ascomycetes) by using concordance of multiple gene genealogies to diagnose
              phylogenetic species. In parallel, they will refine the current Biological
              Species Concept (BSC) via experimental matings among Neurospora species. Recent
              studies in Taylor's laboratory of gene genealogy concordance to diagnose fungal
              species have uncovered genetically isolated species within morphologically
              defined species, just as has been the case with experimental matings. In one
              case, fungi placed in a single species due to mating behavior sort into at
              least four genetically distinguishable phylogenetic species. Therefore, the
              phylogenetic species concept (PSC) diagnoses genetically isolated species in
              nature, as should the BSC, but it can be applied to all fungi, whether or not
              they exhibit sexual reproduction (many do not), as can the Morphological
              Species Concept.
	The choice of Neurospora, an organism used widely as a model
              in developmental and evolutionary biology, is based on four major reasons. 1)
              The 13 known species exhibit the range of reproductive behavior seen throughout
              fungi, including outbreeding (heterothallic), selfing (homothallic), and
              mixtures of the two. 2) The outbreeding species have been diagnosed as
              biological species from the start, and over 4,600 individuals are available
              from the NSF-funded Fungal Genetics Stock Center, each of them having been
              assigned to species by mating tests. 3) Mating tests to assign individuals to
              biological species are not always clear cut, and more than one set of "testers"
              has been required to accommodate variation found in N. crassa and N.
              intermedia. This variation suggests that the BSC for Neurospora may be lumping
              genetically isolated groups (or lineages). 4) Preliminary molecular
              phylogenetic studies indicate that gene flow may be occurring among some
              biological species in the genus, further questioning the applicability of the
              mating-test based BSC. Using the abundant DNA sequence information for fungi in
              GenBank and the Neurospora Genome Project, the researchers will PCR amplify
              gene regions, check for useful variation, and construct at least five gene
              genealogies, tracking the five major chromosomes. Phylogenetic trees can then
              be constructed for each of the genes individually and then combined;
              simultaneous analysis of all five regions reveals basal branches common to all
              five single gene trees due to lineage sorting following genetic isolation,
              while conflict among terminal branches (with resulting polytomies in the
              consensus tree) reveals recombination among individuals in genetically isolated
              species. The interface between the shared branches and the conflicting branches
              represents the species boundary, the zone of lineage separation. 

