Title       : Dissertation Research: Demography and Household Dynamics in the Chiefdoms of the
               Alto Magdalena, Colombia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1999   
File        : a9981573

Award Number: 9981573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Michael Kruschek will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological excavations
              in the Alto Magdalena region of southwestern Colombia. Although the Mayans,
              Aztec and Inca are best known for the levels of social complexity they reached
              prehistorically in the New World, the polity which developed in Alto Magdalena
              shares many of these same characteristics. Archaeologists have uncovered large,
              ornately carved stone tombs as well as monumental sized stone sculptures. Dr.
              Drennan and colleagues have traced the region's prehistory over a ca. 2,600
              year period from 1,000 BC to the Spanish conquest. The record demonstrates
              increasing social complexity over time as well as an increase in population
              size. The relationship between population increase and the development of
              social complexity is well established and archaeologists recognized that these
              two variables are directly correlated. However the nature of this relationship
              is far from clear. Some scientists argue that population pressure is a driving
              force and that new social forms emerge from the need to organize increasing
              numbers of individuals. Other researchers believe that the causal chain is
              reversed and that family size increases in response to opportunities offered
              and demands imposed by an increasingly complex social structure. In the Alto
              Magdalena, as in many other areas of the world when this phenomenon has been
              noted, it is also uncertain whether increased population size is the result of
              in migration from other regions or from increased reproduction which leads to
              larger family size. Mr. Kruschek will collect data to shed light on these
              issues. He will excavate a large number of small shovel test pits to locate a
              sample of dwellings across the 2,600 year span and has developed an efficient
              way to estimate house size. Because ethnographic studies of modern day
              traditional people indicate a direct correlation between house area and number
              of occupants it will be possible to determine how family size changed over
              time. These data, in conjunction with available information on cultural and
              large scale population changes will allow Mr. Kruschek to determine whether
              population increase precedes or follows major cultural milestones and how
              family size, as opposed to migration, comes into play.

This research is
              important for several reasons. It will provide data on an important and poorly
              understood archaeological phenomenon. It will yield new insight into the
              factors involved in the rise of complex society and will assist in training a
              promising young scientist.

