Title       : Collaborative Research & RUI: Spatial Patch Structure: Can Ephemeral and
               Heterogeneous Resource Patches Influence Biotic Assemblages in Streams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a9981376

Award Number: 9981376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joann P. Roskoski                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147494             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret A. Palmer mp3@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marco Colombini  (Principal Investigator former)
              David E. Wooster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In many ecosystems, the dominant habitat patches frequently change in terms of
              their overall quality or their resource levels. Periodically, habitat patches
              may be physically disrupted or destroyed. In such highly dynamic systems it
              often is assumed that mobile fauna will be unresponsive to the arrangement of
              habitat patches or to other landscape attributes. The underlying logic is that
              faunal responses to landscape attributes will be masked by the spatial and
              temporal variability of such systems. In this proposal, we argue that mobile
              fauna in highly dynamic systems are, in fact, responsive to landscape
              attributes - especially patch arrangement. Population persistence and species
              interactions following the disruption of patches or changes in resources may be
              influenced greatly by the quality and arrangement of patches. In prior
              NSF-funded research, we found that stream-dwelling chironomids and copepods
              respond to the quality and distribution of habitat (leaf) patches in laboratory
              and field experiments, but we did not consider how patch stability, patch
              resource (leaf species) composition, or predator-prey interactions influence
              faunal dynamics. Here, we hypothesize that invertebrate abundance in streambeds
              is better explained at the scale of multiple patches (the "landscape") than at
              the scale of individual patches; is directly linked to the interactive effects
              of patch arrangement, patch stability, and patch quality; and, that
              invertebrate response to these three factors is modified by the presence of
              fish predators.

We propose three field experiments to test the following
              specific hypotheses: (1) in stable landscapes (no patch movement), the
              abundance of stream invertebrates depends on patch arrangement and patch
              quality (leaf species composition); (2) when patches are not stable, the
              abundance of invertebrates depends on the interactive effects of patch
              arrangement and the level of patch stability; and (3) the response of stream
              invertebrates to patch arrangement, quality, & stability is influenced by the
              presence of predatory fish. To test the first two hypotheses, we will
              manipulate patch arrangement and patch stability or leaf quality using repeated
              measures factorial designs. For the third hypothesis, we will manipulate
              predator abundance and one landscape attribute at a time (patch arrangement,
              patch stability, or leaf quality). We will follow changes over time in the
              abundance of invertebrates at the level of landscapes, although we also will be
              able to assess variability within and among the individual patches that
              constitute each landscape.

This work has important implications because we
              are asking if and how changes in landscapes --in terms of patch types and their
              arrangement and their resource levels -- influence biotic assemblages. Much of
              the current understanding of biotic responses to spatial landscape features is
              based primarily on theoretical and empirical work on systems in which the
              landscape features are fairly stable. Since many systems are highly dynamic --
              patches move and patch quality varies temporally -- the type of research
              proposed here is greatly needed. As in our past grant, this research will be
              conducted as a collaborative effort between P. Silver at Penn State Erie, an
              undergraduate institution, and M.A. Palmer at University of Maryland College
              Park, a large research institution. The PI's, undergraduates, graduate students
              and a post doctoral associate will collaborate in all phases of the work,
              thereby providing maximum opportunity for students to participate in high
              quality research in an atmosphere of intense teamwork and collaboration with
              workers at a large research campus and a small primarily teaching campus.

