Title       : Development of a Hydride Donor Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  1999  
File        : a9981835

Award Number: 9981835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Rakowski DuBois duboism@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research on the development of a hydride donor scale scale by
              Professor Mary Rakowski DuBois of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
              at the University of Colorado-Boulder and Dr. Daniel DuBois at the National
              Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado. A series of both existing and
              newly-synthesized isoelectronic and isostructural transition metal hydridse
              diphosphine complexes will be employed to determine their hydride donor
              strength as measured by the heterolytic bond dissociation free energies. The
              acidities and homolytic bond dissociation free energies will also be determined
              as part of the thermodynamic cycles used to obtain this substrate and
              solvent-independent donor strength scale. After this scale is established, a
              number of compounds with a range of donor abilities will be reacted with
              organic substrates to examine the relationship between these donor values and
              hydride reactivity ("donicity"). This thermodynamic scale will be extended to
              obtain relative values for the transfer of the methyl cation, anion and
              radical.

The goal of this research is to develop a quantitative scale for
              the ability of metal hydride compounds to transfer hydrogen to a substrate, and
              to relate these numbers to their reactivity. Catalytic hydogenation of organic
              compounds is of great industrial importance, and metal hydrides are often
              intermediates in these reactions. The results of this study will support the
              design of more efficient catalytic processes, and some of the metal hydrides
              prepared in this work may  themselves have value as reactant or catalytic
              materials. Students involved in the project will learn a breadth of skills in
              both synthesis and instrumental methods, and gain experience in an effort which
              links fundamental chemistry with industrial catalysis. 
