Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Molecular Population Genetics of Old-World and
               New-World Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9981452

Award Number: 9981452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15460              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Rand david_rand@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5918,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9981452
Rand

This two-year award for U.S.-France collaboration in population
              and evolutionary biology involves David M. Rand and a postdoctoral researcher
              from Brown University and Michel Veuille of the University Marie et Pierre
              Curie in Paris, France.  Their collaboration is aimed at an extensive
              characterization of genetic variation within and among Old World and New World
              populations of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster and Drosophila simulans. 
              It is believed that this species originated in Africa, spread to European
              locations and more recently colonized the New World.  The presence of
              geographically dispersed populations offers a unique opportunity to test
              genetic variations that may have evolved over centuries.  The investigators
              will focus their effort on collecting natural samples showing a cytonuclear
              polymorphism, a condition found in European, but not North American samples of
              D. melanogaster.   They will test the hypothesis that cytonuclear fitness
              interactions are differed for X-linked nuclear locus versus
              autsomal-cytoplasmic locus.  In addition they will test neutral models of
              population differentiation and molecular evolution. 

This award represents
              the U.S. side of a joint proposal to the NSF and the French National Center for
              Scientific Research (CNRS).  NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses
              for the U.S. investigator and postdoctoral researcher to collect samples,
              prepare duplication accessions of samples and subsequently analyze them.  The
              project will advance our understanding of how genetic variations may have
              evolved in old world and new world species.  

