Title       : Complexity and Design of Transparent Packet Switching Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a9981187

Award Number: 9981187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301843             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Yavuz Oruc yavuz@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Newcomb  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Packet switching has been extensively studied for traffic problems but
              there has been very little work,
if any, on the complexity and methodical
              design of packet switching networks.  Indeed, in a recent
NSF workshop report,
              it was stressed that a wide variety of switching system architectures have
              been
proposed, but little definitive evaluation or comparisons of these
              architectures have been made under criteria that factor in both performance and
              cost measures, where technology-dependent and technology-independent factors
              are clearly separated."
     A buffered network model was recently introduced
              to examine the design and complexity problems in
packet switching networks. 
              Building on this model, the notion of transparency is introduced in
              the
proposed research as a measure of a buffered network's ability to deliver
              its packets at a specified set
of traffic rates between its inputs and
              outputs.  The notion of transparency quantifies the ability of
a buffered
              network to deliver its packets much like the nonblocking property of a circuit
              switching
network quantifies its ability to provide paths between its idle
              inputs and idle outputs.  The main goal
of the proposed research is to use the
              notion of transparency to investigate the basic bounds of packet
transmission
              in packet switching networks, and construct packet switching networks which
              come close
to meeting these bounds.  Such bounds are often imposed on a packet
              switching network by its topology,
buffer space, and crosspoint and routing
              complexity.  In constrast to circuit switching networks, the
complexity of
              packet switching networks has escaped the scrutiny of packet switching research
              so far,
but without any information on their complexity, the performance of
              packet switching networks cannot
be quantified.
     Along with the
              investigation of the complexity problems, the proposed research will attempt to
              identify
the types of traffic and assignments for which efficient buffered
              networks can potentially be obtained,
and actually construct such networks. 
              Informally speaking an "efficient buffered network" is one which
utilizes its
              crosspoints and buffer space as fully as possible subject to meeting a set of
              traffic constraints. Both unicast and multicast buffered networks will be
              investigated.  The main tools of the proposed research will be Hall-type
              theorems, Pinsker's inexplicit combinatorial constructions, and explicit
              recursive network construction techniques.  Inexplicit constructions will be
              used to establish the optimality and quantify the performance of explicit
              recursive buffered networks.  The researchers anticipate that
the complexity
              bounds on packet switching and recursive buffered network construction
              techniques to
be obtained in the proposed research will have a strong impact
              on the way that packet switches are
designed, and can pave the way for a
              methodical design of efficient and practical packet switching
networks.

