Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY: Collaborative Research: Microbial and Nutrient Controls in
               Mangrove Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a9981357

Award Number: 9981357
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joann P. Roskoski                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Myrna E. Jacobson myrnaj@wrigley.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1366,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT 

This project, which is being supported by the Directorate for
              Biological Sciences, the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
              Engineering, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate
              for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, will fund research on mangrove forests
              that dominate the world's tropical and subtropical coasts, paralleling the
              geographical distribution of coral reefs. Ecological processes here are
              influenced by inputs from the land, sea, and sky, which result in extreme
              fluctuations of flooding, salinity, temperature, light, and nutrient
              availability. Mangrove-associated organisms have specialized physiological and
              structural adaptations that sustain them in this variable environment.
              Human-caused enrichment is one of the major global threats to these coastal
              ecosystems. Experiments show that nutrients are not uniformly distributed among
              or even within mangrove forests. Soil fertility can switch from nitrogen to
              phosphorus limitation across narrow gradients. This study will explore the
              relationships among physical and chemical factors, nutrients, microbes, trees,
              and elemental cycling on off-shore mangrove islands in Belize.
We will examine
              the  interactions between the environment and organisms to determine how
              changes in nutrient inputs from natural, agricultural, or urban sources might
              alter the delicate balance among these ecosystem components. Mathematical
              models will help us predict the contribution complexity makes to the ability of
              mangrove ecosystems to survive both natural and anthropogenic disturbances. The
              results of the study will help scientists understand how to better manage and
              conserve mangrove ecosystems and will contribute to our understanding of
              biocomplexity in other ecosystems.

