Title       : U.S.-Japan and U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Determination of Aerosol
               Composition and Concentration from ILAS-II Infared Solar Occultation
               Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a9981542

Award Number: 9981542
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20768              (Estimated)
Investigator: Annmarie Eldering eldering@atmos.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,5918,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9981542
Eldering

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Annmarie Eldering of the University of California in
              Los Angeles and Dr. Yasuhiro Sasano of the National Institute for Environmental
              Studies in Tsukuba, Japan. Collaboration also involves researchers at CNES
              (French Space Agency) and CNRS (French National Center for Scientific Research.
              The researchers will be undertaking a study of the determination of aerosol
              composition and concentration from ILAS-11 infrared solar occultation
              measurements. An important yet poorly understood heterogeneous chemistry
              problem is the role of polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs) in ozone destruction
              in the polar stratosphere.  Laboratory studies and in situ observations show
              that PSCs act as catalysts, transforming chlorine containing compounds into
              reactive forms, which destroy ozone.  New methods are needed to measure the
              composition and concentration of aerosols on a global basis and satellite
              measurements have a great untapped potential for this goal.  In the fall of
              2000 ADEOS-11 will be launched by the Japanese Space Development Agency and
              this satellite will include ILAS-11, an infrared limb sounding instrument. 
              This instrument will provide a unique data set of limb observations through
              PSCs.  The specific objectives of the research are:  1) compare spherical and
              nonspherical models for nitric acid trihydrate and dihydrate extinction to the
              aerosol extinction measured with ILAS-11 and examine the composition of polar
              stratospheric clouds from the IR spectra;  2) use nonlinear least squares
              methods to retrieve aerosol slant columns of polar stratospheric clouds, ice,
              and sulfuric acid; and  3) attempt to develop vertical profiles of aerosols,
              ice and PSCs from slant columns.  

The project brings together the efforts
              of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
              capabilities. Knowledge of the composition and global distribution of aerosols
              is important for understanding climate change and a number of atmospheric
              chemistry problems.  This research could have a significant impact on a broad
              range of atmospheric science areas and should greatly increase our
              understanding of aerosols.  The project advances international human resources
              through the participation of postdocs and a graduate student.  Through the
              exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic
              knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation.   Results of
              the research will be published in international scientific journals and will
              also be presented at scientific meetings in the U.S. and abroad.

