Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Contribution of In Situ Electron Microscopy to
               Understanding and Creation of Advanced Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a9981689

Award Number: 9981689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Sinclair bobsinc@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5921,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9981689
Sinclair

This award supports the participation of American
              scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on Contribution of In Situ Electron
              Microscopy to Understanding and Creation of Advanced Materials, to be held in
              Kyoto, Japan, from November 7-10, 2000.  The co-organizers are Professors
              Robert Sinclair at Stanford University and Professor Hiroyasu Saka at Nagoya
              University in Japan.  The majority of in situ TEM (transmission electron
              microscopy) is carried out in the U.S. and in Japan.  The former has strengths
              in materials science applications (e.g. thin film deposition, semiconductor
              defect behavior, and catalysis), whereas the latter has a wider variety of
              hardware (e.g. higher voltage microscopes, higher temperature specimen holder,
              and piezo-electric devices).  Currently there is very little basis for the
              exchange of ideas, experiments or personnel. This seminar will include
              presentations of the most recent developments in the field.  In addition, the
              strengths of the two countries' approaches will be highlighted.  A significant
              portion of time will then be allocated to developing the field in the future
              and assuming definitive collaborations.

Many high technology materials these
              days are made from the atomic level up (e.g. microelectronic, computer hard
              disks, nanomaterials).  Understanding and improving their performance requires
              examination at extremely high levels of magnification and resolution, which is
              provided by transmission electron microscopy.  This method is being applied in
              an increasing number of ways and in a more innovative fashion.  Seminar
              organizers have made a special effort to involve younger researchers as both
              participants and observers.  The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese
              experts in this field will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work,
              and will set the stage for future collaborative projects.  Dissemination plans
              for the seminar proceedings include publication in the "Journal of Electron
              Microscopy."  A summary of the symposium should also be available in "Materials
              Research Society Bulletin," and "Microscopy Society of America Bulletin."

