Title       : Use of an NMR Spectrometer to Improve the Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2000    
File        : a9981068

Award Number: 9981068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Jurs pcj@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl T. Mueller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Minard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Juliette T. Lecomte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacqueline M. Bortiatynski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
Use of a modern nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer
              and adaptation of relevant experiments developed at other institutions and
              published in a variety of chemistry journals enable continued planned
              improvements in the chemistry curriculum.  The institution's vision for
              undergraduate education is to develop a set of laboratory experiences that are
              thoughtfully sequenced and integrated to promote the full intellectual and
              skills development of students in all courses.  Nuclear magnetic resonance
              spectroscopy has been one of the most powerful structural tools available to
              chemists since its inception.  Within the last two decades, tremendous
              improvements in field strength and stability, computer hardware, software, and
              user interfaces, have allowed much  more complex experiments.  Today, detailed
              studies of molecular interactions, dynamics, and the characterization of
              complex structures are becoming routine.  Knowledge of how to access molecular
              level information is extremely important if graduates are to tackle complex
              questions in the areas of biochemistry, geochemistry, materials science, and
              environmental chemistry.  In many undergraduate chemistry programs, the
              greatest technology gap between undergraduate education and graduate or
              industrial research is often in NMR spectroscopy.  Use of a modern NMR
              spectrometer in the curriculum prepares undergraduates to meet research
              challenges presented in industry and academia.  This spectrometer provides
              students with variable temperature, high resolution, proton and carbon-13 NMR
              spectra as well as spin-lattice relaxation data, magnetization transfer spectra
              in biochemical kinetics, polarization transfer (DEPT) spectra, and a variety of
              2-D spectra such as COSY, NOESY, ROESY, TOSY, HMQC.  Solid-state NMR
              capabilities also allow obtaining magic angle spinning cross polarization
              (CPMAS) NMR spectra.
