Title       : SBIR Phase II: Very Large Scale Integrated (VLSI) Implementations of
               Neuromorphic Virtual Sensors for Intelligent Diagnostics and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a9981852

Award Number: 9981852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander W. Moopenn amoopenn@mosaixtech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mosaix, LLC
	      1229 Bruce Avenue
	      Glendale, CA  91202    818/507-7946

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0207000   Transportation                          
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 1059,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop a novel,
              compact, low-cost
adaptive neuroprocessor chip for advanced diagnostics and
              control in the next generation of low emission
"environmentally friendly"
              vehicles.  This digital CMOS VLSI electronic neural network device combines
              on-chip integration of a fully reconfigurable feed-forward/time-lagged
              recurrent neuroprocessor module with backpropagation-through-time (BPTT) weight
              training module.  Specifically, the technical objectives are to develop a
              neuroprocessor chip suitable for direct insertion into an automobile's
              electronic engine computer (EEC).  This stand-alone electronic neural network
              will function as a co-processor to the EEC's central processing unit (CPU),
              off-loading it of computationally intensive neural based tasks and enabling
              event rate automotive diagnostics and control.  The neuroprocesor is
              programmable, allowing it to execute multiple neural network applications
              on-the-fly; is capable of event rate computational throughput (<<50
              microseconds) per appli-cation; is a system-on-a-chip (SOAC) design
              (stand-alone neuroprocessor with on-chip weight training); and cost effective
              (<$5/chip).  On-chip adaptation will not only enable adaptive control, but will
              address the problem of fixed weight networks - namely that of enabling on-board
              self-calibration of electronic and mechanical systems for optimal
              performance.

Applications areas of the proposed neural network formalism
              cover the following industry sectors: (1) ad-vanced diagnostic and control
              strategies for low emision vehicles & hybrid electric vehicles in the
              automotive industry; (2) prognostics and diagnostics of jet engines for the
              aerospace industry; (3) and adaptive equaliza-tion of cell phones for superior
              noise rejection in the communication industry.

