Title       : Adaptation of GIS for Location of Surface Transportation Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1994   
File        : a9362170

Award Number: 9362170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yakov Smotritsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Routing Tech Inc
	      8678 Bay Parkway B6
	      Brooklyn, NY  112144154    212/666-8327

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,1352,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9362170  SMOTRITSKY   The location of surface-transportation routes and utility 
               corridors requires consideration of economic, political,   engineering, and
              environmental issues.  The potential for   simultaneously considering these
              diverse factors has been   increased dramatically in recent years through the
              development of   sophisticated geographic information systems (GISs), but  
              procedures for analyzing data in ways that identify optimal   routes have not
              yet been developed.  This Small Business   Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
              project will begin work on the   development and application of an algorithm to
              identify least-  cost and environmentally acceptable route locations between  
              points.  Special attention will be given to three major facets of   the optimal
              route location problem.  With respect to   identification of the shortest path,
              this project will focus on   adaptation of an algorithm that minimizes
              metrication errors that   result from characteristics of the spatial units for
              which data   are associated.  The project will address directional factors,  
              especially the role of slopes in terrain that can have a major   impact on the
              operation of transport and utility systems, by   introducing elements of a
              third dimension into calculations.  The   project also will consider the
              practical need to consider how   routes cross boundaries between parcels,
              because past experience   has shown that route location problems are reduced
              when fewer   parcels are affected.  This phase of the project will consist of  
              four parts:  (1) the testing and improvement of an existing   algorithm to
              determine the computational complexity of   adaptations, (2) evaluation of
              commercially available geographic   databases to provide terrain and boundary
              information for test   calculations, (3) creation of a graphical interface for
              users to   simplify information entry for additional data, and   (4)
              application of a revised algorithm in a small-scale   demonstration project
              focusing on highway location  in western New   York state.  The test
              demonstration will be undertaken in   cooperation with officials of the New
              York State Department of   Transportation.   Through development and testing of
              this algorithm, the   investigators will advance the capabilities for GISs to
              address a   critical set of problems in a more powerful and efficient way.   
              The use of this type of algorithm is expected to reduce   construction costs of
              transportation routes and utility corridors   by four to seven percent, thereby
              saving both public- and   private-sector organizations millions of dollars
              annually.  This   type of algorithm also will help the U.S. maintain its  
              competitive advantage in geographic information systems, a   rapidly growing
              segment of the information technology industry.  ***
