Title       : Polymer Based Piezoresistive Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1994  
File        : a9362010

Award Number: 9362010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary G. Moss   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brewer Science Inc
	      2401 High Tech Drive, Box GG
	      Rolla, MO  65401    573/364-0300

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1501,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9362010  Moss  Piezoresistive properties of  materials form the basis of many 
              types of sensors, including  strain  gauges, micromachined accelerometers  and
              pressure sensors, tactile  sensor, and flow  sensors. As  greater demands are
              placed on  devices from the standpoint of size  and cost per  controlled point,
               easier methods of processing which  can produce smaller devices with  greater 
              performance are required.  Brewer Science has developed a  processable
              polyaniline, as well as   conductive, ion implanted polymer  films. Much of
              this prior work was  performed in collaboration  with  Southwest Missouri State
              University,  who is subcontractor in the proposed  work. Preliminary 
              investigations  indicate that devices constructed  from ion implanted polymers
              may have  particular  advantages over devices  using ceramic, metallic,
              crystalline  silicon and carbon-filled materials.   These advantages include
              improved  radiation hardness, greater  flexibility and range of travel, low  
              manufacturing cost, abrasion  resistance, and environmental  inertness. The
              polyaniline-based   sensors are easily deposited onto  the substrate and can be
              patterned  to small or large goemetries  by  standard photolithographic 
              procedures. These materials have  potential in the micromachining   industry
              because of the high quality  of the films that are produced on a  micro-scale
              (<1 micron),  and their  ease of processing. In the proposed  work, we will
              determine the  feasibility of using the  soluble  polyanilines and ion
              implanted films  for piezoresistive devices. Specific  goals of this  research
              are to  determine the piezoresistive gauge  factor, to minimize temperature 
              effects, to  improve environmental  stability, and to construct  prototypes of
              a precision laboratory  weight scale  and a vacuum/pressure  sensor based upon
              devices made from  these materials.  ***
