Title       : Observation of Very High Energy Gamma Ray Sources from the South Pole
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1992       
File        : a9022092

Award Number: 9022092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John T. Lynch                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279520             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Morse morse@alizarin.physics.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Fry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. March  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ugo Camerini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5115      ANTARCTIC AERONOMY & ASTROPHYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              This is a continuation of a project to develop and operate air                 
              Cherenkov telescopes at South Pole Station for the purpose of                  
              studying discreet astrophysical sources of very high energy (VHE)              
              gamma rays.  The project is called Gammas At South Pole (GASP), and            
              this second phase is GASP II.  The primary instrument consists of              
              an array of parabolic mirrors, with photomultiplier tubes at their             
              foci, which can detect light from VHE interactions in a small                  
              volume of the atmosphere.  The experiment will shed light on the               
              origin of cosmic rays and possibly on sources of exotic radiation,             
              if such radiation exists.                                                      
                                                                                             
              GASP complements the pre-existing South Pole Air Shower Experiment             
              (SPASE), which is operated by the Bartol Research Institute of the             
              University of Delaware and Leeds University (UK), and extends                  
              downward by two to three orders of magnitude the energy threshold              
              of SPASE.  SPASE can survey most of the southern sky, and GASP will            
              be able to focus on small regions of suspected activity.                       
                                                                                             
              The location at South Pole allows GASP to view a single object for             
              extended periods (weeks to months) through a constant thickness of             
              atmosphere, while mid-latitude locations allow only a few hours of             
              viewing at a time of a given object.  The Polar location also means            
              that the very interesting high declination southern sky is always              
              within view, which gives GASP a great advantage over any mid-                  
              latitude observatory.                                                          
                                                                                             
              The project is a collaboration of the University of Wisconsin,                 
              Purdue University, Bartol Research Institute of the University of              
              Delaware and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory.  It is jointly             
              funded by NSF's Divisions of Polar Programs, the Wisconsin Alumni              
              Research Foundation and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory.
