Title       : Accomplishment Based Research: Substantive and Measurement Issues in the
               Productivity Growth Slowdown
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1992        
File        : a9022897

Award Number: 9022897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120081             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Gordon rjg@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              The United States is now reaching the end of its second decade of              
              virtually zero growth in productivity in the service sector.  The              
              purpose of this research is to determine and analyze the reasons               
              for this unsatisfactory performance, with its threatening                      
              implications for the future growth of the American standard of                 
              living.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This project is divided into three major components.  The first                
              consists of an international comparison of differences in                      
              productivity measurement-methods.  Some facts of measurement                   
              favor the U.S., particularly in the manufacturing sector, where                
              the U.S. is almost unique in its use of a hedonic price index for              
              computers.  Other considerations help to account for a poor U.S.               
              performance and the more favorable foreign performance in non-                 
              manufacturing, particularly the greater use in foreign accounts                
              of physical measures of output in such industries as                           
              construction, transportation, banking, and finance.  This                      
              research will develop a coherent account of differences in                     
              measurement methods in the U. S. and four other leading nations.               
                                                                                             
              The second part of the project analysis the causes for the                     
              differences productivity performance, particularly the hypothesis              
              that labor in U.S. service industries is poorly paid, leading to               
              a high use of labor relative to some European countries where the              
              relative wage in the services is higher and the use of labor                   
              relatively lower.  The hypothesis will be tested in a comparison               
              of wage and productivity performance across industries and                     
              countries.  The final component will consist of detailed studies               
              of individual U.S. industries which raise a combination of                     
              measurement and substantive issues.  Building on previous work                 
              that yielded new insights on productivity behavior in the U.S.                 
              transportation and utility industries, this part of the project                
              will focus on banking, finance, and retailing.
