Title       : Client Involvement in the Governance of Head Start
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1994    
File        : a9022787

Award Number: 9022787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucie E. White   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0307000   Human Rights-Minority Rel               
              0315000   Social Data & Comm Development          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project is an ethnographic study of client governance in                  
              Project Head Start.  Head Start, a federal pre-school program for              
              poor families that has gained wide public acceptance, gives                    
              parents--generally poor women--substantial legal power to make                 
              management decisions at the local level.  Head Start's client                  
              governance component has endured for over a quarter century and                
              remains strong.  As such, the program provides a rich store of                 
              empirical data on issues of institutional design and cultural                  
              pluralism that are both timely and poorly understood.  Through                 
              demographic and archival research, open-ended interviews with                  
              parents and staff, participant observation, and conversational                 
              analysis of parent deliberations, the study will provide a                     
              detailed, comparative account of the interplay between legal                   
              framework and local culture in Head Start's client governance                  
              process.  Two broad themes, power and community, will structure the            
              data collection and guide the data analysis over a one-year period             
              in two field sites.                                                            
                                                                                             
              Parent participation provides an opportunity to explore problems               
              of democratic control over bureaucracies.  This research will                  
              address theoretical and policy-oriented issues relating to the                 
              law's capacity to facilitate greater participation by ethnically               
              and economically subordinated groups in the social institutions of             
              the welfare state.  The study will inform our understanding of how             
              parent governance is being enacted, how the formal structure of the            
              law is guiding that enactment, and how that enactment distributes              
              power and facilitates community at the local level.  As such, it               
              will illuminate the complex processes of citizen governance and                
              will suggest how the law might more effectively enable the well-               
              being of women and their families within those communities.  Also,             
              the research will provide a basis for more generally assessing the             
              potential and limits of parent governance reforms in education.
