Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Hypercube I\O System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1991     
File        : a9022534

Award Number: 9022534
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith A. Teague teague@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              K. M. George  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rao Yarlagadda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is for the purchase of two I/O nodes for use with an                
              Intel iPSC/2 computer system.  The system supports research in                 
              several areas including the development of a C++ translator and                
              compiler for MIMD architectures, neural networks for image                     
              processing and machine vision, and parallel algorithms for high                
              level direction finding.                                                       
                                                                                             
              There are several problems that can be naturally adapted to                    
              parallel computer architectures.  Two such problems are studied                
              under this award.  The first is research in neural networks.  These            
              networks have been proposed as natural models for vision and are               
              easily simulated on parallel computers.  The hope is that real time            
              vision can be accomplished with a complex enough network.  The                 
              second problem is in signal processing.  The particular application            
              is automatic direction finding which is a problem whose solution is            
              important in sonar, surveillance, and seismic application areas.               
              Massive computation is needed in order to reduce errors introduced             
              by noise in the signals.  The final area of research is in the                 
              development of an interpreter and compiler for the programming                 
              language C++.  This project will support other projects by                     
              providing a compiler for a modern high level programming language.
