Title       : Parsing and Descriptional Succinctness in Natural Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1991      
File        : a9022010

Award Number: 9022010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : July 1,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Palis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACTS                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              Research in computational linguistics has introduced new                       
              grammatical formalisms for natural language (NL) which achieve                 
              greater expressive power than context-free grammars through the                
              use and manipulation of complex structures such as trees and                   
              graphs.  It is argued that these formalisms allow for more                     
              succinct descriptions of linguistic phenomena than less powerful               
              grammars.  However, the enhanced power of these formalisms raises              
              important questions concerning their computational feasibility.                
              Specifically:                                                                  
              (1)  How efficient can NL parsing be carried out for these                     
              powerful grammars?                                                             
              (2)  Can the purported succinctness gain when moving from a                    
              weaker to a more powerful grammar be quantified in precise                     
              mathematical terms?                                                            
                                                                                             
              The planned research is aimed at resolving these two questions.                
              First, upper bounds on the complexity of parsing will be derived,              
              and the most efficient parsing algorithms, both serial and                     
              parallel, for different natural language grammars will be                      
              developed.  Secondly, a mathematical framework for comparing the               
              relative succinctness of different formalisms will be developed.               
              Using grammar size as a measure of descriptional complexity, the               
              gain in succinctness (if any) when moving from a weaker to a more              
              powerful will be quantified precisely.                                         
                                                                                             
              The results of this investigation will be useful in assessing the              
              practicability of building natural language processing systems                 
              based on powerful grammatical formalisms.
