Title       : Polymetallacarborane Stacks and Clusters: Designed Synthesis and Electronic
               Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1993  
File        : a9022713

Award Number: 9022713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell N. Grimes RNG@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic                
              Chemistry Program supports the synthesis of new organometallic                 
              compounds containing transition metals and boron and carbon                    
              clusters.  The research has two main goals:  to develop                        
              systematic preparative routes to polymetallic complexes                        
              containing carboranes and diborols and to investigate the                      
              electronic structures and properties of these materials.                       
              Methods to construct multi-decker sandwiches layer by layer                    
              will first be developed, followed by techniques for linking                    
              those molecules together.  In addition, some                                   
              indenylmetallacarboranes of osmium and ruthenium will be                       
              prepared in order to test some metal insertion reactions which                 
              could provide an alternative mode of polyhedral expansion.  In                 
              all cases, the compounds will be characterized both                            
              structurally and electrochemically, using techniques such as                   
              NMR, vis-UV spectroscopy, X-ray crystallography, cyclic                        
              voltammetry, and ESR spectroscopy.                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              The design and synthesis of chain-like molecules which have                    
              high electronic conductivities along the chain is a very active                
              area of research because of the potential use of such molecules                
              in molecular level electronic devices. This project involves                   
              the synthesis of molecules in which metal atoms are linked by                  
              five-membered rings of carbon and boron atoms in structures                    
              which resemble multi-decker sandwiches, with the five-membered                 
              rings serving as the "bread" and the metal atoms as the "meat."                
              Communication between the metal atoms provides for conduction                  
              of electrons up and down the stack. The presence of boron                      
              provides high thermal stability and decreased sensitivity to                   
              oxidation by atmospheric oxygen.
