Title       : 5 Axis CNC Machine Center in Support of Rapid Prototyping and Unmanned
               Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1991     
File        : a9022578

Award Number: 9022578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Riesenfeld rfr@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elaine Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel H. Drake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research involves automating toolpath generation using                    
              techniques from expert systems and computer geometry.  The goal is             
              to generate CNC codes directly from abstract geometric models.                 
              Expert systems will be used in conjunction with spline-based                   
              geometric models.  The geometric models will model "standard"                  
              geometries while the expert systems will model "features" common to            
              manufactured goods,( e.g., counterbored holes).  These models will             
              then generate CNC codes that can be run on a numerically controlled            
              machine center.  The goal of this research is to develop a fully               
              automated rapid prototyping capability for manufacturing systems.              
                                                                                             
              An advantage that European and Japanese manufacturers have over the            
              United States is the ability to rapidly modify products to meet new            
              user demands.  This research is an effort to improve the rapid                 
              prototyping of manufacturing goods.  The research also will lead to            
              improved quality control procedures and batch manufacturing                    
              capabilities.  The research request is for the acquisition of a                
              device for manufacturing goods.  The machine center will be driven             
              by numeric codes automatically generated from a combination of a               
              mathematical representation and an expert system representation of             
              the object to be manufactured.  This capability will be unique in              
              U. S. universities.
