Title       : Analysis of a Novel Three-Phase Catalytic Reactor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1992     
File        : a9022241

Award Number: 9022241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154683             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramon L. Cerro   (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin A. Abraham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Tulsa
	      600 South College Ave.
	      Tulsa, OK  741043189    918/631-3312

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Ceramic honeycomb monoliths were initially developed as                        
              catalyst supports for use in automotive catalytic converters.                  
                                                                                             
              Monolithic catalyst support provides a means of contacting a                   
              gas and a liquid with a solid catalyst.  This catalyst support                 
                                                                                             
              delivers low pressure drop because of its unique geometry.                     
              High reaction rates may be obtained because of the high                        
              surface area of the catalyst and the low mass transfer                         
              resistance which can be realized when slug flow is maintained                  
                                                                                             
              within the channels of the monolith.  The proper use of such a                 
                                                                                             
              catalyst requires uniform distribution of gas and liquid in                    
              the open cells of the monolith.                                                
                                                                                             
              This research will involve the construction and operation of a                 
                                                                                             
              novel monolithic reactor in which a uniform gas-liquid feed is                 
                                                                                             
              produced through the formation of a two-phase froth within the                 
                                                                                             
              same vessel.  The froth is a vehicle for the introduction of                   
              controlled volumes of gas and into the channels of the                         
              monolith in slug flow.  The reactor will be evaluated for the                  
                                                                                             
              aqueous phase oxidation of phenol over copper oxide catalyst                   
              and the results compared with data reported from a slurry                      
              reactor.  Flow visualization experiments will be used to                       
              determine the hydrodynamic parameters necessary to obtain the                  
                                                                                             
              desired slug flow within the monolith and understand the means                 
                                                                                             
              by which the froth characteristics may be controlled.  A                       
              reactor model based upon the hydrodynamics within square                       
              channels of the monolith will be developed, a model with a                     
              minimum of adjustable parameters.
