Title       : Collaborative Research in Full Equilibrium, Dynamic Models of Policy Formation
               in Legislative Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1991  
File        : a9022932

Award Number: 9022932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45964              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. McKelvey rdm@hss.caltech.eedu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This highly theoretical research develops a formal, mathematical               
              model of the interaction between voters and legislators in a                   
              unicameral legislative system.  Most existing formal models of the             
              relationship of voters and legislators deal with a fixed time                  
              period and treat the relationship as one directional.  Voters are              
              assumed to influence legislative behavior or vice versa but not                
              both.  However, because elections and the legislative process are              
              inherently dynamic processes where influence flows both ways                   
              simultaneously, existing models are limited in the questions they              
              can address.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research models the representative process as one of                      
              reciprocal influence where decisions by voters influence                       
              decisions by legislators which then influence decisions by voters              
              in the next period. The process continues indefinitely until                   
              equilibrium is achieved.  This means that voters, when they make               
              their decisions, anticipate the reactions of legislators.                      
              Legislators, in turn, anticipate the reaction of voters when                   
              deciding policies.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The project will proceed to use these models to explain the                    
              development of certain common institutional features of                        
              legislatures including political parties, seniority, safe seats                
              and lobbying. When completed this project will greatly strengthen              
              existing theories of representative relationships, enhance their               
              realism, and provide a more systematic and rigorous basis for                  
              evaluating the potential effects of proposed legislative reforms               
              such as legislative terms limits.
