Title       : Test for Evolution Without Sex in Bbeloid Rotifers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1990  
File        : a9022716

Award Number: 9022716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew S. Meselson msm@wjh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              Sexual recombination as well as mutations provides the genetically             
              variable raw material upon which evolutionary forces act in higher,            
              more complex organisms.  Thus, based upon that assumption, sex has             
              been considered an important, almost necessary, component of the               
              evolutionary process. However, Dr. Matthew Meselson of Harvard                 
              University describes a class of animals, Bdelloidea, which, in so              
              far as has been determined, has no sexual genetic exchange. But,               
              as he points out, sexual exchange may occur under rare or at least             
              unknown circumstances and a more rigorous test is needed to confirm            
              the fact that an organism which has been successful in evolution               
              is lacking any mechanism for genetic exchange. He proposes to use              
              restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLP) as a test.                    
              Specific species of Bdelloidea, thought to be diploid, will be                 
              selected as test organisms. Isolated DNA will be fragmented with               
              restriction enzymes and the extent of heterozygosity will be                   
              determined. The underlying assumption is that sexual organisms                 
              homozygous their chromosomes much more rapidly than do asexual                 
              organisms. The project can be done within the one year limitation              
              and is high risk in that if the answer is that there is little                 
              heterozygosity seen in the rotifer DNA, the organisms probably have            
              some type of sexual mechanism and thus, are of little interest for             
              further study. If, on the other hand, the answer is that there is              
              a large amount of heterozygosity in their DNA, then significant                
              insights into our understanding of evolution can be achieved by                
              asking the proper questions.***                                                
                                                                                             
              //
