Title       : The Development of Complex Societies in Western Uganda
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1991   
File        : a9022836

Award Number: 9022836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19178              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter T. Robertshaw proberts@csusb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U San Bernardino
	      5500 State College Pkwy
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    714/887-7201

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Peter Robertshaw                  
              will conduct an archaeological survey of the Bunyoro-Kitara                    
              region of Western Uganda. While the prehistory of the region is                
              not well known, limited archaeological work has demonstrated the               
              presence of unexpectedly complex sites which include such                      
              features as massive earthworks. Excavations indicate the                       
              development of a "state" the roots of which can presently be                   
              traced back to the 13th century A.D. Ethnohistoric accounts                    
              indicate that such a large scale society with strong centralized               
              authority existed until recent times. The process by which this                
              tropical African state developed however is not understood.                    
                                                                                             
              Dr. Robertshaw's exploratory research will lay the groundwork for              
              a longer term large scale project. His goal is to set the few                  
              known large sites into a broader regional context. To do this he               
              will survey approximately 30-40% of the region. Random sampling                
              methods will be employed to analyze ceramics at each site located              
              so it can be placed in a chronological framework. Through the                  
              examination of site distributions in both time and space and                   
              through comparison of site sizes at a series of limited points in              
              time it should be possible to trace the process of state                       
              development.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This project is important for several reasons. Archaeologists                  
              wish to understand the processes which underly the development of              
              social complexity and which lead to the emergence of large                     
              complex groups. While much work has been done in non-tropical                  
              regions of the world, because of practical constraints such as                 
              difficulty of access and dense vegetation relatively little is                 
              known about how states developed in tropical regions. Dr.                      
              Robertshaws' exploratory work should help remedy this defect. It               
              will also set the groundwork for larger scale work.
