Title       : STOP(STUDENT TEACHING OTHERS PALEONTOLOGY)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1991   
File        : a9022125

Award Number: 9022125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice Moses                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25357              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patsy Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Booneville Sch Dist
	      PO Box 358
	      Booneville, MS  388290358    601/728-2171

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Students Teaching Others Paleontology (STOP) is an eighth and ninth            
              grade science project initiated for girls to explore, to interpret and         
              to record the geological history along the U.S. Highway 45 corridor in         
              Northeast Mississippi.  The research fossil site is located                    
              approximately three miles from the Boonsville High School.                     
                                                                                             
              This exploratory activity is novel and timely and will result in               
              research experiences for students engaged in the fossil collections.           
              These particular scientific discoveries of sixty million year old              
              fossils will provide students with an enormous grasp of time space and         
              access to specialized data which will help them to verify and classify         
              the fossils.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The site has been identified by geologists and geographers at                  
              Mississippi State University as unique.  The enlargement of U.S. Highway       
              through this area has made available exposures of Cretaceous and               
              Tertiary rocks that contain an impressive amount of fossil material.           
              The fossil material is well preserved and contain species rarely seen in       
              Mississippi or elsewhere.  It has been evaluated by the department at          
              Mississippi State University and deemed to be one of the more important        
              in this region.  A team of geologists from the University of Mississippi       
              and Mississippi State University will assist in removing and identifying       
              the fossils.  Scientists/Mentors from other agencies and universities          
              will serve as role models for the women and minorities which Project           
              STOP targets.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The students' fossil collection will be preserved in their libraries and       
              at the geology museum at Mississippi State University.
