Title       : The Early Neolithic of Northern Dalmatia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1992       
File        : a9022065

Award Number: 9022065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18791              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Voytek   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Dr. Voytek, together with Canadian and Yugoslovian                        
              collaborators, will conduct exploratory excavations at four early              
              Neolithic archaeological sites located the Dalmatia region of                  
              Yugoslovia. These sites, which were discovered in a previous                   
              survey of the region, are known by surface indications to contain              
              cultural material from this period but more detailed information               
              is necessary before a comprehensive research plan can be devised.              
              For this purpose small scale excavation is necessary. The testing              
              of the four sites will focus on basic but important questions:                 
              When were the sites occupied?  Under what cultural and later                   
              geological conditions did they form?  How well are materials -                 
              especially delicate floral and faunal remains - preserved?  What               
              is the range of economic data recoverable?  Does further                       
              investigation seem warranted?  Approximately one week will be                  
              spent conducting test excavations at each site and recovered                   
              materials materials will be analyzed.  Based on the results,                   
              funding will be sought for a longer term large-scale excavation                
              of one of the sites.  The goal will be to explore in greater                   
              detail the questions surrounding the early history of agriculture              
              in this region.                                                                
                                                                                             
                   While archaeologists know that plants and animals were first              
              domesticated in the Near East about 10,000 years ago and then                  
              spread though Europe, the details of this process are still                    
              unknown.  Some believe that this expansion took place through the              
              direct movement of people who, moving from east to west, brought               
              the domesticated sheep, goat, cow, as well as grain crops with                 
              them.  According to this scenario, local hunters and gatherers                 
              were either displaced or absorbed by the newcomers.  Others,                   
              however, argue that it was the traits themselves rather than                   
              peoples which moved; local hunters and gatherers thus obtained                 
              new items from others and then adapted and integrated them into                
              their own cultures.  Unfortunately, the data are not available                 
              which would allow selection between these alternatives.  Because               
              very little work has been done in the Dalmatian region and                     
              because it lies near the point of origin, the information                      
              provided by Dr. Voytek and her colleagues will help to answer                  
              this question.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                   This project is important for several reasons.  First, it                 
              will increase our understanding of how important culture traits                
              are transmitted and how cultures change.  Second, it will provide              
              new data on a poorly known region.  Finally, it will hopefully                 
              set the stage for a larger subsequent project.
