Title       : Modeling the Limitations of Knowledge Represenations in a Knowledge Acquisition
               Tool
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9022293

Award Number: 9022293
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149835             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Clancey Bill_Clancey@irl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst for Rsch on Learning
	      66 Willow Place
	      Menlo Park, CA  94025    650/687-7900

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Knowledge engineering is concerned with the development of                     
              qualitative computer models of processes, and procedures for                   
              applying these models to practical problems of diagnosis, design,              
              control, etc. of complex systems.  Knowledge acquisition research              
              focuses on the development of computer tool for facilitating this              
              modeling process, especially the accumulation of general                       
              representations and reasoning procedures that can be used for                  
              many problems.  This work studies the foundational issues of                   
              formalization and human cognition that lie behind reuse of                     
              representation in new settings for new purposes.  Situated                     
              cognition research suggests that people have capabilities for                  
              creating new representations that today's computers lack;                      
              furthermore, the meaning of a representation and the context that              
              justifies it are always open to reinterpretation and can never be              
              captured fully by representations.  To deal with this, the work                
              will represent the assumptions that justify changes to a model,                
              so a knowledge acquisition program, but especially knowledge                   
              engineers themselves, will be able to intelligently reconstruct                
              the origin and meaning of past representations, and hence more                 
              readily adapt them to new contexts.  The main idea is to study                 
              how people use a layered history of cases, representations, and                
              annotations to reinterpret and re-represent their past work as                 
              they discover and argue for changes to an evolving model.  The                 
              result is improved failure-analysis techniques, coupled with a                 
              better understanding of what aspects of the knowledge engineering              
              process cannot be automatized using current methods, but which                 
              appropriate tools can nevertheless facilitate.
