Title       : Numerical Competence in the Chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1991  
File        : a9022355

Award Number: 9022355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah T. Boysen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary G. Berntson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Chimpanzees are well known to be our closest non-human relatives,              
              but the surprising extent to which they share cognitive abilities              
              with human beings is still being discovered.  Drs. Boysen and                  
              Berntson are investigating the numerical competence of                         
              chimpanzees.  Their studies should contribute to our                           
              understanding of the similarities and differences in cognitive                 
              capabilities across species and toward clarifying those processes              
              that may support numerical skills in non-human primates.  Besides              
              these contributions to basic scientific knowledge, these studies               
              may yield sharper tests for and understanding of numerical                     
              competence in children and, more generally, provide a better                   
              understanding of non-verbal intelligence.  Thus, the present                   
              project may provide insights into the cognitive abilities of                   
              language-impaired or otherwise developmentally-challenged                      
              children.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Experiments will examine the manipulation of numerical symbols,                
              the emergence of counting skills, and the representational nature              
              of number symbols.  Training methods previously developed will be              
              extended to increase the range and functional significance of                  
              number use by three young-adult chimpanzees, and to examine                    
              features of summation and subtraction using arrays containing                  
              both symbols and objects.  The emergence of counting skills will               
              also be examined in an adult and an infant chimpanzee, including               
              an analysis of ability to recognize the position within the                    
              series from 1 to 7 of two quantities (3, 6) that have not                      
              previously been paired with arrays of objects.  The contribution               
              of abstract symbol use will be further examined in a study of                  
              food sharing that employs Arabic numerals and arrays of objects                
              in a social, cooperative context.  A final study will investigate              
              the chimpanzees' formation of equivalence sets among categories                
              of numerical stimuli.
