Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1991   
File        : a9022930

Award Number: 9022930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Melvin J. Hinich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The standard view of the rational voter is one who votes for the               
              party or candidate whose positions are closest to the voter's on               
              those ideological or issue dimensions of importance to the voter.              
              In recent years, a highly sophisticated body of research has                   
              explored the ideological structure or "issue space" of voters,                 
              candidates, and political parties and the linkages among them.  An             
              important outcome of this research is a body of theory suggesting              
              that the success of elections in selecting candidates who are                  
              closest to the voters' ideal is heavily influenced by the type of              
              electoral system used.  To date, however, most research on spatial             
              theory has concentrated on American style, plurality elections                 
              involving only two candidates.  This award supports doctoral                   
              dissertation research designed to test the validity of spatial                 
              theories of voting in multicandidate elections such as many primary            
              and local non-partisan elections in the United States, and the                 
              national elections in other countries.                                         
                                                                                             
              When only two candidates compete for office the traditional                    
              American system of single member districts and plurality voting has            
              been shown to be sufficient to insure a good fit between election              
              outcomes and voter issue beliefs.  However, in multicandidate                  
              elections theory suggests that single member districts with                    
              plurality voting are likely to produce unstable equilibrium.                   
              Prevailing theory also suggests that adoption of majority rules                
              with single member districts or the use of multimember districts               
              with plurality rules will solve this problem.  To test these                   
              theoretical predictions this project examines voting patterns in               
              Chile, one of the few political systems which uses both two                    
              candidate and multicandidate elections concurrently and thus                   
              provides an controlled environment in which to isolate the effects             
              of the different electoral systems.  An unusually rich data set on             
              Chilean elections already has been assembled and made available to             
              the Principal Investigator to facilitate this research.                        
                                                                                             
              When completed this research will enhance our understanding of                 
              voter decisions, the relationships between voters and candidates,              
              and the effect on those decision and relationships of alternative              
              electoral systems.  In so doing this research will provide                     
              important information that will facilitate evaluations of the                  
              effectiveness of electoral systems in the United States and                    
              elsewhere.
