Title       : Learning by Abstraction and Analogy: Acquiring Planning Expertise in Complex
               Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1993    
File        : a9022499

Award Number: 9022499
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184312             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jaime G. Carbonell jgc@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year of a three year continuing award.  To plan              
              in complex, large-scale tasks requires elaborate and costly                    
              knowledge engineering and programming to design and implement                  
              task-specific planners.  General planning methods, on the other                
              hand, apply only to small constrained tasks because of the                     
              inherent combinatiorial search.  Although some worthy inroads                  
              have been made by modern planners, such as SIPE, to combine                    
              general planning methods with hand-crafted domain heuristic, This              
              research considers a different alternative:  focused machine                   
              learning of control knowledge to guide search.  In particular,                 
              the fully-implemented PRODIGY planner presents the ideal                       
              substrate on which to investigate multiple learning methods.                   
              Previously explanation-based learning was successfully integrated              
              in PRODIGY.  This research addresses automated acquisition of                  
              abstraction spaces for hierarchical planning, case-based learning              
              with derivational analogy, and their synergistic integration.                  
              Proper abstractions in partially-decomposable domains provide                  
              major performance improvements, and automated abstraction                      
              eliminates the bottleneck of laborious hand-coded abstraction.                 
              Derivational analogy provides and extremely flexible case-based                
              replay mechanism, falling back to general planning when solution               
              to subgoals do not transfer.  Together, both methods should prove              
              even more effective, with abstraction providing the key indices                
              for case-based memory search (those features that cannot                       
              abstracted away, such as bottleneck points or roots of dependency              
              networks), and derivational analogy speeding up search within                  
              abstraction spaces.  Through this automated acquisition of                     
              control knowledge, planners will be able to solve increasingly                 
              complex planning domains.
