Title       : Macroeconomics and the Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1991     
File        : a9022825

Award Number: 9022825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rowena A. Pecchenino   (Principal Investigator current)
              A. Andrew John  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stacey L. Schreft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              Decisions that affect environmental quality both influence and                 
              respond to macroeconomic variables.  Further, many environmental               
              and macroeconomic consequences of current actions will have                    
              uncompensated effects that outlive the actors.  This project will              
              develop and analyze macroeconomic models exhibiting                            
              intergenerational environmental externalities.  The models                     
              proposed utilize the overlapping-generations framework, since                  
              this is a simple and natural demographic structure for                         
              macroeconomic analyses of intergenerational concerns.  The                     
              project, among other things, will contribute to the "new growth                
              theory", since it integrates environmental externalities with                  
              models of capital accumulation under external, increasing                      
              returns.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The aims of the research are three fold  The first goal is to                  
              analyze the properties of overlapping-generations models with                  
              intergenerational externalities.  Second, the models developed                 
              will be used to investigate the role of macroeconomic policy in                
              ameliorating environmental problems.  Finally, variants of the                 
              models will be developed that permit detailed consideration of                 
              specific environmental concerns, such as recycling and                         
              availability of landfill space.  This research is important                    
              because it will enhance our understanding of the interaction of                
              economic growth and environmental issues.
