Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Optimal Control MethodsApplied to the Study
               of Mesoscale Meteorological Model Sensitivity and Data Assimilation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1992      
File        : a9022892

Award Number: 9022892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9650               (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas K. Lilly dlilly@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              0510101   Climate Models                          
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1525,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professors Douglas K. Lilly and John M.                    
              Lewis of the Cooperative Institute for Mesoscale Meteorological                
              Studies (CIMMS), University of Oklahoma, to collaborate with                   
              Dr. Hartmut Kapitza and others of the GKSS National Research                   
              Center, in Geesthacht, Germany.  The objective of their                        
              collaboration is to apply the principles of optimal control to                 
              improve the modelling of mesoscale phenomena and to improve the                
              manner in which models and data are matched.  In particular,                   
              they will work on extending a promising new technique called                   
              the "adjoint" method, that was originally developed by Dr.                     
              Karpita.  He and his colleagues at GKSS have special expertise                 
              in modeling that is well matched by the U.S. group's expertise                 
              in the use of data from new observational systems being                        
              introduced in the U.S. that include sophisticated ground-based                 
              remote sensing techniques.  The U.S. group will be able to help                
              scientists at the GKSS to introduce realistic mesoscale data                   
              into the model, while research in data assimilation at CIMMS                   
              will benefit greatly from the opportunity to use the model and                 
              its adjoint on a variety of mesoscale meteorological problems.                 
                                                                                             
              Deterministic models used in mesoscale meteorology are among                   
              the most complicated used in science today.  The physical                      
              scales that must be included in the models range from the                      
              larger scale ageostrophic circulation around fronts to the                     
              microphysics of precipitation processes.  This is further                      
              complicated by the need to interface with large scale models and               
              to obtain boundary conditions.  The observational demands of                   
              such systems are substantial, and the compilation and analysis                 
              challenge is extraordinary.  The University of Oklahoma now has                
              an NSF-funded Science and Technology Center, called "Center for                
              the Analysis and Prediction of Storms" (CAPS.)  The kind of                    
              data assimilation work being advanced by Dr. Kapitza and the                   
              German center is now one of the principal foci of the CAPS                     
              program plan.
