Title       : Request for Massively Parallel Computer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1991     
File        : a9022447

Award Number: 9022447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry A. Finkelstein laf@ccs.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carole D. Hafner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gene Cooperman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Futrelle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald J. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research revolves around the acquisition of a Single                      
              Instruction, Multiple Data (SIMD) computer and its applications to             
              a variety of problems.  The problems include:  parallel group                  
              algorithms, natural language processing, neural network learning               
              algorithms, and the scientist's assistant project.  The SIMD                   
              computer is uniquely suited as both an exploratory platform upon               
              which to test new algorithms and as a compute server to actually               
              solve problems that would otherwise require substantial super                  
              computer resources to solve.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The next generation of super computers are likely to be highly                 
              parallel computers following the Single Instruction, Multiple Data             
              (SIMD) architecture and/or the Multiple Instruction, Multiple Data             
              (MIMD) architecture.  In either case, algorithms need to be                    
              developed and tested for the architectures to see what problems run            
              best on what architectures.  This can be done in two ways.  The                
              first is to pick arbitrary problems and develop algorithms for both            
              architectures and then compare the results.  The second method is              
              to look for problem classes that are best solved by a particular               
              architecture.  The group at Northeastern have chosen the second                
              alternative and are looking for SIMD algorithms for problems that              
              seem to be particularly well suited for that architecture.  Two                
              problems in particular are promising areas of research.  The                   
              parallel group algorithms are intended to solve computationally                
              intensive problems that could not easily be solved on a single                 
              processor architecture.  The scientist's assistant project is a                
              sophisticated very large pattern matching application that is                  
              particularly well suited to the SIMD architecture.
