Title       : Occupational Mobility in Spatial Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1992      
File        : a9022868

Award Number: 9022868
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122589             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Hanson SHANSON@CLARKU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Despite rapid increases in the participation of women in the U.S.         
              labor force and efforts to eliminate gender-related discrimination in          
              employment, a large percentage of women remain mired in certain lower-         
              paying occupations.  Analyses of gender-related occupational                   
              segregation have focused on various institutional, social, and                 
              demographic factors.  Geographers have undertaken complementary                
              analyses of geographic dimensions of employment patterns and processes,        
              focusing on the degree to which limited accessibility to transportation        
              and the location of job opportunities have restricted women's                  
              employment.  This award supports continuation of a project that                
              examines the geographic, sociological, and personal dimensions of              
              employment for both men and women in different occupational categories         
              in Worcester, Massachusetts.  Data at the core of this analysis are the        
              detailed job and residential histories of workers in 620 households.           
              The location and occupational status of jobs held by these workers will        
              be analyzed to determine the nature and rate of job transitions and            
              reasons given for those changes.  A second part of the project will use        
              regression models to analyze the nature of individual employment in            
              terms of individual attributes like age and educational levels,                
              household attributes like marital status and numbers and ages of               
              children, and spatial attributes like the locations of housing and             
              work sites and the locations of alternative jobs within reasonable             
              proximity to homesites.  Data included in this part of the analysis            
              also will be used to test hypotheses about the impacts of housing              
              relocations on employment and about ways that the geography of                 
              employment opportunities affects residential relocations.  As a final          
              part of this project, the investigators will investigate occupational          
              mobility as a social process explicitly set in specific places.  The           
              degrees to which personal contacts and information gathered at both            
              home and work sites affect employment searches will be explicitly              
              addressed in order to explore the geography of employment-information          
              networks.                                                                      
                   This project will build on earlier studies by analyzing the               
              interplay of personal, social, and geographic factors in individual            
              employment and residential decision making.  Special attention will            
              focus on the different ways that women and men make decisions about the        
              nature and location of their jobs, thereby contributing to the broader         
              literature on gender-related patterns of employment.
