Title       : Non-Intrusive Furnace Exhaust Gas Temperature Monitor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1991      
File        : a9022383

Award Number: 9022383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221647             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Frish   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Physical Sciences Inc
	      20 New England Business Center
	      Andover, MA  018101077    508/689-0003

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1406,
Abstract    :
              Heat recovery in utility boilers is maximized when a                           
              particular temperature distribution within the furnace and its                 
              downstream heat recovery apparatus is maintained.  This design                 
              temperature distribution provides the optimum balance between                  
              steam production by radiant heat transfer in the furnace                       
              section and steam reheating or superheating in the convective                  
              heat transfer section.  When the temperature distribution                      
              deviates from its design condition, turbine efficiency                         
              declines either because:  a) the steam production is too low                   
              due to insufficient heat absorption in the furnace; or, b) not                 
              enough sensible heat remains in the exhaust to superheat the                   
              steam (since too much heat is absorbed in the furnace).  Off-                  
              design operation can also lead to tube overheating failures,                   
              ash deposition, and cold-end corrosion.                                        
                                                                                             
              This SBIR project continues the development and testing of a                   
              non-intrusive rapid-response instrument able to monitor ash                    
              particle temperatures in furnace exhaust gases.  Because the                   
              particles are thermally equilibrated with the gas, the                         
              measurement is, in fact, an accurate representation of the                     
              local gas temperature.  The instrument employs an innovative                   
              variation of two-color pyrometry to eliminate errors,                          
              associated with radiation from the primary combustion zone and                 
              boiler walls, which have confounded previous attempts to                       
              accurately measure exhaust gas temperatures.  The prototype                    
              instrument will be coupled to a furnace control system and,                    
              after verification of proper operation, used to control and                    
              optimize one aspect of the combustion process.  This will lead                 
              to increased plant efficiency.  The instrument can also be                     
              used to control incinerator furnace temperatures, specifically                 
              to maintain them above 1700oF in order to minimize emission of                 
              toxic organics such as aromatic hydrocarbon or chlorinated                     
              dioxin/furans.  Indirect benefits of the device include                        
              increased plant longevity, reduced pollutant emissions, and                    
              the extended lifetime of our finite fossil fuel resources.  As                 
              part of this program, an instrument for calibrating furnace                    
              exhaust gas spectral signatures is also being built.  This                     
              instrument will be useful for acquiring data needed to                         
              commercialize the temperature monitor.
