Title       : Equipment in Support of Parallel Processing Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1992     
File        : a9022560

Award Number: 9022560
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Franklin jbf@ccrc.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth F. Wong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              I. Norman Katz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael I. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is for the upgrade of an NCUBE parallel processor to the            
              next generation NCUBE processor.  The research projects are in                 
              parallel hierarchical simulation systems for use in computer-aided             
              design, parallel iterative algorithms for signal processing, and               
              parallel finite element methods.  The upgraded NCUBE processor is              
              necessary in order to tackle real world problems.                              
                                                                                             
              The computing challenge of the 90's is to put parallelism to work              
              in solving important computational intensive problems.  The next               
              wave of super computers will be using thousands to millions of                 
              individual processors working in parallel to solve problems.  There            
              must be some mechanism to split the work up evenly amongst the                 
              processors in order to utilize parallelism to the fullest extent.              
              This research looks at three problem domains particularly suited               
              for parallel architectures where each processor has its own memory             
              and executes its own program.  The first project is signal                     
              processing for medical image reconstruction.  It is very important             
              the highest quality images be available for diagnostic purposes and            
              good parallel algorithms running on a fast parallel processor are              
              required in order to implement this medical image reconstruction               
              technology.  The second project involves the design and simulation             
              of VLSI circuits.  This is a particularly computation intensive                
              process that is modular enough so that it can be programmed on an              
              NCUBE processor.  The upgrade is needed to run the simulations on              
              real VLSI circuits.  The final project is the exploration of a set             
              of techniques known as finite element methods for partial                      
              differential equation solution.  These techniques, when                        
              parallelized, may exhibit a prohibitive communication cost between             
              the individual computing elements.  The additional memory and                  
              better communications on the new NCUBE processor allows further                
              exploration of these numerical solution techniques.
