Title       : Trade and Environmental Policies with Internationally Mobile Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1994     
File        : a9022898

Award Number: 9022898
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92491              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Markusen james.markusen@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              Both the theory of environmental regulation and the theory of                  
              international trade generally assume fixed plant locations that                
              are exogenous to policy changes.  The analysis tends to focus on               
              firms' marginal price and output responses to policy changes,                  
              such as emission controls or tariff rates.  It is the nature of                
              these models that responses are small and continuous, implying                 
              that optimal tax or tariff rates can be calculated.  However, it               
              is well understood by policy makers that plants are of discrete                
              size due to scale economies, and that plant location decisions                 
              are endogenous to cost differentials across regions or countries.              
              Regional and increasingly national governments are explicitly                  
              taking the endogeneity of these location decisions into account                
              in designing policies which attract firms or which may raise the               
              costs of local production.  To date, economic theory and                       
              empirical work has shed little on these important policy                       
              questions.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this project is to conduct both a theoretical and               
              empirical analysis of environmental and trade policies when the                
              location decisions of large manufacturing, utility, or resource-               
              based plants are endogenous.  Attention well be focused on cases               
              where the firm in question can make choices between politically                
              independent locations, to allow for the possibility of                         
              inefficient political competition between regions.  Non-                       
              cooperative outcomes can then serve as a benchmark from which to               
              evaluate the gains from policy coordination.  Models will be                   
              constructed to analyze the effects of trade liberalization                     
              between the U.S. and Mexico, and tougher environmental policies                
              in the U.S. on the North American location of plants in the auto               
              and chemical industries.
