Title       : Assessment of Scientific and Technical Information Dissemination in the United
               States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PRA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1992   
File        : a9022131

Award Number: 9022131
Award Instr.: Contract                                     
Prgm Manager: Shirley A. Woods                        
	      OPA  OFFICE OF PLANNING AND ASSESSMENT       
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : May 15,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose-Marie Griffiths   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5733      POLICY RESEARCH AND ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              92        Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 5733,
Abstract    :
              This project is to carry out an assessment of scientific and                   
              technical information (STI) dissemination in the United States.                
              There are two phases to the project.  Phase I is to focus on                   
              estimating and examining the size and characteristics of the demand            
              for different STI dissemination services by various users and the              
              magnitude, quality and costs of supplying STI dissemination                    
              services by various sources.  Phase II, to be performed at the                 
              option of the NSF after a review of the results of phase I, is to              
              concentrate on examining private or public actions with a potential            
              for improving STI dissemination in the United States.                          
                                                                                             
              This project will involve largely quantitative analyses using                  
              available data, which are to be obtained from a variety of sources.            
              The project team is to design and implement a format for                       
              integrating these diverse data for effective processing and                    
              analysis.  Information for project reports are to be derived from              
              a series of papers describing the results, procedures, and data for            
              studies on a number of focussed topics.  Final substantive                     
              coverage, findings and analyses contained in these papers are to               
              come about from interim drafts, which will be revised in response              
              to intensive evaluations by outside experts on STI dissemination.              
              %%%                                                                            
              The NSF always has been concerned with the nation's capabilities               
              and performance in disseminating timely information about science              
              and engineering research results and activities.  Over twenty years            
              have elapsed since the Federal Government last undertook a                     
              comprehensive assessment of the dissemination of scientific and                
              technical information (STI).  This project is to provide the NSF               
              with empirical studies and analyses, which, as a group, are to                 
              constitute a comprehensive examination of current conditions,                  
              future potentials and policy issues for STI dissemination in the               
              United States.
