Title       : United States-Argentina Workshops on Coastal Ocean Space Utilization:
               Engineering Research & Environmental Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9022636

Award Number: 9022636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman Caplan                           
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76025              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Abel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N J Marine Sci Consortium
	      
	      Pomona, NJ  08240    /   -

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The New Jersey Marine Sciences Consortium proposes to lead                     
              the U.S. effort in developing and conducting U.S. -                            
              Argentina workshops in Coastal Ocean Engineering Research                      
              with due regard to the coastal environment.                                    
                                                                                             
              The subject matter for both workshops will be                                  
              approximately the same.  The specific content of the                           
              second workshop will be based on the results of the first                      
              workshop and the need to fulfill the objectives of the                         
              project.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              A steering Committee representing the United States and                        
              Argentina will select a maximum of eight participants for                      
              each workshop.  Each workshop will last three days in                          
              which preliminary papers will be presented; relevant                           
              research needs and opportunities will be discussed; and                        
              future collaboration will be planned.  A fourth day will                       
              be available for visiting a few local facilities and                           
              laboratories related to the Workshop topics.                                   
                                                                                             
              The objective is to enable the United States and Argentina                     
              to gain mutually from collaborative discussion of common                       
              research needs in developing coastal ocean space and how                       
              best to approach them.
