Title       : Mechanism(s) of Protein Retention in Mammalian Golgi Apparatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1993   
File        : a9022817

Award Number: 9022817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Storrie Storrie@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Proteins present within segments of the Golgi apparatus, a major               
              subcellular organelle system within eukaryotic cells, can be                   
              considered to be either resident proteins, i.e., proteins most of              
              whose lifetimes are spent in the organelle, or transient proteins,             
              i.e., proteins which are processed in the organelle but whose                  
              ultimate "citizenship" is elsewhere within the cell or                         
              extracellular milieu.  Based on previous results, three hypotheses             
              can be advanced to explain residency: (1) limited entry into                   
              transport vesicles, due to restricted mobility of resident versus              
              transient proteins, which results in the preferential inclusion of             
              transient protein in non-selective, bulk transport vesicles budding            
              from the Golgi apparatus; (2) preferential trapping of transient               
              versus resident proteins in Golgi transport vesicles with the                  
              mobility of both protein classes being similar; or (3) equal                   
              inclusion of both transient and resident proteins in Golgi                     
              transport vesicles with the resident proteins then being retrieved             
              after each round of transport.  Various combinations of these                  
              hypotheses are, of course, possible.  To test the validity of these            
              hypotheses, the mobility of two membrane proteins, a transient                 
              Golgi protein, the vesicular stomatitis virus G protein, and a                 
              resident Golgi protein, a murine galactosyl transferase, will be               
              measured directly by confocal fluorescent recovery after                       
              photobleaching (cFRAP).  Recombinant DNA techniques will be used               
              to express the specific galactosyl transferase in cultured monkey              
              cells.  The cFRAP experiments will be done in collaboration with               
              Dr. Thomas Kreis, at the European Molecular Biology Laboratory in              
              Heidelberg, Germany, using EMBL facilities.  Preparative work for              
              these experiments will be done at Virginia Polytechnic Institute               
              and State University in Blacksburg, VA.  In a second set of                    
              experiments, the relative enrichment of the transient and resident             
              Golgi proteins in isolated Golgi vesicles relative to isolated                 
              Golgi complexes will be assessed.  These experiments will be done              
              entirely at VPI-SU.                                                            
                                                                                             
              These experiments focus on an important problem in cell biology,               
              namely, how do specific proteins get to their functionally                     
              appropriate destinations within the compartmentalized cell?  The               
              results of these innovative experiments are expected to advance our            
              understanding of these critical cellular processes.
