Title       : The Selection of Distractors and Eyewitness Identification Accuracy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1992    
File        : a9022182

Award Number: 9022182
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Wells glwells@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              Sociolegal scholars have devoted considerable attention to research            
              in the area of eyewitness evidence and identification in recent                
              years.  Although significant advances have been made in the                    
              scientific identification from lineups and photospreads, all                   
              progress has been of one form, namely reducing the likelihood of               
              false identification without affecting adversely the likelihood of             
              correct identifications (hits).  The selection of distracters so               
              as to meet functional or effective-size requirements has been a                
              major tool for reducing false identification rates.  This project              
              follows on the recent theoretical argument that, depending on the              
              strategy used to select distracters, two lineups of equal                      
              functional or effective size can have different amounts of                     
              propitious (beneficial) heterogeneity with the result of having                
              strikingly different hit rates.  It is argued from theory and pilot            
              data that implementing ways of maximizing the variance between the             
              suspect and the distractors can improve the hit rates so that                  
              witnesses are more likely to correctly identify the suspect.                   
                                                                                             
              Three experiments are designed to fully test the propitious                    
              heterogeneity idea for improving hit rates without inflating false             
              identification rates.  The experiments follow a basic format in                
              which crimes are staged for unsuspecting witnesses who later are               
              presented with a lineup and asked to identify the culprit.                     
              Comparisons are made between lineups that include distracters who              
              were chosen to (a) resemble the suspect, (b) match the eyewitness's            
              description of the culprit, or (c) match the description plus                  
              maximize the propitious variance.  A confidence-accuracy relation              
              will be assessed in each experiment with the expectation that the              
              relation will be stronger when propitious variance is high.                    
                                                                                             
              This research has theoretical value in advancing basic                         
              understanding of the process of eyewitness identification.  From               
              a practical standpoint, such knowledge about the dynamics of lineup            
              procedures could lead to increased quality and efficiency by which             
              justice is administered in criminal cases.   Finally, in the area              
              of cognitive psychology, the study will illuminate theoretical                 
              issues associated with recognition memory.
