Title       : Anodic Oxidations and Their Applications to Organic Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1995  
File        : a9022436

Award Number: 9022436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213865             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Swenton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9223,
Abstract    :
              This research involves several areas of study using anodic                     
              oxidation for the preparation of novel compounds, or compounds                 
              difficultly available via conventional chemistry. First, the                   
              anodic oxidation of p-hydrogen and p-alkyl anilides will be                    
              studied as a route to acylated quinone imine ketal and quinol                  
              ethers. These compounds, which are not available from                          
              conventional routes, can serve as key intermediates in organic                 
              synthesis. The second area, and major emphasis of the work, is                 
              development of high-yield anodic carbon-carbon bond-forming                    
              reactions. The initial studies will be directed at                             
              intramolecular trapping of oxidized phenol intermediates with                  
              unsaturated linkages resulting in carbon-carbon bond formation.                
              The products obtained from 4-(2'-unsaturated-aryl)-phenols are                 
              2,5-cyclohexadienones which are important intermediates in                     
              organic synthesis. The objectives are to understand how                        
              substituents on both the aryl and phenol rings influence the                   
              yield of the anodic carbon-carbon bond-forming reaction and                    
              utilize this knowledge for the efficient preparation of useful                 
              compounds or intermediates. Another objective is to investigate                
              the use of the products obtained from these anodic oxidation                   
              studies in organic synthesis.                                                  
                                                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
                                                                                             
              With this award the Synthetic Organic Program of the Chemistry                 
              Division will support the research of Dr. John S. Swenton of                   
              the Department of Chemistry at Ohio State University. The                      
              research involves the study of anodic oxidation chemistry for                  
              the preparation of novel compounds, or compounds difficultly                   
              available via conventional chemistry. This approach using                      
              synthetic electrochemistry is very timely since it serves as a                 
              reagentless method for effecting oxidations, reductions, and                   
              carbon-carbon bond formation. With the proper selection of                     
              electrode and experimental conditions, electrochemistry is the                 
              environmental choice for conducting chemical transformations                   
              since there is no spent oxidant or reductant to be disposed of                 
              or recycled after the reaction.
