Title       : The Role of Protozoan Zooplankton in Plankton Community Structure, Composition
               and Fate in the Equatorial Pacific
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1993   
File        : a9022318

Award Number: 9022318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397137             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Sieracki MSieracki@Bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,1577,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              This project constitutes a portion of U.S. joint global ocean                  
              flux study (JGOFS) of the  central equatorial Pacific.  Several                
              observations have been made in this region which contradict some               
              of our conventional concepts of trophic status and the                         
              relationship between plankton community structure and vertical                 
              flux.  High nitrogen concentrations and supply rates, usually                  
              associated with eutrophic conditions, co-exist with relatively                 
              low chlorophyll, primary productivity, and "new production" -                  
              which are characteristics of oligotrophic waters.  Smaller pico-               
              and nanoplankton cells dominate the phytoplankton (Chavez, et.al.              
              in press), yet significant rates of biogenic sedimentation occur               
              and is correlated with primary production. High flux rates are                 
              usually thought to be associated with large cells, such as                     
              diatoms, sinking out of surface waters or being consumed by                    
              larger cells, fecal pellet-producing metazooplankton.  These                   
              apparent contradictions indicate that the consequences of                      
              phytoplankton size structure, protozoan versus metazoan grazing,               
              and their relationship to vertical flux of material out of the                 
              surface layer are not fully understood.                                        
                                                                                             
              This project will examine these contradictions by measuring the                
              abundances and biomass of the phototropic picoplankton,                        
              phototrophic and heterotrophic nanoplankton, and phagotrophic                  
              protozoans in the surface water, and the grazing impact and                    
              growth rates of protozooplankton.  We study will employ proven,                
              state-of-the-art color image analysis combined with                            
              epifluorescence microscopy to describe the size, trophic and                   
              taxonomic structure of the plankton.  Results will be used to                  
              determine the role of protozoan zooplankton in the coupling of                 
              production, consumption and export of particulate of particulate               
              organic matter in the surface waters of the central equatorial                 
              Pacific.
