Title       : Modelling the Term Structure of Interest Rates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1992     
File        : a9022643

Award Number: 9022643
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92911              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose A. Scheinkman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project contributes methodologically and substantively to our             
              understanding of the relationship between long-term and short-term             
              interest rates.  It explores surprisingly robust empirical                     
              regularities in the term structure of U.S. interest rates obtained             
              earlier by the investigator in joint work with applied empirical               
              economists using financial data from Goldman and Sachs.  The                   
              project uses these empirical results as guides toward developing               
              theoretical models that capture the dynamics of financial markets              
              much better than other existing models.  New statistical methods               
              for estimating the characteristics of non-linear dynamics from                 
              discrete economic data are also developed.  The research addresses             
              a number of fundamental theoretical questions about financial                  
              markets.  It will provide new insights into the determinants of the            
              volatility of financial markets.                                               
                                                                                             
              The research consists of two main projects.  The first one                     
              estimates an unobservable states, Markov chain model of interest               
              rates using a time series of prices on different interest-rate-                
              sensitive instruments such as U.S. treasury bonds, bond futures and            
              options on bond futures.  The presence of futures and options on               
              the data should enhance the estimation of the process that                     
              determines the volatility of interest rates.  The use of a time                
              series of different bonds allows for the estimation of the risk                
              premiums embedded in the securities' prices.  The second project               
              aims at developing moment conditions to be used in testing and                 
              estimating continuous time stochastic models while avoiding either             
              the use of continuous data or the use of numerical solutions for               
              the conditional distribution of the state variables.
