Title       : Faculty Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1995   
File        : a9022961

Award Number: 9022961
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara H. Cooper bhc1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,1761,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The NSF Faculty Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers                 
              recognizes the high quality of the awardee's record in teaching and            
              scholarship, as well as potential research, the academic                       
              profession, and the education of future scientists and engineers.              
              Dr. Cooper's research under this award is directed at understanding            
              the interactions of energetic ion beams with clean and adsorbate-              
              covered single crystal metal surfaces.                                         
                   The dynamics of hyperthermal ion-surface scattering (incident             
              energies below 500 eV) are of fundamental interest because it is in            
              the hyperthermal energy regime that the transition occurs from                 
              thermal scattering,in which the ion interacts simultaneously with              
              the entire surface to keV scattering, where the ion undergoes a                
              series of sequential binary collisions with individual surface                 
              atoms. Hyperthermal scattering dynamics are also of practical                  
              importance since this energy regime is used in technological                   
              applications such as reactive ion etching and ion beam assisted                
              epitaxy. To study these dynamics, well-characterized ion beams are             
              scattered from clean and adsorbate-covered metal surfaces.                     
              Particular emphasis is placed on understanding aspects of the                  
              scattering dynamics, such as energy transfer to the surface and                
              particle trapping, and on understanding mechanisms of ion-surface              
              charge transfer. The initial studies will use alkali ion beams                 
              since the relative simplicity of alkali ion-surface reactions                  
              permits detailed modeling of the scattering and charge transfer                
              dynamics.                                                                      
                   Scattering dynamics studies are currently underway for Na+                
              scattering from Cu(001), and will be extended to other alkalis and             
              to other beam species, such as oxygen and nitrogen. Investigations             
              to determine the mechanisms of ion-surface charge transfer are                 
              currently underway for incident Li+, Na+, and K+. They will be                 
              extended to other incident species, in particular atomic and                   
              molecular oxygen.                                                              
                   A probe that is complementary to ion scattering for studying              
              local atomic and electronic surface properties is the scanning                 
              tunneling microscope (STM). STM will be used in ultra high vacuum              
              to study tunneling mechanisms on metal surfaces, the effect of                 
              adsorbates on the electronic structure at metal surfaces, and                  
              diffusion on metal surfaces.
