Title       : Sharing Research Data: An Examination of Practices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1993    
File        : a9022424

Award Number: 9022424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Georgine Pion   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Cordray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              In the light of current concern about scientific integrity,                    
              scrutiny of scientific practices that are thought to insure                    
              integrity takes on special importance.  This is the starting                   
              point for examining data sharing practices in different                        
              scientific fields.  But other values motivate inquiry as well:                 
              an interest in maximum use of data and efficient use of federal                
              funding.  At the same time, little is known about data sharing                 
              practices and their relative merits. This research project                     
              addresses all of these concerns and will begin to answer                       
              questions about (1) what are the current practices; (2) what are               
              the outcomes of data sharing practices; and (3) what factors                   
              facilitate or impede sharing.  Using a sample of completed NSF                 
              research grants in the biological and social sciences, the                     
              investigators will develop fifty case studies based on document                
              review, content analysis, and semi-structured interviews.  Alert               
              to the great variety of forms that data can assume, the                        
              researchers will select projects completed since 1983 so as to                 
              gain information about the outcomes of NSF's own policies and                  
              directives.  The picture of current practices which is the                     
              intended product of this research will be used to devise a                     
              research plan for large-scale quantitative research on data                    
              sharing practices and outcomes.  The project will include                      
              development and pre-testing of instruments for collecting data in              
              a large-scale study.                                                           
                                                                                             
              This proposal is a reasonable request for support to enable                    
              highly qualified scholars to address issues about integrity in                 
              research and efficient use of data by an examination of data                   
              sharing practices.  The research plan is well designed to produce              
              empirical findings relevant to research ethics and useful for                  
              assessing NSF policies and for devising a large-scale,                         
              quantitative study.  Institutional support is very good.  The                  
              findings are likely to reach well-targeted audiences.  Support is              
              highly recommended.
