Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Multiparameter Bifurcations and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1992     
File        : a9022621

Award Number: 9022621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmen C. Chicone carmen@chicone.math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1266,
Abstract    :
                   This project will research bifurcation of multiparameter                  
              families of nonlinear differential equations.  The primary  focus              
              is the analysis of bifurcations to periodic solutions.  In the                 
              autonomous case the bifurcation of limit cycles from centers and               
              from one parameter families of periodic solutions is considered                
              while in the autonomous case bifurcation of subharmonic solutions              
              is studied.  A major goal is to develop an analysis that goes                  
              beyond the usual first order methods by being able to treat the                
              response to a nonlinear perturbation to all orders.  This will                 
              allow for a complete understanding of the bifurcation diagram of               
              the multiparameter system by detecting periodic solutions which                
              are invisible to first order methods and by mixing a priori                    
              information on the minimum order to which the perturbation                     
              analysis must be carried so as to exhaust the possibility of                   
              finding additional perturbed periodic solutions.  The methods                  
              employed include geometric analysis of nonlinear dynamics,                     
              perturbation theory, "Andronov-Melnikov" theory, and algebraic                 
              geometric ideal theory.  There is also an important computational              
              component especially integration of differential equations,                    
              computer graphics and computer algebra.                                        
                   Applications of the theory are found wherever physical                    
              systems are modeled by nonlinear ordinary differential equations               
              depending on parameters and, in particular, when determining the               
              possible response of a nonlinear system to external stimuli.  A                
              typical application is illustrated in the project by the analysis              
              of a wind oscillation problem.
