Title       : Rational Learning in Long Term Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1992     
File        : a9022305

Award Number: 9022305
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113010             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ehud Kalai kalai@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ehud Lehrer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The concept of Nash equilibrium has become central in economics.               
              Researchers in fields such as industrial organization,                         
              international economics, economics of information, labor                       
              economics and bargaining theory have adopted it as the main                    
              theoretical tool for the analysis of interactive strategic                     
              behavior.  Yet the assumption that agents will play according to               
              Nash equilibrium is questionable because it relies on strong                   
              assumptions regarding common knowledge and full rationality of                 
              all agents.  The goal of this research is to determine under what              
              conditions profit maximizing agents learn to play according to a               
              strategic Nash equilibrium and what are the possible patterns of               
              the limit behaviors when they do not converge to a Nash                        
              equilibrium.  This is an important line of research because the                
              experimental literature has shown that agents in repeated                      
              interactive situations do learn to play Nash equilibrium, but no               
              theoretical explanation for this phenomenon has yet been                       
              provided.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The research in this project concentrates on rational learning in              
              long term interactions.  By rational learning it is meant that                 
              players choose actions that optimize their overall payoffs,                    
              present and future, with learning being included as part of the                
              overall optimization problem.  However, unlike classical game                  
              theory, rationality will include no assumption about common                    
              knowledge of parameters of the game or strategies of the                       
              opponents.  The project extends a pathbreaking proof by the                    
              investigators that rational learning in two-person games leads to              
              Nash equilibrium if there is a "grain of truth" in the beliefs of              
              the players about each other's likely strategies.  These results               
              are extended to games with many players, games with imperfect                  
              observability, and to stochastically changing environments.  The               
              results will also be studied when players are not completely                   
              rational but use finite automata.
