Title       : Dexterity Enhancement via Macro/Micro Bilateral Manipulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1993     
File        : a9022513

Award Number: 9022513
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Devendra P. Garg                        
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208876             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Edward Colgate colgate@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the topic of dexterity enhancement by                   
              macro/micro bilateral manipulation.  Macro/micro bilateral                     
              manipulation refers to the use of a force interpreting master-slave            
              manipulator to provide a human operator the capacity for dexterous             
              micromanipulation.  Micromanipulation refers to any manual task                
              requiring control of motions and forces well below normal                      
              physiological resolution.  The most obvious applications for macro-            
              micro bilateral manipulators (MMBM) are as assistive devices for               
              microsurgery and microassembly.  This project addresses both                   
              theoretical and experimental aspects of MMBM.  Its goal is to                  
              understand and describe the features of MMBM behavior that lead to             
              optimal dexterity enhancement.  This is accomplished by examining              
              a class of tasks in which the MMBM behaves as a hand tool.                     
              Specifically, this project studies the effects of using the tool               
              to match operator and environment impedances, and of using it to               
              reshape the the environment's impedance, compensating for the                  
              effects of physical scaling laws.  A high performance MMBM will be             
              developed which will be characterized by four degrees of freedom,              
              direct drive, master and slave manipulators, a multi-processor real            
              time control system, and a microscope, camera, and monitor for                 
              observation of the slave manipulator and microenvironment.  The                
              apparatus will be used to perform a series of psychophysical                   
              experiments to assesss dexterity.
