Title       : Economic Theories of the Firm - 2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1993   
File        : a9022792

Award Number: 9022792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143161             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Milgrom milgrom@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is an accomplishment-based renewal of the research of one of              
              the most creative, influential and productive scholars in the                  
              modern economic theory of industrial organizations.  The primary               
              emphasis in this project will be on studying the interactions                  
              between the co-evolution of manufacturing firms, their suppliers,              
              technologies, and organization forms and on the problems of                    
              coordination and strategy in the presence of returns to scale,                 
              complementarities, and "design dependence."  A second emphasis                 
              will be on the incentives at work in firms and how compensation                
              contracts, jobs, authority relations and decision processes are                
              designed in light of these problems.  A third emphasis will be on              
              the evolution of modern institutions for supporting exchanges and              
              how these affected the evolution of the modern firm.                           
                                                                                             
              The first part of the project represents a major new direction of              
              research that should develop into a fruitful and exciting area of              
              economic theory.  Research completed under the previous NSF grant              
              on individual firms provides a new theory of discrete                          
              organizational design with the extent of communications with                   
              customers as the major design variable.  Profit maximizing firms               
              are shown to choose one of two different and complementary                     
              organizational structures: a low inventory, extensive                          
              communication organization or a high inventory, low communication              
              system.  The low inventory firms differ from high inventory firms              
              in the same environment in that they have higher rates of new                  
              product introduction, more flexible production technologies                    
              (e.g., robotics), greater reliance on subcontractors, and more                 
              general training for workers.  The next phase of the research                  
              will be to expand this theory to study the evolution of                        
              manufacturing systems and other activities across firms and                    
              eventually to develop a rigorous economic theory of the role of                
              management.
