Title       : Institutional Response to Large-Scale Technological Risk in Extreme Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1992      
File        : a9022757

Award Number: 9022757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51384              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee Clarke lee@leeclarke.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              Recent large-scale accidents such as the Chernobyl nuclear plant               
              radiation release and the Valdez oil spill have underscored the                
              importance of studying how we do and should deal with the                      
              prospect of catastrophes in conditions of scientific uncertainty.              
              In that light, contingency planning and prevention measures                    
              require investigation.  This research project focuses on                       
              contingency planning in organizations. It seeks to understand                  
              decision making processes of organizations facing the prospect of              
              technological catastrophes for which there are no control                      
              measures.  A guiding insight is that as organizations attempt to               
              rationalize uncertainties and plan for the unknown, they channel               
              and define societal values.  The investigator will proceed by                  
              examining two cases, contingency plans for major oil spills and                
              evacuation plans for civilian nuclear power plants, through                    
              intensive interviews and archival investigation.  Building upon                
              previous work from several disciplines, the research should shed               
              light on how some values are promoted and some are suppressed in               
              the decision making, how expertise is constituted in the process,              
              and consequences for society of organizational planning.                       
              Yielding a fuller understanding of decision procedures regarding               
              extremely difficult problems, the research should be useful to                 
              policy makers and experts who must plan for low probability, high              
              consequence events in conditions of great uncertainty.  The book               
              and articles to be produced by the project should interest these               
              audiences, as well as scholars in relevant fields.                             
                                                                                             
              The principal investigator is highly qualified; the institutional              
              resources are very good; the issues are important and timely;                  
              results will be appropriately disseminated.  The project is                    
              meritorious and recommended for award.
