Title       : Symposia on Sentence Processing, Rochester, NY, May 9-11, 1991
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1991  
File        : a9022553

Award Number: 9022553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8910               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Bever   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory N. Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael K. Tanenhaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              The annual CUNY sentence processing conference will take place at              
              the University of Rochester this year.  This conference assembles              
              100-200 researchers active in the study of language processing,                
              including linguists, computational linguists, psychologists and                
              philosophers.  The conference typically has had invited papers                 
              and a fairly open poster session, primarily for graduate                       
              students.  This year, the organizers are emphasizing increased                 
              participation, including a special university-sponsored fund for               
              about 30 graduate student fellowships, several sessions open to                
              competitive submissions and invited posters from senior                        
              investigators.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              There will be three didactic symposia, each devoted to presenting              
              a current area of research which should have a large impact on                 
              future sentence processing research.  (1) A second wave of                     
              connectionist modelling offers new ways of thinking about how to               
              model processes; (2) recent research has coalesced around three                
              different kinds of methods for studying on-line sentence                       
              processing, word reading time, on-line probe responses and evoked              
              response potentials on the skull; (3) fresh ideas about lexical                
              concepts and how they are accessed at different levels may lead                
              to models which better integrate the processing of conceptual and              
              structural information.  In each case, the symposium will have a               
              main presenter whose charge is to lay out the issues, theories                 
              and current results in a way which sentence processing                         
              specialists can understand.  Commentators have been chosen to                  
              explore specific directions and to make specific proposals about               
              the implications for processing research.
