Title       : Learning in Dynamic Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1991   
File        : a9022642

Award Number: 9022642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55531              (Estimated)
Investigator: In-Koo Cho   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project develops an axiomatic intuitive learning model that               
              can be used as an alternative way of selecting an equilibrium                  
              from a class of dynamic games, where the conventional approach                 
              like strategic stability is often ineffective.  The conventional               
              rational expectations equilibrium is often ineffective because it              
              is founded on a strong "rationality" assumption.  Each economic                
              agent must perfectly foresee all others' strategies and beliefs                
              without prior communication or coordination.  One alternative to               
              the conventional approach is called "rationalizability".  The                  
              rationalizability literature develops solution concepts that are               
              intuitively more plausible than the conventional approach, but                 
              admit too many outcomes to be an effective solution concept.                   
              Another alternative is to develop axiomatic learning models with               
              very specific assumptions about the behavior of individual                     
              economic agents.  The contribution of this project comes from                  
              developing axiomatic learning models that capture the intuition                
              of rationalizability and make precise predictions about the                    
              outcome of economic problems.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The project develops an axiomatic intuitive learning theory and                
              uses it to generalize the Coase theorem for durable good                       
              monopolists, an important economic theorem about monopoly                      
              behavior.  The theory is also used to determine the conditions                 
              under which learning will lead to cooperation.  Finally, the                   
              results obtained in the first two parts of the project will be                 
              applied to  alternating offer bargaining models, bargaining where              
              each party can stop the learning process once and for all by                   
              accepting the offer.
