Title       : Information Theoretic Models for Shift-Share Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1991   
File        : a9022747

Award Number: 9022747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4470               (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Knudsen knudsen@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Shift-share analyses are used by geographers, regional scientists,        
              economists, and other social scientists to explore the nature of               
              interconnections in economic and social systems.  By examining changes         
              in statistical associations in data among subunits (such as states,            
              economic sectors, or groups of people) as parts of a larger entity             
              (such as a nation, an economy, or a population) over a specific time           
              period, shift-share analysis helps identify the degree to which changes        
              over time are a function of broad variations across the entire entity          
              ("shares") and the degree to which they relate to differential                 
              developments among the subunits ("shifts").  Although shift-share              
              analysis explicitly focuses on changes in patterns over time, it has           
              been criticized by many scientists as being overly deterministic and as        
              incapable of elucidating the processes that produce those changes.             
              This project will explore alternate forms of shift-share analysis based        
              in probabilistic statistical approaches.  These approaches differ from         
              conventional accounting-system approaches.  By basing his work on the          
              fact that probabilistic shift-share analysis is a special case of more         
              general statistical models, the investigator will extend probabilistic         
              shift-share approaches to include interaction terms among variables.           
              He also will evaluate algorithms designed to estimate parameters in            
              probabilistic shift-share analyses, and he will compare the results of         
              probabilistic shift-share methods with results obtained using more             
              conventional approaches.                                                       
                   This research will address some important methodological issues           
              that have limited the potential utility of shift-share analysis.  This         
              project will explore the statistical foundations of the procedure and          
              will develop it within a probabilistic framework, which should provide         
              a sounder basis for quantitative testing of hypotheses about changes in        
              economic activity, employment, and population.
