Title       : Fundamentals of Supercritical Extraction From a Solid Matrix
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1994   
File        : a9022026

Award Number: 9022026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aydin Akgerman a-akgerman@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective of this project is to determine solid/solute                     
              (absorbent/adsorbate) interactions in supercritical extraction                 
              from solid matrix through determination of adsorption                          
              equilibria between dilute supercritical mixtures and well                      
              characterized solid matrices, using a dynamic tracer response                  
              technique.  The partial molar volumes of the adsorbate in the                  
              adsorbent are determined through the isothermal density                        
              dependence of the solubilities of these solutes in the                         
              supercritical phase (date from the literature) combined with                   
              the isothermal density dependence of the adsorption                            
              equilibrium constants which are measured.  Similarly, the                      
              heats of adsorption are determined from the isobaric                           
              temperature dependence of the adsorption equilibrium                           
              constants.  Employing the data, a thermodynamic model for                      
              adsorbate/adsorbent interactions in presence of a                              
              supercritical fluid will be developed.                                         
                                                                                             
              In addition to the adsorption equilibria, the transport and                    
              hydrodynamic parameters for supercritical extraction from                      
              solid matrices are studied.  Together with the adsorption                      
              equilibrium constant, analysis of the tracer response data                     
              also yields the axial dispersion coefficient, the mass                         
              transfer coefficient, and the effective diffusivity of the                     
              solute in the pores of the solid matrix at the extraction                      
              conditions.  A model is proposed for restrictive diffusion in                  
              porous particles (effective diffusivity) in presence of                        
              supercrtical fluids in terms of the particle morphology,                       
              molecular diffusivity, and the ratio of the diffusing molecule                 
              diameter to the pore diameter:  The results have implications                  
              for removal of pollutants from solid adsorbents, for complex                   
              mixtures separations and analysis, and for extraction of heat-                 
              sensitive chemicals in the food and fragrance industries.
