Title       : SGER: Polar-Opitcal-Phonon Enhancement of Nonlinear Effects at the Shottky
               Barrier Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  2001        
File        : a0096519

Award Number: 0096519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Boris Gelmont gb7k@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0096519
Gelmont

As high-frequency devices are extended farther into the
              terahertz (THz) regime, the
electron physics will, for the first time, be
              impacted by polar optical phonon resonance
(POP) that typically lies above 1
              THz. In this frequency region, the dispersion of the
permittivity in all
              heteropolar materials can not be neglected. At the POP frequency,
              the
permittivity has a singularity that influences and perturbs all physical
              processes within
heterostructure barrier devices. Thus, the emerging area of
              THz electronics requires the
development of new physical theories for the
              analysis of the heterojunction interface in
the vicinity of the POP
              frequencies.

In the last two years, the new theory of POP effects within
              depletion layers of GaAs
barrier heterostructures has been proposed [1-2].
              This physical phenomenon is based upon
dramatic change in complex permittivity
              of electronic material near the polar
optical-phonon resonance frequency which
              cause highly nonlinear behavior of depleted
heterostructure modified by the
              interaction between the lattice and the electric field.
While this simplified
              theory to date has considered only forward bias conditions and has
ignored
              neutral layer and external parasitic effects, it predicts a strong
              POP
influence. Specifically, it predicts that the POPs present within the
              electron-depleted
region influence the barrier charging dynamics near the
              semiconductor resonant frequency, directly modify the potential barrier,
              perturb the spatial dependence of the electric field within the
              depletion-region and strongly alter the nonlinearity associated with the
              heterostructure current. This strong and highly-localized frequency-space
              phenomenon has broad implications to all polar-semiconductor-based
              heterostructure devices that utilize nonlinear electron transport
              effects.

The goals of this exploratory research project is to develop a new
              quantitative and
physics-based model for investigating the high frequency
              dynamics of semiconductor
interfaces. In particular, a research investigation
              is proposed to study the nonlinear
behavior of forward and reversed bias
              heterostructures. The physical model will be
integrated with a
              circuit-embedding algorithm to conduct computer simulation of dynamic
behavior
              of heterojunction based high frequency devices operating within
              realistic
situations. This work will also consider the physical operation of
              interfaces that are
constructed from novel materials systems which can be used
              to release Schottky interfaces
with good barriers heights and very low
              resonance frequencies (~600 GHz).
These particular scientific investigations
              hold great promise for introducing new degrees
of freedom into the
              functionality and performance of semiconductor-based electronic
devices. For
              example, the possibility of enhancing the nonlinearity, and therefore
              the
innate harmonic generation capacity, of heterojunction structures would
              have a profound
impact on the search for high-efficiency harmonic multiplier
              sources operating at THz
frequencies.

