Title       : Pulse Propagation in Periodic Dielectric Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a0096148

Award Number: 0096148
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155397             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Haus jwhaus@udayton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Dayton
	      300 College Park
	      Dayton, OH  454690104    937/229-2919

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number: ECS-9630068    Principal Investigator:  Joseph Haus    Title: 
              Pulse Propagation in Periodic Dielectric Materials      Analysis:       In this
              research, electromagnetic wave propagation in photonic band gap (PBG)
              structures, containing new materials with both strong nonlinear absorption and
              nonlinear refraction, will be theoretically and experimentally investigated. 
              In a photonic band gap structure, a periodic array introduces optically
              forbidden bands in analogy with electronic band gaps in solid state crystals.
              With the introduction of materials with a strong nonlinear refraction into a
              PBG system, it is expected that additional PBG effects will be introduced,
              which can also be controlled. Introduction of materials with a strong nonlinear
              reverse saturable absorption, into channels should result in a structure in
              which the optical response is limited in intensity by the material and by the
              diffraction and scattering properties of the photonic crystal.  There are many
              applications for such structures in any situation in which intense light is a
              problem. The PBG structures in this investigation will be broad band to provide
              wavelength agile protection and will be capable of operating with a wide field
              of view.    A strong direct experimental collaboration with researchers at the
              Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) has been established.  The NRL component of the
              research will be funded by the Army Research Office (ARO), through NSF, via
              subcontract with Renssalear Polytechnic Institute.  A copy of the ARO
              Augmentation Award Statement of Work defining the NRL research contribution,
              and the ARO reviews, are attached. The theoretical investigation at RPI is
              directly coupled to the experimental realization at NRL.
