Title       : Career: A Career Development Plan in Optimal and Robust Control Theory and
               Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a0096228

Award Number: 0096228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1999   
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bassam A. Bamieh bamieh@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624152  Bamieh         The research efforts outlined in this proposal are
              unified  by the idea of developing the existing paradigms in robust and 
              optimal control in a variety of novel problems, some of which  make contact
              with other areas such as nonlinear systems  sensitivity and identification.    
                The starting point of our investigations is the problem of  robust digital
              control.  We take the view that a digital control  system is a mixture of
              continuous-time and discrete-time systems,  with the resulting periodic
              behaviour, and the related nonlinear  quantization effects due to finite
              wordlength computations.  For  this problem the issue is to develop a
              systematic theory where  one can analyze performance tradeoffs between sampling
              rates,  periodic behaviour, and quantization effects.  Such a theory does  not
              at present exist.  This leads us to develop compatible  techniques in two
              different directions with a wide range of  applicability.  First, we develop a
              framework for the analysis  and synthesis of mixed continuous-time
              discrete-time systems  which extends the principal investigators previous work
              on  sampled-data robust control.  The second direction involves the  analysis
              of systems with switching nonlinearities such as relays,  hysterisis, and
              quantization.  We show via a multirate sampling  technique (akin to Sigma-Delta
              modulators in signal processing)  that many problems with switching
              nonlinearities are equivalent  to analyzing a LTI system in feedback with a
              relay.  We address  the problems of computing limit cycles and their
              sensitivities in  terms of the input-output loo nonlinear for such systems.
              This  effort seems to provide a connection between robust control and  certain
              types of so-called "intelligent systems."       In a parallel and related
              effort, the L1 model reduction  problem is addressed and its significance as a
              "good" norm for  model reduction is outlined.  This problem is also motivated
              from  the perspective of reduced order robust controller design for  la rge
              scale systems.  In the area of control oriented  identification, we address the
              novel problem of the  identification of parameter varying systems, whose models
              would  be more useful for process control problems such as in the  real-time
              control of semiconductor manufacturing, and situations  where the underlying
              processes undergo rapid changes in operating  conditions, for which a single
              LTI model is inappropriate.  Preliminary results are outlined as well as their
              connection and  implication for identification and modeling in the bahavioural 
              framework.       The educational part of this career plan is guided by the 
              principle that control and systems theory are fundamentally  interdisciplinary
              subjects.  This idea is apparent in research  problems that cross departmental
              boundaries.  In education, this  can be carried out with interdepartmental
              courses and  laboratories.  The current involvement of the principal 
              investigator in the establishment of an interdepartmental  controls laboratory,
              will be a guide to the establishment of  common courses in controls and
              systems.  Another component in  this plan is the incorporation of recent
              research results to  update graduate and undergraduate courses.  Specifically,
              we  outline ongoing efforts at incorporating recent results on  sampled-data
              control from the hybrid systems point of view in  digital control courses.  ***
