Title       : Thiamine Synthesis as a Model for Metabolic Pathway Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0096513

Award Number: 0096513
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana M. Downs downs@bact.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental question in cell biology is how metabolic pathways are integrated
              and controlled to produce a balanced, efficient metabolism.  The long-term goal
              of this research is to gain a molecular understanding of regulatory and
              metabolic interactions amongst pathways.  A solid understanding of such
              metabolic integration is needed as a foundation for efforts to predict the
              response of cells to environmental change and developmental switches, efforts
              to develop metabolic modeling systems, and efforts targeting metabolism for
              rational drug design and/or production of small molecules.  The biosynthesis of
              thiamine in the bacterium Salmonella enterica serves as a model system to
              address pathway integration.  The system was chosen because several metabolic
              processes and the function of several uncharacterized open reading frames are
              required for optimal thiamine synthesis.  Critical for the hypotheses being
              tested in this project were the findings that the aerobic synthesis of 
              thiamine requires glutathione and genes involved in the synthesis or repair of
              [Fe-S] centers. With this project the investigator will i) determine the role
              of the YggX protein, specifically how it prevents damage and/or facilitates
              repair of oxidatively damaged [Fe-S] centers, and ii) determine the function
              and structural characteristics of the ThiH protein, a thiamine biosynthetic
              enzyme. Chemical, biochemical, molecular biological, and genetic techniques
              will be employed. 

This study of the biochemical function of the YggX and
              ThiH proteins should provide insights into the integration of metabolic
              processes. Ultimately this work should contribute to the understanding of
              global metabolic strategies that Salmonella enterica uses to survive in its
              natural environment.  These strategies are likely to represent those used by
              other cells to respond to developmental and environmental stimuli. 






