Title       : CAREER: Integrated Dynamic Control for Robust Quality-of-Service Routing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1999   
File        : a0096045

Award Number: 0096045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99248              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ibrahim Matta matta@cs.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal deals with the dynamic control of large networks that  integrate
              real-time and non-real-time applications with heterogeneous  Quality-of-Service
              (QoS) requirements.  To meet these requirements,  adaptive algorithms are
              needed for the routing, scheduling and admission  control components.  Routing
              provides a selection of routes, which  should have sufficient resources to
              satisfy the applications' QoS.  Scheduling allocates link resources (bandwidth,
              buffers, etc.) among the  different service classes.  Admission accepts or
              rejects a new incoming  application, based on the requested QoS and the
              available resources.  Because each control component causes and reacts to
              changes in the  network state, there is a strong time-dependent interaction
              among them.  By taking this interaction into account, the proposed work will
              develop  QoS routing algorithms that will provide significant improvements in 
              performance.  To this end, we will develop dynamic integrated models.  A  novel
              numerical-analytical technique, called "Z-iteration", will be used  to solve
              these models.  The Z-iteration promises to provide rapid and  accurate
              solutions to transient performance of integrated networks  consisting of both
              wired and wireless links.  Networks based on ATM and  integrated services IP
              will be considered. The proposed work will  develop software educational tools
              and projects for integrated networks,  and will experiment with providing QoS
              support to educational multimedia  applications.    More information about this
              project can be found in  http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/matta/proj/project.html
