Title       : Evolutionary Analysis of the Generation and Loss of Biodiversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a0096189

Award Number: 0096189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary G. Gillespie gillespi@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George K. Roderick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Gillespie   9726573                   We are undertaking part of a large study
              examining the dynamic nature of ecological and geographic range occupation by
              species. The ultimate goal is to determine whether, and how, evolutionary
              history dictates the size of a species range, and hence its vulnerability to
              extinction. The focus of the research is a large and diverse species radiation
              of spiders endemic to the Hawaiian Islands. The current objectives are: (1) to
              resolve the evolutionary relationships among 4   groups of the spiders, two of
              which differentiate extensively within islands, while the others differentiate
              primarily between islands or mountains; and (2) for a single group, to generate
              estimates of effective population size and gene flow (using molecular markers)
              between populations of each species.         If it were possible to determine
              the natural evolutionary changes in distribution among species through their
              evolutionary history, then it may be possible to distinguish species that are
              naturally   restricted in their range from those that have been confined due to
              human impact. The objective of the proposed study is to understand
              relationships among populations and species, so that we will be able to go on
              to test whether the natural evolutionary future of a species can be predicted.
              We have argued that, for species characterized by extensive migration, local
              subdivision of populations will be impossible. Therefore, species divergence
              can only occur when a population becomes isolated, for example when it reaches
              a new land mass, at which time the new species is also likely to expand in
              abundance and range. In such a scenario, the most recently formed
              representative of a species group will be the most widespread, while the older
              species in that lineage will be more restricted and vulnerable to extinction.
              For species exhibiting reduced migration, local population subdivision should
              be possible, with subdivided species becoming more restricted in abundance and
              range. In this second  scenario the more recently derived species should be the
              most restricted and vulnerable to natural extinction. The data generated in
              this study will indicate how information on phylogenetic relationships among
              clades can be most effectively coupled with data on effective   population size
              and gene flow between populations in order to statistically test for
              significant patterns of distributional change.
