Title       : Tissue Engineering: The Morphogenesis of Values of Knowledge in a New Scientific
               Field
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0096575

Award Number: 0096575
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289246             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda F. Hogle lhogle@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is a qualitative, empirical study of the work practices of
              scientists in the emerging, interdisciplinary field of tissue engineering.
              Studying tissue engineering offers an opportunity to examine knowledge
              production in a scientific field in its embryonic state. The field involves new
              collaborations and institutional arrangements, and brings together engineers,
              materials scientists, and life scientists from a variety of disciplinary
              traditions, sources of expertise, priorities, and styles of problem-solving.
              The project is timely, as the field is in early stages and new social
              arrangements are under construction.  Studying the new concepts and approaches
              to research that may result also entails studying the conditions in which the
              production and circulation of knowledge takes place, including the broader
              cultural and political-economic values that affect and are affected by new
              technoscientific endeavors. In particular, the study will examine how notions
              of risk and control over uncertainty, beliefs about perfectibility and
              enhancement, and understandings of human biology and the body come into play. 
              The project is a multi-sited ethnography, taking place in research
              laboratories, professional conferences and other educational settings where
              tissue engineering is being taught, and public hearings for regulatory and
              policy purposes. It will include in-depth interviews with scientists, and
              representatives of relevant professional organizations, policy and other public
              groups.  A literature review will include scientific and professional
              publications, government documents, and industry analyses, and a content
              analysis will provide data on the way tissue engineering as a field is
              represented, as well as the engagement of engineering and life sciences with
              each other, and with public domains.  A search of internet sources and their
              links will demonstrate not only topics of relevance to tissue engineers, but
              demonstrate linkages between researchers in various disciplines, and
              connections of organizations and types of expertise, documenting the
              circulation of specific types of knowledge. The products will include
              publications and resources for the social studies of science, technology and
              medicine, as well as innovative educational tools to be used for both social
              scientists and tissue engineering scientists. In this way, the project will
              contribute to the study of a variety of emerging and changing scientific
              fields, as well as providing empirical data on work practices that will
              contribute to the growing body of works in the anthropology of science,
              technology and medicine.
