Title       : Collaborative Research: Design and Construction of a Second-Generation Buriable
               Broadband Ocean Bottom Seismograph and Burial System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0096451

Award Number: 0096451
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra Isern                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $481545             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Collins jcollins@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Detrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative ocean science technology development project builds upon
              successes achieved on land with temporary deployments of portable broadband
              seismographs.  A scientific argument has been made to provide an equivalent
              capability for the oceans. Currently available portable broadband ocean bottom
              seismographs (BBOBS) and burial systems are prototypes and must be improved
              before the use of these seismographs in the oceans becomes routine. This
              project will develop a combination of burial system and buriable seismometer
              that will enable 2-3 BBOBS deployments per day.  The burial system will become
              part of the U.S. National Ocean Bottom Seismic Instrumentation Pool (OBSIP) and
              will be available to the research community.  The new burial system will use
              the force of gravity for seismometer burial, and because the new BBOBS uses a
              borehole seismometer that has a substantially smaller diameter than
              conventional models, the force required to bury the new seismometer will
              substantially less.  Enhanced seismic coverage over the oceans is vital to
              improving seismic resolution to better address existing as well as new
              questions pertaining to solid Earth dynamics.  The geophysical community will
              benefit from ocean bottom seismometers with measurement capabilities comparable
              to land-based stations that can be deployed and recovered quickly and at
              minimal cost.  This project will construct and test one burial system and one
              BBOBS. Should the new buriable seismometer and burial system meet design goals,
              funding will be sought to upgrade up to 30 existing instruments with buriable
              broadband seismometers.
 

