Title       : A Portable Lidar for Rapid Determination of Forest Canopy Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0096656

Award Number: 0096656
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210613             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey G. Parker parkerg@si.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for the development of a portable instrument that
              can be used to provide accurate measurements of the tree height and mass in
              forested areas. The organization of the forest canopy is closely related to
              important functional characteristics of the forest: the developmental stage and
              potential for growth, the exchange of matter and energy with the atmosphere,
              and the diversity of included habitats. Canopy structure is also an effective
              predictor of stand attributes important in forest management, such as stem
              density, basal area, and above-ground biomass. However, understanding of the
              relation between structure and function is limited by the lack of methods for
              measuring structures rapidly, accurately, and at scales useful for ecological
              studies. Remote measurements typically view only the canopy outer surface, and
              reveal little of the critical internal organization. Although a few airborne
              scanning instruments that use laser imaging (lidar) have been developed, these
              systems are proof-of-concept prototypes of spaceborne instruments with limited
              resolution. The portable lidar system to be developed with support from this
              award will be able to rapidly assess canopy structure at scales extending from
              meters to kilometers that can be controlled by the user, and can be deployed
              either from the ground (looking up) or from towers, cranes, or light aircraft
              (looking down

