Title       : Relativistic Gravitation and Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0096522

Award Number: 0096522
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford M. Will cmw@wuphys.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Within the next decade the likely detection of gravitational waves from
              astrophysical
sources will open a new window for astronomy and provide new
              tests of Einstein's theory
of general relativity.  Interpreting the
              observations will require accurate theoretical gravi-
tational waveforms
              calculated from the theory. This project will endeavor to provide the
needed
              waveforms, by solving Einstein's equations systematically in a post-Newtonian
              ap-
proximation, which amounts to an expansion in powers of v/c, where v and c
              are the speeds
of the source bodies and of light, respectively. The goal will
              be to find the equations of
motion for the bodies correct to order (v/c)7
              beyond Newtonian gravity, and the flux of
gravitational radiation to order
              (v/c)6 beyond the lowest "quadrupole" approximation. This
will make use of a
              method known as Direct Integration of the Relaxed Einstein Equations
(DIRE),
              that has been developed at Washington University. Using this method it will
              also
be possible to study the effects of the interior structure of the bodies,
              including their spin,
on the motion and gravitational waveform, to high order
              in the post-Newtonian expansion.
Ways to use gravitational-wave data to test
              alternative theories of gravity will also be
studied. This includes testing
              the scalar-tensor alternative theories by observing gravita-
tional waves from
              neutron stars inspiralling into black holes, and testing whether or not
              the
graviton has a mass by observing waves from inspiral of pairs of
              supermassive black holes
using the proposed space-based gravitational antenna,
              LISA. A recently published class of
alternative theories of gravity that
              predict a massive graviton will be studied in detail as
"foils" against which
              to compare and contrast the predictions of general relativity, and as
guides
              to other possible tests of a massive graviton.



