Title       : Development of a Scalable High Performance Reconfigurable Real-Time Signal
               Processing Platform for Dynamic Data-Driven Neural Simulations and Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0096737

Award Number: 0096737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $760766             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross K. Snider rosss@ee.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal provides support for development of a high performance,
              reconfigurable signal-processing platform that will permit real-time analysis
              of large-scale multi-channel neurophysiologic data and subsequent use in
              simulation and modeling. The computational architecture will be a distributed,
              real-time system of modular design consisting of computational nodes connected
              in a three-dimensional mesh. A computational node will include a floating-point
              digital signal processor (DSP), a field programmable gate array (FPGA), and
              local memory. This system to be used is reconfigurable, so that algorithms can
              be directly implemented in the hardware. The FPGAs can act as communication
              processors, allowing significant bandwidth for communication between
              computational nodes. Configuring the system as a three-dimensional mesh will
              allow the system to scale to any number of computational nodes required to
              process an arbitrary number of real-time I/O data streams.  
The platform will
              be developed using the analysis of neural signal processing in a simple nervous
              system, that of the cricket. Specifically, the platform will be developed to
              allow investigation of the cooperative neural encoding schemes used to transmit
              information about air currents within the cricket's  nervous system. The
              platform will enable real-time decoding of neural information, and will thus
              enable experimental perturbation of the encoded information while the neural
              signals are in transit between multiple peripheral sensors and the central
              processing ganglia. If the platform is successfully developed, an unprecedented
              degree of interactive control in the analysis of neural function will result. 
              This could lead to major insights into the biological basis of neural
              computation and a new paradigm in experimental and computational neuroscience,
              one where experimental and theoretical neuroscientists can work together to
              test hypotheses of neural function in vivo.

This proposal provides support
              for development of a high performance, reconfigurable signal-processing
              platform that will permit real-time analysis of large-scale multi-channel
              neurophysiologic data and subsequent use in simulation and modeling. The
              computational architecture will be a distributed, real-time system of modular
              design consisting of computational nodes connected in a three-dimensional mesh.
              A computational node will include a floating-point digital signal processor
              (DSP), a field programmable gate array (FPGA), and local memory. This system to
              be used is reconfigurable, so that algorithms can be directly implemented in
              the hardware. The FPGAs can act as communication processors, allowing
              significant bandwidth for communication between computational nodes.
              Configuring the system as a three-dimensional mesh will allow the system to
              scale to any number of computational nodes required to process an arbitrary
              number of real-time I/O data streams.  
The platform will be developed using
              the analysis of neural signal processing in a simple nervous system, that of
              the cricket. Specifically, the platform will be developed to allow
              investigation of the cooperative neural encoding schemes used to transmit
              information about air currents within the cricket's  nervous system. The
              platform will enable real-time decoding of neural information, and will thus
              enable experimental perturbation of the encoded information while the neural
              signals are in transit between multiple peripheral sensors and the central
              processing ganglia. If the platform is successfully developed, an unprecedented
              degree of interactive control in the analysis of neural function will result. 
              This could lead to major insights into the biological basis of neural
              computation and a new paradigm in experimental and computational neuroscience,
              one where experimental and theoretical neuroscientists can work together to
              test hypotheses of neural function in vivo.


