Title       : Molybdenum Biogeochemistry in the Open Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a0096453

Award Number: 0096453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209901             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory E. Ravizza   (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Waterbury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0096453

In this study, researchers at the Woods Hole
              Oceanographic Institution will conduct a careful study of the marine chemistry
              of  molybdenum (Mo) in the open ocean.  Mo is currently believed to behave as a
               conservative element in the open ocean and therefore to have a relatively 
              uninteresting chemistry in this environment.  However, it is well established
              that Mo is an  important micro-nutrient that is required in nitrate reductase
              and in the most common  form of nitrogenase, enzymes which are required for
              organisms to utilize nitrate and to  fix nitrogen (N), respectively.  The PIs
              expect that sufficiently precise analyses of Mo in  suspended particulate
              matter (SPM), and in filtered seawater will reveal variations that  are
              potentially related to biological utilization of Mo. 

The specific
              objectives of this proposal are:  (1) to establish whether or not
              non-conservative distributions of Mo in the eastern Pacific result from
              biological utilization of  Mo; and (2) to determine whether or not enrichments
              of Mo in SPM result from biological  utilization of Mo in association with
              denitrification and/or N-fixation.  Accomplishing  these objectives is
              necessary in order to evaluate the potential of Mo enrichments as  tracers of
              these important components of the marine nitrogen cycle.  In addition, this
              work  could contribute to a better understanding the biological demand for iron
              (Fe) in the ocean because biological  utilization of Mo and Fe are coupled. 
              

To accomplish the objectives stated above the investigators will: (1)
              determine the vertical  distribution of Mo in filtered and unfiltered seawater
              samples from several sites in the  eastern Pacific that represent contrasting
              regimes of denitrification and Mn oxide redox  cycling, (2) complete a suite
              laboratory culture experiments designed to test our  hypothesis that cellular
              Mo concentration covary with levels of Mo-containing enzyme  activity and (3)
              collect and analyze SPM from regions that support active denitrification and 
              N-fixation in order to establish the relative proportions of Mo associated with
              lithogenic  debris, Mn oxides and biogenic material.  

Upon completing the
              proposed work the investigators expect to be able to make a first order 
              assessment of the potential of analyses of dissolved and/or particulate Mo in
              seawater as  tracers of denitrification, N-fixation or Fe-utilization.  In
              addition, they hope to gain insight into the patterns of biological utilization
              of a non-limiting micronutrient.  



