Title       : A Specimen-Level Database of the North American and Mexican Wild Bees (Apoidea)
               at the University of Kansas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2001     
File        : a0096905

Award Number: 0096905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235976             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Ashe ashe@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Engel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0096905



A specimen-level database of the North American and
              Mexican wild bees at the University of Kansas

New computational and
              information technology provides innovative opportunities to use data resident
              in museum collections to address research projects involving conservation,
              predictive modeling, visualization of distributions, as well as other
              biological phenomena. Unfortunately, few databases for insects or other
              invertebrates exist for use with these new tools. The wild bees (superfamily
              Apoidea), with over 20,000 described species world-wide, play a profound role
              in the economy of nature; as pollinators, they are critically important in
              structuring ecosystems and have a major impact on agriculture.  Data in the
              excellent bee collection at the University of Kansas will be entered in a
              modern relational database in order to bring them into a currency for research
              in biological informatics.
 	This project will 1) capture specimen data from
              35,400 specimens of Mexican and 120,000 specimens of North American Apoidea
              (bees) (7 families; 2272 North American and 838 Mexican species) from the
              collection of the Division of Entomology of the KU Natural History
              Museum/Biodiversity Research Center in a fully relational database; 2) provide
              georeferencing (latitude and longitude) for locality information so that the
              data are maximally useful to the greatest diversity of users; and 3) make this
              database available in fully searchable form on the World Wide Web using Z39.50
              query and retrieval protocol.
This will be the first comprehensive database of
              specimen data for Mexican and North American Apoidea (bees) and will include
              nearly 200,000 individual specimen records, representing data for over 3,100
              species, when combined with existing data for Mexican bees.  Once the data for
              these bees are captured, verified and accurately georeferenced, they become
              permanently accessible to the user community.  The database will be web
              accessible using Z39.50 protocols for search and data retrieval.  Retrieved
              data will be interoperable with other bee databases that may be developed or
              placed on-line, and with geospatial, modeling and other analytical tools (such
              as "Species Analyst," Biodiversity Workshop, and Arcview) for research in
              systematics, ecology, and biodiversity dynamics.  Programs for mapping,
              visualization and modeling of biodiversity data are constantly improving,
              thereby increasing the value of the bee database.  By bringing this material
              into a database, particularly with georeferenced locality data, it will be
              possible to associate distributional patterns with those of other plant and
              animal groups for broader biogeographical studies incorporating G.I.S.
              information on temperature clines, soil types, and other physical data.   The
              data will be available for use in policy decisions concerning native
              pollinators, agriculture, biological diversity, biogeography, conservation, and
              resource management as well as basic and comparative research programs.  


