Title       : A Multi-Scale Study of Solid Phase Reactions: Unraveling Mechanical-Chemical
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0096381

Award Number: 0096381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265030             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hendrik J. Viljoen chrdhjv@engvms.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PI: H. J. Viljoen 
Institution: University of Nebraska at
              Lincoln
Proposal Number: 0096381

Certain solid materials, outside the class
              of classic explosives, can react in an extremely violent manner if they are
              hydrostatically compressed.  The elastic potential energy in the solid's
              lattice is "unlocked" in an avalanche-like manner and if this energy release is
              synchronized with a chemical reaction, a shock wave of extraordinary intensity
              could form in the solid structure.  The existence of solid phase detonation
              becomes a real possibility.  The conditions in such a shock front could be
              contemplated: presses in excess of one million atmospheres and shock wave
              velocities of 5-10 km/s.  Although such pressures and velocities are routinely
              reached in implosion experiments and conventional explosive, energy density in
              a solid phase detonation exceeds conventional processes by several orders of
              magnitude.  This high-energy wave constitutes a non-equilibrium state of the
              material, but simultaneously it finds a harmonic interaction across atomic,
              mesoscopic and macroscopic scales.  It is the goal of this project to
              investigate events of energy transfer on these three scales.  A hierarchical
              approach is planned.

Small clusters of single element/compound of a few
              thousand atoms will be studies by molecular dynamics simulation.  Energy
              distributions and characteristic times to equilibrate are calculated for a
              variety of dynamic and hydrostatic loadings.  Clusters of different compounds
              introduce chemistry as an additional form of potential energy to the system. 
              When pre-compressed clusters are brought in contact and lattice collapse is
              initiated at one face, the symbiotic interaction between chemistry and elastic
              potential energy release will be elucidated.  The mesoscopic models are used to
              study energy transfer on a particle level.  Although time scales are still
              small enough to study non-equilibrium states, atom-atom interaction is limited
              to nearest neighbors to expand the length scale.  Waves begin to build up
              across several atomic layers.  When sufficient energy is supplied during
              build-up, a soliton is created.  This particular wave type traps elastic
              potential energy.  At heterogeneities some energy is transferred to thermal
              energy, but local spalling also occurs and lattice collapse is initiated.  The
              inverse scattering theory will be employed to analyze formation of solitons. 
              Contiuum models need refinement, because kinetics depends not on the
              concentration of reactants, but on their surface area.  Combinatorics provides
              expectation values of common surface area and dependency on surface area due to
              soliton action, melting and inhibition by condensed phase products. 
              Descriptions of the state of species must be included: particle size and
              surface area.  This links the macroscopic model with mesoscopic models.

In
              addition, a series of experiments are planned to test the proposed mechanisms. 
              Reactive mixtures are loaded in a Bridgman anvil.  The amount of potential
              energy loaded in the system is varied and beyond critical load a fast reaction
              with active participation of the elastic potential energy in the reaction
              process is anticipated.  Metal/oxide and metal/non-oxide systems with different
              physical properties will be explored.  The electrothermal explosion method will
              be combined with the Bridgman anvil to study kinetics under pressure.

