Title       : Theory of Liquid Crystals and Soft Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0096531

Award Number: 0096531
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tom C. Lubensky tom@dept.physics.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports theoretical research and education the area of soft
              condensed matter.  Research will be carried out on layered structures, nematic
              liquid crystals, twist grain boundary phases, nematic elastomers, and granular
              matter.
The PI has demonstrated that layered structures, such as free standing
              smectic-C films, lyotropic smectics with dissolved proteins that form 2D
              lattices within their bilayer membranes, or DNA-lipid complexes with DNA
              intercalated between lipid bilayers can exhibit remarkable new "sliding phases"
              of matter. These phases are characterized by 2D power law behavior of
              correlations in spite of nonvanishing interlayer couplings.  Many properties of
              these phases both in stacks of 2D classical systems and in arrays of 1D quantum
              wires are unexplored or incompletely understood and will be investigated by the
              PI.
Nematic liquid crystals exhibit both line disclination and point hedgehog
              defects.  Disclination loops can produce far-field director configurations
              equivalent to those of point hedgehogs and can carry hedgehog charge.  The
              topology and homotopy group of these charge carrying loops is well understood.
              The distribution of hedgehog charge along a disclination loop is, however,
              largely unexplored.  The PI will develop ways of quantifying hedgehog density,
              explore its energetic consequences, and study its effect on coarsening of
              defect patterns after a quench into the nematic phase from the isotropic phase.
              
Twist-grain boundary (TGB) phases are liquid-crystal analogs of the Abrikosov
              vortex lattice phase of superconductors. At least three distinct TGBC phases in
              addition to the original TGBA phase have now been predicted or observed
              experimentally.  Investigations of the energetic differences among these phases
              and the parameters that determine their stability, which are poorly understood,
              form an important part of the proposed program. 
Nematic elastomers, formed by
              crosslinking nematic polymers, combine the properties of rubber elasticity and
              orientational order of nematic liquid crystals.  They have unusual elastic
              properties that have a number of potential applications, most notably as
              artificial muscles.  A major part of the proposed program will be devoted to
              the study of the static and dynamic properties of nematic elastomers, including
              nematic elastomeric membranes and lyotropic nematic elastomers formed by
              dispersing colloidial rods in a swollen gel. 
When subjected to sufficiently
              strong shear stresses, granular matter becomes partially fluidized and exhibits
              flow properties that differ from those of a Newtonian fluid.  The PI will
              investigate the flow of granular materials in various flow geometries using a
              generalization of the Chapman-Ensgog kinetic hydrodynamical equations with
              inelastic collisions in which effects of particle corrrelations are modeled
              near random close packing by a viscosity that diverges more rapidly with
              density than other transport coefficients. 
%%%
This award supports research
              and education in the area of soft condensed matter.  The term "soft materials"
              encompasses a wide spectrum of materials that includes complex fluids and
              liquid crystals and that are important to industry, as well as most biological
              matter. The PI will use these materials as an arena to explore fundamental
              concepts in condensed matter physics, such as broken symmetry, topological
              defects, and fluctuation destruction of long-range order in low-dimensional
              systems. This work helps improve our fundamental understanding of soft
              materials, and involves novel new phases of matter, "sliding phases," that
              occur in layered 'soft matter,' topological defects that occur in nematic
              liquid crystals, twist-grain boundary phases that occur in liquid crystals,
              nematic elastomers, and complex fluids. 
***

