Title       : Policy Representation in the American States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2001   
File        : a0096435

Award Number: 0096435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173131             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald C. Wright wright1@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Representation lies at the very heart of democratic processes.  Although there
              are many definitions of democracy, almost all include the need for some level
              of responsiveness of governors to the will of the governed.  This project seeks
              to extend studies of representation to the American states.  It follows the
              tradition in the literature of examining representation in terms of the
              congruence between the policy preferences of citizens and the legislators who
              represent them.
	The innovations of this project are (1) the extension of
              theories of representation into the comparative institutional and electoral
              contexts of the American states; (2) the development of new data resources on
              legislative policy behavior and constituency preferences.
	Most of the
              empirical work on representation focuses on the United States House of
              Representatives and, consequently, the lack of variation in electoral and
              institutional conditions means that there is little theoretical development of
              the conditions which enhance or retard effective representation.  The major
              reason for this is the paucity of data in contexts other than the Congress to
              address empirically questions of representation.
	This study includes all
              state legislatures of the United States.  The comparative analysis examines how
              the varying electoral, constitutional and district features of the states
              influence the process of policy representation.  The project also examines and
              attempts to account for variations in the intensity of partisan conflict among
              state legislatures, drawing substantially from the recent literature on the
              impact of party with the Congress.
	A major part of this project is the
              collection of data for the analysis of representation in the states.  The
              biggest task is the collection of a comprehensive set of roll call votes in the
              50 states.  Two technological advances makes this effort possible:  most state
              journals, the source of roll call data, are not available over the Internet and
              text-processing technology allows the conversion of the text of legislative
              journals into roll call data sets.  The period covered is the 1999-2000 terms
              (varying them where appropriate for states with odd-year elections).  These
              data are supplemented with a comprehensive collection of interest group ratings
              of state legislators, and surveys of state legislative candidates.  The surveys
              serve as validation of the roll call scales and to establish a common metric
              for roll call-based measures which enhances their value in comparative analysis
              across chambers and states.
	On the voter side, the project uses an extensive
              collection of demographic characteristics available for the state legislative
              districts.  The project also processes newly available presidential voting
              measures, which serve as an indicator of voter preferences. 
	The project
              promises to make important progress in our understanding of how electoral and
              institutional differences among the states shape the ability of citizens to
              achieve effective policy representation.  It also produces important new data
              for use by the state, electoral and legislative politics communities.  The
              approach and the lessons learned have implications for the study of
              representation well beyond the context of the American states.   

