Title       : A Mechanistic Investigation of the Effect of Stress on the Photochemical
               Degradation of Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0096606

Award Number: 0096606
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Tyler dtyler@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Studies have shown that stress will accelerate the photochemical degradation of
              many polymers, but reasons for the increased degradation rates are not well
              understood.  The primary objectives of this study are to determine the
              mechanistic origins of the stress-induced rate increases and to find a general
              expression for quantitatively relating stress to photodegradation rates.  In
              order to circumvent the problems associated with the mechanistic complexities
              of photogradation and to facilitate rapid experimental progress, three key
              experimental strategies will be used.  First, to simplify the mechanistically
              complicated degradation pathways of typical polymers, is proposed to study
              polymers containing metal-metal bonds placed periodically along their
              backbones.  These polymers photodegrade by a straightforward mechanism with no
              unwanted side-reactions.  Second, to eliminate the complexities caused by
              rate-limiting oxygen diffusion, radical traps will be built-in along the
              polymer backbones.  Third, a computer controlled apparatus will be used to
              collect photdegradation quantum yields as a function of stress applied to
              polymer films.  The data will be compared to the predictions of three
              degradation hypotheses: (1) the Plotnikov hypothesis, (2) the "Decreased
              Radical Recombination Efficiency" hypothesis (a theory that relates degradation
              rates the decreased ability of radical to recombine under the influence of
              stress), and (3) a photochemical analog of the Zhurkov equation.
%%%
This
              work may be of considerable practical significance because polymers are
              increasingly being used in structural applications, by which they are subjected
              to stress and light.  A proper understanding of the synergy between light and
              stress is therefore essential for the accurate estimation of polymer lifetimes
              and for the development of stabilizing systems.  Important fundamental
              principles about radical recombination in the solid state should also emerge
              from this study.

