Title       : (ESH) Holocene Climate Variability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a0096331

Award Number: 0096331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287857             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Mayewski paul.mayewski@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Loren D. Meeker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

To address a variety of paleoclimatic questions, this proposal is to
              further refine and expand previous investigations of the Holocene GISP2 ice
              core glaciochemical record and utilize several other existing paleoclimate
              records (e.g., ice cores, marine sediments) for comparison. Well-dated,
              continuous Holocene climate records from the Antarctic are rare and large
              regional differences are expected over the continent. Thus, the proposal plans
              to develop a bipolar comparison by utilizing records developed from the
              proponents involvement in the Siple Dome (West Antarctica) ice core and an East
              Antarctic glaciochemical record to be developed from Law Dome in collaboration
              with Australian colleagues.
The primary laboratory analytical emphasis in this
              proposal is the production of detailed (~ 10+ samples/year) major ion series
              (chloride, nitrate, sulfate, calcium, magnesium, sodium, potassium and
              ammonium) and MSA. These ions represent >95% of the soluble ions in the
              atmosphere and can be used: (1) to develop environmental records (eg., volcanic
              history, marine and continental biogenic source productivity); (2) in the
              reconstruction of atmospheric circulation systems, and (3) to develop even more
              precise dating of existing ice core records. The proponents plan to utilize a
              variety of multivariate statistical analyses in our interpretation of temporal
              and spatial data series.
The study is expected to add a new dimension to the
              classic stable isotope-temperature reconstruction of climate by defining,
              through the examination of glaciochemical series, complementary measures of
              variability in atmospheric circulation.

