Title       : Vibrational Spectroscopy and Reaction Dynamics of Complexes and Reactive
               Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a0096378

Award Number: 0096378
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $466305             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marsha I. Lester milester@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Marsha Lester of the University of Pennsylvania is supported by the Experimental
              Physical Chemistry Program to perform experiments that examine reaction
              pathways of fundamental chemical reactions, including the reversible reaction
              of OH + CO to form HOCO with subsequent decomposition to H + carbon dioxide,
              and the reaction of OH + HCl to form water + Cl.  The potential energy surface
              along the reaction pathway from the entrance channel to the transition state
              will be mapped via infrared spectroscopy of intra- and inter-molecular
              vibrational modes of the reactant complexes.  The transition state region(s)
              will also be characterized by vibrational overtone studies of the HOCO reactive
              intermediate, which will access theoretically predicted predissociative
              resonances of HOCO.  The complexes and reactive intermediates will be generated
              photolytically, and their vibrational overtone spectra will be obtained using
              various laser pump-probe methods.  The structure and stability of the reactant
              complexes are expected to reveal their role in the reaction dynamics, and may
              explain unusual temperature behavior observed for these reactions.  Vibrational
              activation of the complexes and reactive intermediates will supply sufficient
              energy to induce inelastic and/or reactive scattering dynamics, providing a
              complementary way to explore the reactive potential energy surfaces.  The
              lifetime of the vibrationally excited complexes and intermediates will be
              determined by direct time-domain measurements or by spectral line broadening in
              the frequency domain.  Quantum state distributions of inelastically scattered
              fragments and reaction products will be examined, as well as the branching
              between these decay processes.  Intra-and/or inter-molecular mode selective
              excitation and isotopic substitution will be utilized to prepare initial states
              that preferentially decay by chemical reaction. 

There have been many
              advances in experimental and theoretical investigations of chemical reaction
              dynamics over the past decade.  These studies focus on directly evaluating the
              influence of long-range forces on chemical reactions, exploring processes that
              are of practical importance in atmospheric and combustion chemistry. 
