Title       : US-Morocco Cooperative Research: Environmental Contamination and Toxicity Caused
               by Heavy Metals Released from a Closed Mine in Marrakech, Morocco
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a0096819

Award Number: 0096819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabriel Bitton gbitton@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 5928,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0096819
Bitton

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project
              by Dr. Gabriel Bitton, Department of Environmental Engineering Science,
              University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida and Dr. Ali Boularbah, of Cadi
              Ayyad University in Marrakech, Morocco.   The two plan to study heavy metal
              concentrations and toxicity in environmental media near a mine located in the
              vicinity of the city of Marrakech, Morocco.  Soil, surface runoffs, surface
              water, and sediments will be tested for heavy metal contamination via chemical
              analyses and toxicity tests, using MetPlate or MetPad which are specific for
              heavy metal toxicity.  The two also propose to investigate metal
              hyperaccumulating plants in the sites.  The research is aimed at evaluating the
              impact of mining operations on metals contamination. The proposal activity
              applies recently developed techniques to addressing problems in ecological
              impact assessments, and adds ecological knowledge to a new geographic
              environment, in Morocco, that has not been studied before.

Scope:  The data
              generated will be most useful to Moroccan regulatory agencies, and will provide
              a catalyst for better environmental control, with possible profound beneficial
              effects on the health of the local people.  This applies particularly to the
              conditions of this area, which is dry for most of the year, but during the
              rainy season could produce sudden widespread health problems.  The proposed
              work will help in the training of a Moroccan scientist to properly assess
              terrestrial metals contamination. The proposed research applies techniques for
              metals toxicity testing developed by Dr. Bitton.  Dr. Bitton has worked before
              in Morocco and collaborated with Moroccan investigators.  The US and Moroccan
              scientists have good research and publication records, and it is expected that
              this research will result in publications in international scientific journals.
               The project will also allow a graduate student from the University of Florida
              to participate in field research at a foreign site, and thus gain experience in
              international collaboration.  This proposal meets the INT objective of
              supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual scientific interest.  This
              project is being supported by the Division of International Programs and the
              Division of Biological and Environmental Systems. 
