Title       : The Fred and Lois Gehring Special Year in Complex Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2000  
File        : a0096694

Award Number: 0096694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Fornaess Fornaess@Math.LSA.UMICH.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              . Abstract of the proposed activity.
 
   The Fred and Lois Gehring Special
              Year at the University of Michigan
 2001/2002 is devoted to Complex Analysis,
              Complex Dynamics and their
 interaction. There are several Experts in Complex
              
 Analysis and in Complex Dynamics at the University of Michigan,
 and in
              addition there will be several senior long-term visitors
 and several junior
              faculty hired in these areas and a good number
 of short term visitors. Also
              there will be two conferences highlighting
 recent developments and bringing
              in experts from around the world.
 
 
 2. Abstract of Proposed Research.

              
  Many phenomena in nature and human society, such as the weather,
 or the
              stock market, are chaotic and hard to predict and analyze. In 
 fact any time
              three or more entities interact, the behaviour tends to 
 have chaotic
              features as the interaction between any two of them is 
 constantly interfered
              with by the third and the effects of these third
 person interferences
              accumulate and backfire. Large systems
 are beyond our ability to calculate
              completely. One can only understand
 with complete precision lower dimensional
              systems and then one can hope
 to infer from these which phenomena can happen
              in larger systems.
 Complex dynamics provides the low dimensional setting with
              the most
 tools available for such analysis. The theory of complex analysis
              provides
 powerful methods for complex dynamics. It is also exciting that
              complex 
 dynamics provides tools back to complex analysis. So getting these
              groups
 together for an extended period should have strong impact on both
              areas.
 
 
  One of the main tools in complex dynamics is (pluri)potential
              theory,
 which is a key area in complex analysis. Using Green functions from

              potential theory one can get invariant currents and measures for the
 dynamics
              via the complex Monge ampere operator. A basic problem
 here is that in some
              cases it is difficult to define this operator
 due to the fact that one needs
              to multiply distributions. Kobayashi
 hyperbolicity is another key concept.
              Invariant regions which are
 Kobayashi hyperbolic gives rise to nonchaotic
              behaviour because iterates
 are then a normal family. It is however difficult
              to decide which regions
 in complex manifolds are Kobayashi hyperbolic.  The
              best results on the
 embedding problem for Riemann surfaces in C^2 use complex
              dynamical 
 techniques, but there are many open cases still. And these are
              only a
 few of the topics that will be investigated by this huge group of

              researchers

