Title       : Computational Study of the Effect of Wall Shear Stress on Atherosclerosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a0096327

Award Number: 0096327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74471              (Estimated)
Investigator: Biyue (Betty) Liu bliu@monmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Monmouth University
	      
	      West Long Branch, NJ  07764    732/571-3502

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Atherosclerosis is a disease of the large- and medium-size arteries, which 
              involves complex interactions between the artery wall and the blood flow.  Both
               clinical observations and experimental results showed that the fluid shear
              stress acting on the artery wall plays a significant  role in the physical
              processes  which lead to atherosclerosis. Therefore, a sound understanding of
              the effect of the wall shear stress on atherosclerosis is of practical
              importance to blood flow research and early detection, prevention and treatment
              of the disease. The objective of this project is  to develop mathematical
              models to reveal the relationship between the disease processes and the wall
              shear stress in order to understand the effect of the wall shear stress on
              atherosclerosis. To achieve this goal,  three-dimensional mathematical models
              will be introduced to simulate the blood flow in arteries with atherosclerotic
              plaques. A finite element method with stabilization techniques will be applied
              to solve the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations with a  free moving
              boundary, where the location and the size of the atherosclerotic  plaque is
              determined by a geometry update condition coupling  the information of the
              blood flow and the artery wall. To simulate the blood flow through  realistic
              carotid bifurcation and curved tubes, and also to analyze the development of
              atherosclerotic lesions, numerical computations will be carried out  allowing
              for variations of geometry and flow parameters under  physiological conditions.
              A successful accomplishment of this project will be very critical in advancing
              Dr. Liu's academic career. POWRE award will be very important to achieving such
              accomplishment.  It will allow her to establish a strong interdisciplinary
              research program in biomedical science and to use her computational skills in
              attacking significant problems in this field. It will provide financial support
              to recruit graduate students to this research program of scientific computation
              and mathematical modeling  in biomedical science.  This POWRE project is
              supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA).
