Title       : Astronomical Research and Technical Support of Millimeter-Wavelength VLBI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a0096454

Award Number: 0096454
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard E. Barvainis                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1182615            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan E. Rogers   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheperd S. Doeleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeast Radio Obs Corp
	      77 Massachusetts Ave
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/692-4764

NSF Program : 1211      UNIV RADIO FACILITIES PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0096454. Northeast Radio Observatory Corporation. PI:  A. A. E.
              Rogers	

Astronomical Research and Technical Support of Millimeter Wavelength
              VLBI

This award supports the operation of the Northeast Radio Observatory's
              "Coordinated mm-VLBI Array" (CMVA).  The CMVA provides unified scheduling,
              support, and analysis infrastructure for an ad hoc network of observatories
              which carry out very long baseline interferometry (VLBI) at millimeter
              wavelengths.  The CMVA network consists of a core group of mm-wave
              observatories which have agreed to make approximately two weeks per year
              available for VLBI; additional facilities make time available on a per-proposal
              basis. The CMVA is unique, and its intent is to make mm-wave VLBI available to
              all astronomers, not just those who are experts in the technique.
              

Millimeter-wavelength VLBI achieves the highest angular resolution in
              astronomy-typically 50 milliarcseconds at 3mm.  Only such resolutions can begin
              to reveal the compact astrophysical structures associated with the massive
              central engines of active galactic nuclei such as quasars and BL Lacertids, and
              only at millimeter wavelengths does one minimize the inherent limitations of
              continuum VLBI due to scattering by the interstellar plasma and optical depth
              effects.  The millimeter band is also rich in molecular masers whose structure
              can only be resolved by VLBI. 

During the past award period 60 investigators
              from more than 25 institutions made use of the CMVA, producing observations of
              the Galactic Center, a survey of active galactic nuclei, and studies of
              methanol and silicon monoxide masers in both star-forming regions and the
              envelopes of evolved stars.  This proposal requests funds to continue operation
              of the CMVA for a final 3-year period.  At that time, the proposers expect that
              3mm VLBI efforts will fully pass to the NRAO's VLBA - which will have completed
              upgrading to 3mm capability - and the CMVA's ad hoc activities will be
              abandoned. 
***
