Title       : Cooperative Molecular Motions in Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0096892

Award Number: 0096892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319200             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. E. Stanley hes@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Eugene Stanley is supported by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
              Program to study the anomalous dynamics of water in the supercooled regime, and
              determine how this behavior relates to the local structure of water.  His first
              project will examine the underlying mechanism that causes this anomalous
              behavior.  Moreover, he will explore critically the liquid-liquid phase
              transition hypothesis, attempt to either substantiate or refute this
              hypothesis, and extend this work on water to those other materials that may
              undergo a liquid-liquid phase transition.  His second project will explore the
              potential energy surface (PES) in configuration space at low temperature.  The
              way in which microscopic restructuring of the hydrogen-bonded network affects
              the transitions between basins of the PES will be studied, along with
              determining what kinds of thermodynamic behavior are found close to the glass
              transition temperature.  Finally, efforts will be made to extend the above
              studies to examine how the introduction of boundaries affects an otherwise bulk
              system of water molecules.  Outcomes from this project are expected to improve
              the understanding of the effects of basic phenomena such as the hydrophobic
              effect on biologically significant processes that occur in confined
              water.

Water is an important fluid.  Although it has been studied
              extensively for many years, water's important and unusual properties are still
              not completely understood.  The outcomes of this research will enable increased
              understanding of how water forms network structures.  These network structures
              impact the behavior of biomolecules in solution and geologically significant
              mineral-water interactions.
