Title       : Planning Grant: Assessing African American Perceptions of Criminal Justice
               (Neighborhood Spatial Association and Local Crime Effects)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2001     
File        : a0096374

Award Number: 0096374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard R. Brooks r-brooks@law.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will examine the influence of spatial associations on perceptions
              of the fairness in the American legal system.  In particular, the project will
              investigate the effect of dissimilarities between a respondent's community with
              adjacent neighborhoods. Perception of the legal system may vary among residents
              of two neighborhoods with similar socioeconomic characteristics and racial
              composition because the experiences with the legal system differ as a result of
              their adjacent communities. This project addresses this gap in the conventional
              analysis of perceptions of the legal system by explicitly incorpo-rating
              characteristics of adjacent and close-by neighborhoods. The principal data
              source will be the National Black Politics Study (NBPS), a national survey of
              African Americans. NBPS provides items on perception of fairness in the legal
              system and among the police, as well as individual-family characteristics and
              the census tract of the respondents. The census tract information will be used
              to merge the NBPS data with 1990 Census Summary File data on neighborhood
              information, such as median income, education, poverty, population density,
              land use, housing occupancy, building vacancy, percent renters and owners.  In
              addition, the project conducts a second contextual analysis by examining the
              impact of local crime and arrest rates by offense type of perceptions of
              injustice. The research will broaden the understanding of neigh-borhood effects
              on perceptions of inequality and fairness in the legal system. The project also
              will highlight potential costs of expanding arrest rates in terms of
              perceptions of fairness and ultimate cooperation with legal authority. The
              results from this work should significantly inform several important debates
              relating to neighborhood factors, community policing, broken windows, and
              quality of life policies. Finally, the project will produce two data sets with
              a host of neighborhood level information merged with attitudinal responses to
              questions relating to politics, religion, and the law.
