Title       : Tradability of Goods, Exchange Rate Movements and Capital Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2001  
File        : a0096364

Award Number: 0096364
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221920             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Kehoe kehoe002@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In post-war data real exchange rates have been highly volatile and have deviated
              widely and systematically from their purchasing power parity values.  Since the
              breakdown of the Bretton Woods system, real and nominal exchange rates are
              highly positively correlated. This fact is widely cited as (indirect) evidence
              of nominal price rigidities, such that real exchange rates are driven entirely
              by shocks to the nominal exchange rate, while relative national price levels
              are relatively smooth.  Partly as a result of this evidence, the predominant
              theoretical frameworks for analyzing exchange rates are characterized by
              nominal rigidities. Such frameworks have been successful in replicating many
              features of international business cycle and exchange rate facts.  The
              investigator and Caroline Betts have obtained preliminary results that are
              difficult to reconcile with the idea that real exchange rates are driven solely
              by shocks to the nominal exchange rate.   They have shown that real exchange
              rates are also very highly correlated with the relative prices of nontraded to
              traded goods, however, suggesting that real factors are key determinants of
              real exchange rates. Furthermore, they show that a multicountry, multisector
              real business cycle model is capable of generating relative price behavior at
              both the sectoral and aggregate level that matches Mexico-US data. They develop
              a class of business cycle models that can address these puzzling empirical
              features of exchange rate behavior. The research would extend this work through
              the introduction of a role for national monies. A key goal is to reconcile the
              evidence of high correlations between real and nominal exchange rates with that
              of high correlations of real exchange rates and the relative price of nontraded
              to traded goods across countries. Another goal is to replicate other key
              features of international business cycle data. Much this research would be
              joint work with Caroline M. Betts of the University of Southern California. 
              The research would extend the empirical analysis of Betts and Kehoe on the
              relationship between the Mexico-US real exchange rate and the relative prices
              of traded to nontraded goods. The analysis to date has used annual gross output
              deflators to measure sectoral relative prices, and we propose to investigate
              other sources and frequencies of price data.  It would also extend the analysis
              to the other countries and to explore the empirical behavior of nominal
              exchange rates and nominal prices for this group of countries.

The proposed,
              multicountry, multisector, business cycle models depart from traditional
              theories of real exchange rate determination in that the outputs of different
              sectors, rather than being either tradable or nontradable, have differing
              degrees of tradability. The degree of tradability is determined by the sort of
              trade costs emphasized by Obstfeld and Rogoff .  The models incorporate
              considerable sectoral detail, and some allow roles for national monies. Real
              and monetary shocks drive international fluctuations. Preliminary results for a
              model without money are encouraging: One does not need nominal rigidities to
              account for the size or even most of the persistence of real exchange rate
              fluctuations. Country-specific demand shocks calibrated to match the
              variability and persistence of aggregate output are sufficient to capture
              international relative price movements by sector. Further, the model can
              account for the high volatility of the real exchange rate compared to the
              relative price of nontraded to traded goods across countries, despite the
              absence of monetary features in the model.

Despite these successes,
              nonmonetary versions of the model are silent on the relationship between real
              and nominal exchange rates and the role of nominal shocks. Proposed research
              would introduce the simplest possible quantity equation model in which the real
              side of the economy is unaffected by money. In addition, we propose a
              cash-in-advance variant in which money can give rise to a distortion in the
              leisure-labor choice. Key features of the data that we would want any monetary
              model to replicate is the high correlation of real and nominal exchange rates
              and the behavior of relative prices shown in our empirical work.

