Title       : Synthesis of Liquid Crystalline Radicals and Study of Their Molecular and Bulk
               Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a0096827

Award Number: 0096827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Piotr Kaszynski piotr@ctrvax.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports Professor Piotr
              Kaszynski, of the Department of Chemistry at Vanderbilt University, for his
              work on the synthesis of liquid crystalline radicals and the study of their
              molecular and bulk properties. Following the design and theoretical analysis of
              new heterocycles containing the thioaminyl fragment as a source of unpaired
              spin, Professor Kaszynski will carry out the synthesis of model compounds and
              develop general synthetic approaches to these materials. Calamitic and discotic
              mesogens based on these systems will then be prepared, leading to the synthesis
              of polymeric liquid crystalline radicals. The properties of mesogens will be
              explored both in the pure state and in binary mixtures by a variety of
              techniques, including thermal and optical characterization, phase miscibility
              studies, magnetic measurements, and photovoltaic measurements.

Magnetic
              materials are at the heart of numerous technologies. Although such materials
              have historically been comprised of inorganic compounds, carbon-based (organic)
              magnetic materials have also been discovered and offer a variety of unique
              advantages. With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
              Program, Professor Piotr Kaszynski, of the Department of Chemistry at
              Vanderbilt University, is carrying out the design and synthesis of a new class
              of organic magnetic materials. Through incorporation of these materials into
              polymeric and liquid crystalline compositions, Professor Kaszynski addresses
              fundamental questions regarding the nature of organic magnets and explores
              their potential for the preparation of new materials displaying important
              technological properties.
