Title       : Highly-Efficient and Compact Wave Guide Scanner Capable of Monitoring Microarray
               Hybridization Kinetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0096750

Award Number: 0096750
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $759493             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerrit J. van den Engh engh@systemsbiology.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institute for Systems Bio
	      1441 North 34th Street
	      Seattle, WA  98103    206/732-1200

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the development of a DNA-array scanner that detects
              fluorescence signals by means of a novel wave guide collector. The wave guide
              will collect light trapped inside the array substrate by total internal
              reflection (TIR). The proposed scanner combines the best properties of various
              alternative scanner designs, while avoiding some significant disadvantages. The
              use of orthogonal illumination will result in low background levels and
              improved signal-to-noise in comparison to existing commercial instruments. The
              light collection optics allow addition of a temperature kinetics module which
              will permit use of hybridization conditions that greatly increase binding
              specificity. 

The use of DNA array hybridization has been widely adopted by
              biologists and biomedical researchers as a technique for detection of mutations
              in DNA and for monitoring of gene expression.  Commercially available
              instruments for scanning arrays are relatively complex devices based on the
              same optics used in confocal microscopes, are expensive to manufacture and are
              unsuited to the real-time measurement of hybridization kinetics.  The TIR
              design is simple, compact, requires little alignment and can be manufactured at
              low cost. Scanners with TIR collection will make possible a new generation of
              versatile laboratory instruments for hybridization array quantification with
              improved accuracy and speed.

