Title       : Data Management Services for the U.S. GLOBEC Southern Ocean Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0096445

Award Number: 0096445
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153523             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Wiebe pwiebe@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Groman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0096445
Wiebe

	This award will support a Data Management Office for the
              Southern Ocean Experiment of the Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics Program
              (SO-Globec).  The experiments that form the U.S. Globec programs are large,
              multi-disciplinary, multi-year oceanographic efforts
involving many scientific
              investigators from many different organizations.  The Southern Ocean Experiment
              is a study of the winter survival strategy of krill under the antarctic sea ice
              in the vicinity of Marguerite Bay on the western side of the Antarctic
              Peninsula.
The Data Management Office will be responsible for providing the
              data management services required by the scientific investigators of the
              Southern Ocean component of the U.S. GLOBEC Program as they conduct their field
              research, analyze the data from their individual efforts, and integrate the
              results with those from other research components. The office will be
              coordinated and assisted by the same team as the Northwest Atlantic Georges
              Bank Program. During the proposal period,  the office will manage data sets
              (CTD, biomass, meteorological, satellite, model results, etc.) from the
              Southern Ocean investigators and make these data available via an on-line,
              World Wide Web based, data management system (JGOFS); maintain an inventory and
              program thesaurus of data field names; and support and encourage data synthesis
              by providing on-line, web-based and stand-alone display tools.
***

