Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Use of Cement Kiln Dust in the Manufacture of
               Building Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a0096965

Award Number: 0096965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27600              (Estimated)
Investigator: R I. Malek RQM@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 5944,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0096965
Malek 

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. R.I. Malek, Materials Research Laboratory, Pennsylvania State
              University, University Park, Pennsylvania and Dr. Z. H. Khalil, Department of
              Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Assiut University, Assiut, Egypt, and Dr. Said
              Saad Imbaby, Mining Department, Faculty of Engineering, Assiut University,
              Assiut, Egypt.  They plan to: a) expand the fundamental understanding of the
              mechanism of evolution of nanostructure in aluminosilicate frameworks, b)
              explore utilization of cement kiln dust (as a model industrial waste) in the
              manufacture of masonry and building products, c) evaluate the products and
              ensure their compliance with the standards specification in both the United
              States and Egypt, and d) provide sound scientific bases that facilitate the use
              of any industrial waste to produce nanostructured building products. 

Scope:
              This project combines the expertise of scientists from the United States and
              Egypt to develop new structural materials and to reduce environmental
              degradation inherent in existing systems.  Dr. Malek's laboratory at Penn State
              University has some of the most advanced testing equipment for materials.  Dr.
              Malek has worked on alternate construction materials for several years and will
              be responsible for much of the analytical studies and the materials
              characterization.  The Egyptian scientists have access to kiln dust, the
              material that is produced as an environmentally hazardous byproduct in cement
              making, and have the facility needed to manufacture usable construction
              material from that dust.  They will participate in the characterization work
              during their visits to Penn State University.  The project will have a
              significant impact in Egypt by providing new building material in place of the
              topsoil, which is no longer replenished after the building of the Aswan Dam. 
              The project may help provide less expensive masonry material and at the same
              time reduce pollution from cement factories.  The project meets INT criteria
              for support of cooperative projects that are mutually beneficial.  This project
              is supported jointly by the Division of International Programs and the Division
              of Civil and Mechanical Systems.  
