Title       : Workshop on Grand Challenges in the Social and Behavioral Sciences; Baltimore,
               October 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0096646

Award Number: 0096646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald F. Abler rabler@aag.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc of Amer Geographers
	      1710 16th St. NW
	      Washington, DC  20036    202/234-1450

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Because of an exciting and powerful array of new discoveries across a broad
              range of disciplines, the social and behavioral sciences stand at a pivotal
              point.  In addition to advances by individual researchers and small groups of
              investigators, social and behavioral scientists have seen the value of
              interdisciplinary activities that have increased collaborations with natural,
              mathematical, and computer scientists and engineers.  Increased attention
              within the social and behavioral sciences has begun to focus on identification
              of "grand challenges"  -- broad, fundamental questions that transcend the form
              and substance of individual sciences.  This award will permit the Association
              of American Geographers and other organizations in the Consortium of Social
              Science Associations (COSSA) to organize and conduct a workshop that focuses on
              grand challenges in the social and behavioral sciences.  Of special concern at
              the workshops will be identification of one or more major research questions
              fundamentally central to the overall concerns of the social and behavioral
              sciences.  These questions should (1) hold the promise of creating new
              knowledge and theory; (2) attract the interest and participation of scientists
              across a broad spectrum of interests, including the earth, biological,
              mathematical, and information sciences, as well as in education and
              engineering; (3) be the result of broad and intensive consultation in the
              social and behavioral science community and therefore a challenge that will
              attract broad support and generate widespread enthusiasm; (4) be transparent to
              intelligent lay persons and capable of enlisting their interest and support;
              (5) engender interest and attracts support from a broad spectrum of federal and
              state agencies and private foundations; and (6) be international and
              multinational in scope, making it a means of promoting multinational
              collaborative science.  About 30 leading researchers and practitioners from the
              broad range of social and behavioral science disciplines will meet for a
              two-day workshop, tentatively scheduled for October 13-15, 2000, in Baltimore. 
              Preliminary candidates for grand challenges will be formulated by and
              circulated among participants before the workshop, with a set of plenary and
              more focused break-out sessions providing structure for the exploration of
              ideas and development of consensus.  The proceedings and results of the
              workshop will be disseminated electronically and through publication in the
              newsletters of COSSA-related societies.  The conduct of the workshop and its
              recommendations will provide valuable new insights and stimulus for
              researchers, both individually and collectively, and they will contribute to
              discussions within major funding agencies and organizations regarding major new
              research and budgetary initiatives now and in the future.  A follow-up workshop
              for Fall 2001 is tentative planned.  Any NSF support for this follow-up
              workshop would be made through a supplement to this initial award.

