Title       : A Genetic Database for Anthropology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0096588

Award Number: 0096588
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2652755            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth K. Kidd   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1388,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The past decade has seen a virtual explosion in the amount of data available on
              the human genome.  Data on the human genome can be used to help us understand
              human evolutionary history, including both our relationship as a species to
              other great apes and much more recent relationships among human populations
              reflecting their histories. Information derived from our knowledge of the human
              genome is also relevant to many of the social sciences.  Yet, there is little
              infrastructure available to help provide an interface between data on the human
              genome and data derived from the social sciences. One area of particular
              relevance to history, historical demography, linguistics, medical anthropology,
              forensic anthropology, and ethnic studies, among others, is the gene frequency
              variation that exists among human populations.  Gene frequency variation among
              current populations is the net genetic effect of all of the factors in the
              history of those populations: relative endogamy versus exogamy, past and
              present population sizes, length of time relatively endogamous, origins,
              selection, etc.
Currently there is no centralized location for information on
              gene frequency variation for the modern DNA polymorphisms detected in the bulk
              of the human genome.  The closest approximation to such a resource is the
              current implementation of ALFRED, the web-accessible ALlele FREquency Database
              <http://alfred.med.yale.edu/alfred/index.asp>.  This project will further
              develop ALFRED to serve as a resource for the anthropological genetics field
              and the other social science areas noted above.  The database will contain gene
              frequency data for multiple genetic loci (both functional genes and anonymous
              loci) and multiple populations.  Each frequency will have detailed
              descriptions/definitions of both the polymorphic site studied with protocols
              used as well as the specific sample of the specific population studied.  The
              molecular definition of the polymorphism at the DNA sequence level will be
              linked to the molecular databases and the description of the population (name,
              language, location, etc.) will be linked to at least one ethnographic
              database.
Development will involve three aspects: curated on-going
              accumulation of gene frequency data from the current literature and that of the
              past 15 or so years, enhancement of the design and implementation (hardware and
              software) to allow robust and rapid response to queries over the internet, and
              implementation of interconnections to relevant human genomics databases on the
              molecular side and to ethnographic and other databases on the population/social
              science side. 
The enhanced database will serve many functions.  It will be an
              educational resource at both the undergraduate and graduate levels.  It will be
              an inter-disciplinary research resource providing reference gene frequencies
              for comparison with new data.  It will provide impetus to focus future data
              collection efforts in diverse labs on those genetic markers that early studies
              suggest will provide the best information on specific research questions.  It
              will provide entree to the genetics/genomics world via specific social/cultural
              variables such as language, geographic location, population size, etc. 
              Conversely, it will provide links to relevant ethnologic and historical data on
              populations that anthropological geneticists need in order to interpret the
              gene frequency data they collect.  As a bridge between the genomics databases
              and the relevant social sciences the database will provide infrastructure to
              the increasingly interdisciplinary nature of modern research.

