Title       : Lexical Guidance During Syntactic Generation, Selection, andReanalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a0096173

Award Number: 0096173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie E. Boland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana at Lafay
	      104 University Circle
	      Lafayette, LA  705032701    337/482-6203

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project investigates how syntactic representations are initially
              developed during sentence comprehension, and how recovery proceeds when the
              initial analysis turns out to be incorrect. As in constraint based lexicalist
              approaches, the focus is on the interface between word recognition and sentence
              understanding. However, the primary goal is to directly test some assumptions
              that constraint based lexicalists often make: (1) structural alternatives are
              generated and evaluated in parallel, (2) syntactic selection immediately
              follows the generation of alternatives, and (3) all relevant classes of lexical
              knowledge are used in the earliest stages of syntactic analysis. This project
              diverges from most constraint-based approaches by making a distinction between
              syntactic generation and syntactic selection.  However, the current approach
              differs from the incremental model and the garden path/construal model in many
              ways. Notably, the proposed experiments examine the possibilities that
              syntactic generation may be influenced by lexical probabilities, and that
              semantic processing is not wholly parasitic upon syntactic processing. Both
              possibilities are common elements of constraint based models. Thus in the
              current proposal, syntactic and semantic processing will be measured
              independently  to the extent that it is possible to do so  using some new
              experimental paradigms.  This project challenges some of the basic assumptions
              made by researchers in sentence processing, and explores experimental paradigms
              that may be able to test these assumptions directly. The first set of studies
              is methodologically oriented, combining three experimental strategies. Reading
              times measure on line processing difficulty, and the cross modal integration
              paradigm and event-related brain potentials differentiate the syntactic and
              semantic levels of processing. The second set of studies investigates sentences
              containing sense ambiguous verbs like pass and tense ambiguous verbs like
              raced.  Both lexical ambiguities create structural ambiguities, and cross modal
              naming will be used to test the hypothesis that lexically defined syntactic
              alternatives are generated in parallel. Additional experiments evaluate the
              hypotheses that the structural alternatives are weighted by relative frequency,
              and that error recovery is facilitated if the (unselected) syntactic
              alternative is still accessible. The third set of studies investigates
              prepositional phrase attachment ambiguity. Preliminary studies using on line
              sensibleness judgments have suggested that non structural lexical information
              influences processing difficulty in sentences like John gave the letter to his
              son to a friend. The studies use reading time paradigms to test the hypothesis
              that verb argument structure and/or probabilistic information influence the
              timing and outcome of the attachment decision. Additional experiments measure
              event related brain potentials in order to learn whether the observed
              processing difficulty is caused by a semantic anomaly (eliciting an N400),
              syntactic anomaly (eliciting a P600), or both.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
