Title       : Models for Classification and Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a0096022

Award Number: 0096022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64109              (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Estes wkestes@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In NSF-funded work leading up to this project, separate theoretical models for
              subsystems of human memory have been integrated into a unified model for memory
              loss, distortion, and recovery.  The unified model assumes that memories for
              objects and events are stored as arrays of properties.  A further assumption is
              that following storage, a basic, automatic, and apparently immutable process
              leads to degradation of the property information, and therefore to decreased
              accessibility of the memories. This process produces spontaneous recovery of
              memories on some occasions, often in distorted form.  Research planned for the
              project is intended to yield new methods of measuring these changes in memory,
              and to identify procedures that can alleviate memory loss and reduce
              distortions of recall and recognition.   Some planned experiments will simulate
              situations involving eyewitness testimony, such as accidents or crimes.  The
              aim is to study how recall and recognition are influenced by factors such as
              witnesses' prior familiarity with objects or people present in the scene. Other
              experiments will seek an explanation for the well-documented ability of people
              to recognize hundreds of naturalistic scenes viewed within a very limited time
              period.   An offshoot of the main effort will focus on the role of memory in
              decision making. The general memory model yields predictions about how
              decisions depend on internal referents or standards derived from long-term
              memories. The predictions will be tested in situations contrived to simulate
              decision making of the kind that occurs in gambling, selection of insurance
              options or investments, and choices among alternative goals.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
