Title       : Development of Perceptual Categorization in Infants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a0096020

Award Number: 0096020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237917             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul C. Quinn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The use of categories - for example, dog, animal, chair, furniture - is central
              to human cognition, underpinning the ability to perceive, remember, and reason.
               Questions concerning when and how categorical representations emerge in
              infancy is therefore  central to the study of perceptual and cognitive
              development.  The aim of this project is to further our knowledge about the
              development of complex, perceptually-based categorical representations in young
              infants.  The results will help us to understand how children learn, and should
              have relevance for issues concerning early childhood education, and
              developmental disabilities.

A series of experiments using the
              familiarization-novelty preference procedure will be conducted to study the
              categorical representations formed by infants at superordinate (e.g., animal,
              furniture), basic (e.g., dog, chair), and subordinate (e.g., German Shepherd,
              living room chair) levels across the first year of life. Specific experiments
              are planned to examine: (1) the ages at which infants first develop
              representations for superordinate, basic, and subordinate categories;  (2)
              whether representations for superordinate categories precede those at the basic
              and subordinate levels;  (3) whether methodological factors such as the number
              of exemplars presented to the infant underlie apparent differences in previous
              findings on the development of representations for superordinate and basic
              categories; and (4) what surface attributes of the stimuli (e.g., overall
              shape, particular parts, color, texture, etc.) infants extract when forming
              category representations at different levels.

