Title       : Professional Development for Mathematics Leadership: A VideoCase Strategy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0096672

Award Number: 0096672
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monica M. Neagoy                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith Mumme jmumme@wested.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gloria Moretti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine Carroll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WestEd
	      730 Harrison Street
	      San Francisco, CA  94107    415/565-3070

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project creates leadership curriculum materials designed to develop the
              skills, sensibilities and long-term capacity of teacher leaders, enabling them
              to design and implement quality mathematics professional development. 
              Curriculum materials are video-based (CD-ROM) cases illuminating various
              aspects of mathematics professional development practice.  Rooted in
              mathematics, a series of five modules (containing six three-hour cases) include
              video of professional sessions, mathematics activities, interviews,
              commentaries, research papers, articles, references to the literature,
              assignments designed to help apply learnings to practice and facilitator
              guides.  Materials are designed for flexible use as individual cases, as
              complete modules or as a comprehensive curriculum.  Rather than providing
              exemplars to model, these materials will utilize a case method, lesson-study
              approach where leaders inquire into professional development practice in
              mathematics K-12.  Modules are designed for use in facilitated sessions; text
              and video facilitation materials are integral to the final product.  The CD-ROM
              format provides for at home and distance learning capabilities. 

The
              materials are designed for use by leaders of teacher leaders to help these
              teacher leaders:
1. Deepen their knowledge of mathematics content;
2. Develop
              the habits of mind that view professional development as a complex practice,
              foster a stance of inquiry about that practice and look at all professional
              development through the lens of equity;
3. Build analytic skills and a
              language of practice that will enable the development of clearer communication
              and reasoning about mathematics professional development;
4. Build a
              repertoire of strategies and facilitation moves that can be used to design and
              implement a thoughtful program of mathematics professional development. 

