Title       : The Performance of Customized Molecular Coatings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1999  
File        : a0096031

Award Number: 0096031
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62500              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Kyle Vanderlick vandertk@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Quinn  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-9615868  Quinn, J./Vanderlick, T.R.  U of Penn          Project Summary     
              By exploiting the desire of certain organic molecules to spontaneously
              organize, it is possible to design and fabricate customized molecular coatings
              with unique architectures.  One such coating process is the Langmuir-Blodgett
              (LB) deposition technique, a mechanical method used to build multi-layered
              molecular films.  Another process is "self-assembled monolayer (SAM)
              formation," a chemical method based on chemisorption from solution.  Over the
              last decade, substantial effort has been directed at expanding the sets of film
              forming molecule and characterizing the structure of the resultant coatings. 
              On the other hand, little effort has been spent on evaluating the performance
              of these customized molecular coatings in different applications, or their
              response to changes in their surroundings.    Measuring and understanding the
              ways in which these organic coatings interact with their environment is the
              central focus of this proposal.  Experiments are designed to examine how
              coatings behave to the presence of different gases, liquids, and solids with
              which they come into contact.   This work is divided into two branches.  The
              first centers on the  absorption characteristics of coatings with
              non-negligible volume (as formed from the LB method), establishing their
              performance as "molecular sponges"  Here, cues will be taken from biological
              membranes to design films with different transport properties.  Also, a novel
              method (using track-etched mica) will be developed to measure transport
              along/within the strata which comprise the LB films.  The other branch of  this
              proposal deals with the performance of nonmolecular  films.  Coatings of
              different molecular design will be fabricated using self-assembled monolayers
              derived from two different breeds-the well-known alkane-thiol based systems and
              a new class  of film forming molecules based on aromatic thiols.  The adhesion
              of SAMs to various surfaces(including   other SAMs)  will be investigated, thus
              evaluating the performance and reponsiveness of these coatings "molecular
              glue."  The adsorption characteristics of different coatings will also be
              investigated, establishing their performance as "molecular tack-paper."  A key
              objective of this work is compare the behavior of these different monolayer
              forming systems.  The studies proposed herein will take advantage of two
              powerful tools:  the surface forces apparatus to measure the forces of
              interaction between surfaces, and the quartz crystal microbalance to measure
              mass pickup.  Although many groups are currently investigating self-assembled
              monolayers, the uniqueness of this approach rests both on techniques employed(
              in particular the SFA) and on systems proposed for study(including the new
              Class of SAMs)
