Title       : Collaborative Research: Volcanic Records from the Siple and Taylor Dome Ice
               Cores, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2002  
File        : a0096317

Award Number: 0096317
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303922             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Zielinski gzielinski@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9614384  Zielinski  9615167  Dunbar    Abstract  This award supports a project
              to characterize the volcanic  material in the Siple Dome and Taylor Dome ice
              cores.  The time  series of volcanic aerosol and tephra deposition available in
               high-resolution, bi-polar ice cores is the most reliable means of  developing
              continuous and lengthy records of past volcanic  activity and assessing the
              climatic and environmental impact of  global volcanism.  The volcanic records
              from the Siple Dome ice  core, initial ice core in the West Antarctica Ice Core
              Program  (WAISCORES), and the Taylor Dome core, recently collected from  the
              Transantarctic Mountains, will provide the Southern  Hemisphere component of
              this record.  These results will  complement the lengthy GISP2 volcanic record
              from Greenland.  Annual resolution should be available in the Siple Dome core
              for  the Holocene resulting in the longest volcanic record with such 
              resolution from Antarctica.  Total length of record thought to be  available
              from the Siple Dome core is 80,000 years whereas that  for the Taylor Dome core
              is probably over 100,000 years.  Although temporal resolution will be much
              coarser in the glacial  portion of the Siple Dome core and in much of the
              Taylor Dome  core, correlations and comparisons of the volcanic records from 
              those cores with those from the GISP2 core are still possible.  Evaluation of
              the timing of the volcanic signals in relationship  to the record of changing
              climatic conditions available in these  ice cores provides critical information
              on the climate forcing  capabilities of global volcanism on decadal to century
              time  scales through the Holocene.    The key to developing a reliable
              chronology of past volcanism  from the Siple Dome core is the simultaneous and
              continuous  measurement of SO42-, a direct measure of the volcanic H2SO4 
              produced from the eruption, and the search for tephra in the same  subsamples
              over the entire length of the core.  The  glaciochemical record will be
              available through other   investigators in the Siple Dome project.  The
              glaciochemical  record for the Taylor Dome core is presently available. 
              Locating  tephra and identifying the source of the volcanic glass through  both
              optical microscope and microbeam (both electron and ion  microprobes) analyses
              will verify the source of the chemical  signal and help differentiate between
              equatorial and local  eruptions.  Comparisons with the GISP2 volcanic record
              will  assist in achieving this goal.  This multiparameter approach to 
              deciphering the volcanic record will improve on our understanding  of the
              influence of volcanism on climate both  interhemispherically and
              intrahemispherically.  The correlation  of tephra found in these cores with
              that found in marine  sediments and in the terrestrial record will expand on
              the  chronology of global volcanism and improve the correlation among  ice
              core, marine, and terrestrial proxy climatic records.  Visible tephra layers
              that should exist in the Siple Dome core  and do exist in the Taylor Dome core
              will provide additional  absolute time lines for possible correlations between
              the two  cores, among previously collected Antarctica ice cores and with 
              tephra studies in blue ice areas of Western Antarctica and the  Transantarctic
              Mountains.
