Title       : Biomechanical Models of the Mandible: An Experimental Verification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1999   
File        : a0096037

Award Number: 0096037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 3,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24071              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Daegling   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Col of Podiatric Med
	      1210 Scott Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941154009    415/563-3444

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research on jaw biomechanics has operated under the assumption that mandibular
              morphology  is a reflection of the stresses encountered during chewing
              behaviors. These chewing stresses  have been inferred using simple engineering
              models, despite claims that the structural and  material complexity of the
              mandible compromises the explanatory utility of such simple models.  By
              contrast, computer-driven mathematical models of the jaw's behavior are capable
              of making  very precise predictions about the stress environment. Application
              of such techniques, however,  is problematic because they require knowledge of
              certain variables (muscular forces, tissue  interactions under load, etc.) for
              which reliable measurement is not currently possible.  Improvements on both
              techniques can be realized through documentation of stress and strain 
              distributions under controlled experimental conditions. The proposed research
              will sample  mandibular bone strain simultaneously from multiple locations in
              preserved primate jaws under  a variety of controlled loading conditions. The
              profiles of recorded strain will be used to  evaluate the accuracy and
              reliability of alternative structural models of the mandible. This  research
              will allow the central issue in jaw biomechanics to be addressed; specifically,
              the  experiments performed under this proposal will provide a much clearer
              understanding of the  relationship of variation in mandibular form to
              differences in feeding behavior among the  primates.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
