Title       : Crystal Structures and Functions of Limulus Hemocyanin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0096006

Award Number: 0096006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. Magnus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Karen A. Magnus
MCB9817090

1. Technical

The three-dimensional structures
              of oxygenated and deoxygenated forms of
Limulus  subunit II hemocyanin have
              clarified the molecular controls of
function in these large oxygen-transport
              proteins.  The native hemocyanin
of Limulus consists of 48 subunits with eight
              types of polypeptide chains.
Each subunit type is capable of reversibly
              binding oxygen at a dicopper
active site.  The subunits differ in primary
              structure, ligand affinities,
and sensitivity to assorted allosteric
              effectors.  This study is designed
to test mechanistic ideas using a
              combination of biochemical, biophysical
and molecular biological techniques.
              Hemocyanin structures will serve as
prototypes for a large class of
              multisubunit assemblies that require
multiple components for complete
              function.  Comparison of the structure of
Limulus II hemocyanin with
              preliminary structural results for subunits IIIa
and IV suggests the mechanism
              for subunit II cooperativity may well be
general for all arthropod-type
              hemocyanin subunits. cDNA has been isolated
from a Limulus library that codes
              for a 24 residue peptide identical in
sequence to part of subunit a from a
              southeast Asian horseshoe crab. Once
the nucleic acid sequences for the
              subunits are available, construction of
designed variants and smaller
              reversible oxygen-binding entities will be
pursued.  The structure of subunit
              IIIa is incomplete, providing further
insight into the chemistry of the
              dicopper active site.  Protons, divalent
cations and specific anions act as
              modulators of oxygen affinity in Limulus
hemocyanin.

2.
              Non-techincal

Oxygen transport from the environment to the tissues is vital
              for the
survival of multicellular organisms.  In humans, this function is
              carried
out by the protein hemoglobin, the red pigment in blood.  In
              some
arthropods such as lobsters, crabs, crayfish and horseshoe crabs,
              the
oxygen transport protein is hemocyanin ("blue blood").  The hemocyanin
              of
the horseshoe crab is about 3.3 x 106 Daltons and is made up of 48
              subunits
of eight different types. All of the subunit types can reversibly
              bind one
molecule of oxygen at their dicopper active sites.  When the subunits
              are
assembled into the 48mer, they bind oxygen cooperatively--once the
              first
molecule of oxygen is bound it becomes easier to bind subsequent
              molecules
and once the first molecule of oxygen is released at the tissues,
              later
ones come off more readily.   The cooperative binding of oxygen
              is
regulated by allosteric effectors such as chloride and calcium ions. 
              The
goal of this project is to understand in molecular detail how this
              complex
protein assembly carries out its physiological functions.  The
              three
dimensional structures of all eight subunits and their complexes are
              being
determined using the methods of x-ray crystallographic analysis.  Study
              of
structures of hemocyanin subunits with and without oxygen bound
              suggested
which amino acids are key in effecting cooperative, reversible
              ligand
binding.  By using the techniques of molecular biology, the proposed
              key
amino acid residues can be changed and the altered structures
              physical
properties studied to test and extend the mechanism.  The structures
              of
various forms of the whole hemocyanin molecules will also serve as
              a
prototype for larger more complicated structural assemblies.


