Title       : Reorganization of the University of Iowa Paleontology Repository
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0096768

Award Number: 0096768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255149             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann F. Budd ann-budd@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia Golden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan M. Adrain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The University of Iowa Paleontology Repository has been ranked among the top ten
              collections in North America in terms of size and significance, and supports
              the research activities of a paleontology graduate program recently ranked
              seventh in the nation.  The Repository contains some 25,000 type and referred
              specimens and over one million specimens in total.  It has long been the
              primary holding facility for paleontological and geological collections in the
              state, and is the focal point of the research and teaching activities of the
              paleontology faculty in the Department of Geoscience. The Repository has
              reached its effective operating capacity and is in urgent need of comprehensive
              reorganization.  

This project represents the first phase of a larger
              project, which will ultimately involve both curation and computerization.  This
              first phase (curation) focuses on: (1) a complete evaluation of the holdings,
              especially the Paleozoic and Mesozoic non-Iowan stratigraphic collections and
              Cenozoic molluscs; (2) completion of a range of curatorial projects
              facilitating reorganization, including curation of retiring faculty members'
              research collections and several special collections of potential interest to
              the community at large, especially the Strimple echinoderm and Belanski
              Devonian collections; and (3) physical reorganization, including purchase of
              new specimen cabinets.  Visiting specialists will be invited to evaluate those
              collections where in-house expertise is lacking.

Although the collection
              already is heavily used, completion of the project will result in even greater
              use.  A long-term plan for the collection includes making collection data
              available on the WWW.

