Title       : CAREER: Epigenetic Silencing of Gene Expression in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0096561

Award Number: 0096561
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $609998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott G. Holmes sholmes@wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Budding yeast uses a gene repression mechanism, known as silencing, to control
              the expression of key developmental regulatory genes.  Silencing is
              distinguished from more commonly described modes of gene regulation in that the
              repression, once established, is a permanent, heritable property of the gene,
              known as an "epigenetic" effect.  Similar gene silencing mechanisms underlie
              the development of all eukaryotes, including humans.  To gain insights into the
              mechanism of epigenetic inheritance in yeast two specific questions will be
              addressed:  First, what specific functions of the silencing machinery are
              required for epigenetic inheritance? The lab will create and characterize new
              dominant and conditional alleles of several silencing genes, including SIR2. 
              Particular in vivo defects caused by these mutations will be correlated with
              alterations of Sir2's biochemical properties in vitro.  Second, what is the
              role of chromosomal anchoring in establishing and inheriting the repressed
              state?  The Sir4 and Rap1 silencing factors are known to localize to the
              nuclear periphery and act as anchors for the DNA sequences they bind, but the
              influence of chromosomal localization on gene expression is not clear.  To
              examine the role of chromosomal anchoring on gene silencing the lab is using
              the yeast REP3 sequence as a surrogate anchor.  This project will examine the
              ability of REP3 to substitute for the functions of known silencing factors, and
              investigate the possibility that the silencing and REP3 systems have common
              anchoring sites.  The educational component of this CAREER award will support
              development of two undergraduate courses, Molecular Biology, designed for
              science majors, and Genetics: From Mendel to the Human Genome Project, designed
              for non-science majors. 


