Title       : Career: Reusable Specifications for Retargetability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0096069

Award Number: 0096069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47520              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman Ramsey nr@eecs.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research addresses the problem of retargeting tools  used to  translate,
              analyze, instrument, improve, and migrate  programs.  Such  tools include not
              only compilers, but also assemblers,  linkers,  debuggers, binary-code
              modifiers, and binary translators.  The primary  retargeting technique being
              applied is the generation of  machine-dependent  components from compact,
              reusable descriptions of machine  properties.    The research objectives are to
              describe machine properties  clearly and concisely, to represent instruction
              semantics in  a way that supports retargeting, to reuse specifications to 
              retarget a variety of tools, and to reuse analyses of  specifications to derive
              components for multiple machines.  Instruction semantics are specified in three
              layers.  Descriptions of whole instruction sets will be written using  the
              metalanguage layer. These descriptions will be  mechanically transformed into
              the register-transfer layer,  which defines each instruction's semantics in  a
              form that is easy to analyze.  The interpretation layer  will provide semantic
              interpretations of register transfers;  different interpretations support
              different analyses and  component generators. The major payoff of this research
              is  in developing new capabilities in machine specification; it  should deepen
              our understanding of properties of machines,  foster innovation in
              machine-level tools, and help others  save effort, cost, and time in developing
              tools of  scientific and practical value.
