Title       : Systematics of the Spider Family Theridiidae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0096307

Award Number: 0096307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200090             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary G. Gillespie gillespi@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan A. Coddington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9707744  GILLESPIE    Spiders are among the most diverse groups of organisms on
              earth, and are exceptional for their web-spinning abilities and diverse feeding
              strategies.  Although a number of studies have examined relationships among
              spiders, one of the seven largest families, the comb-footed spiders
              (Theridiidae), remains an assemblage of poorly defined species.  Besides being
              a large and abundant group, the Theridiidae exhibit a wide spectrum of unique
              ecological and behavioral attributes that make them unusually interesting.  For
              example, some groups have developed the behavior of feeding exclusively on the
              webs of other species; others have elaborate web architectures; still others
              are social, living in large communal webs and sharing in the activities of
              capturing insects and tending the eggs and young.  The family includes some
              well known and striking forms, such as the Hawaiian happy face spider and the
              notorious Black Widow.    In this research, Rosemary Gillespie and Jonathan
              Coddington will make use of several different types of morphological and
              molecular characters to determine the phylogenetic relationships among
              comb-footed spiders, a previously difficult problem made more tractable by
              advances in phylogenetic analysis.  The analysis will help the investigators
              determine how, and how often, the many shapes, sizes, colors, behaviors,
              ecological associations and venoms have appeared during the history of this
              spider family on Earth.
