Title       : US-Kenya Cooperative Research: Bioreactors for Synthesis and Pollutant
               Decomposition in Microemulsions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a0096456

Award Number: 0096456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23900              (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Rusling James.rusling@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
Program Ref : 5991,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0096456
Rusling

This award supports a two-year collaborative research
              project between Professor James Rusling, in the Department of Chemistry at the
              University of Connecticut, and Professor Geoffrey Kamau, of the Department of
              Chemistry at the University of Nairobi.

The PI will conduct a study on the
              use of bioreactors for synthesis and pollutant decomposition in microemulsions.
               Microemulsions are clear, stable fluids made from oil, water, and surfactant. 
              They are less toxic and less expensive than alternative organic solvents, and 
              have shown great promise for controlling and enhancing rates of catalytic
              electrochemical reactions.  New catalytic protein films designed specifically
              for microemulsions combined with kinetic control by fluid composition may
              provide a basis for future cost-effective and environmentally benign processes
              for synthesis of organic chemicals.  The collaborators expect to elucidate
              fundamental principles by which interactions between the protein films and the
              microemulsions may be used to control reaction kinetics. Electrolysis, product
              analysis, and voltammetry to monitor film properties and catalytic efficiencies
              will be done at the University of Nairobi.  Kamau and a graduate student will
              visit Rusling and his students to conduct specialized characterization
              experiments using instrumentation at the University of Connecticut.  The
              results of this grant should provide fundamental guidance for the future design
              of electrochemical synthetic processes involving protein film catalysis in
              relatively inexpensive, low toxicity, water-based fluid media.  The methods to
              be developed involve novel approaches to biotechnology, without resorting to
              the use of highly sophisticated or complicated technologies. 

The Division
              of International Programs, the Division of Chemical Transport System, and the
              Division of Chemistry are jointly supporting this project.

