Title       : Conference "First International Symposium on Computational Cell Biology" held
               March 4-6, 2001 in Lenox, MA.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0096625

Award Number: 0096625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann E. Cowan acowan@nso2.uchc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie M. Loew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. H. Carson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Conn Health Center
	      263 Farmington Ave.
	      Farmington, CT  060302806    860/679-3173

NSF Program : 1114      CELLULAR SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1114,1271,1705,9183,9263,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides partial support for the First International Symposium on
              Computational Cell
Biology to be held March 4-6, 2001 in Lenox, MA.
              Computational Cell Biology is an emerging interdisciplinary field that responds
              to the need for computational methods to analyze and organize the abundance of
              experimental data on the structure and function of the cell. Whereas other
              meetings have been held that focus on bioinformatics and molecular and
              structural biology, this will be the first meeting geared to the use of
              computational modeling applications in cell biology, and will be primarily
              targeted to cell
biologists. The major focus of the meeting will be on areas
              of cell biology for which modeling approaches are currently being developed, or
              that are ripe for computational modeling approaches. A key goal is to bring
              together cell biologists whose research addresses quantitative aspects of
              cellular mechanisms with computer scientists and mathematicians who can provide
              the computational tools. The symposium is being organized by The National
              Resource for Cell Analysis and Modeling (NRCAM), located in the Center for
              Biomedical Imaging Technology (CBIT) at the University of Connecticut Health
              Center. The organizing committee consists of
Drs. Leslie M. Loew, Director of
              NRCAM and CBIT, John Carson, co-Director of NRCAM and Vladimir Rodionov,
              associate faculty of CBIT, and is chaired by Ann Cowan, Deputy Director of CBIT
              and head of dissemination and training for NRCAM. The members of the organizing
              committee feel that the time is ripe to bring together cell biologists,
              mathematicians, and computer scientists to develop a true community of
              scientists sharing the common goal of developing computational tools for cell
              biological modeling and simulation.  Topics at the meetings will encompass a
              range of cellular mechanisms including regulation of the cytoskeleton and
              molecular motors, membrane and protein trafficking, regulation of calcium
              dynamics, signal transduction pathways, and cell cycle control. In each of
              these areas key researchers who utilize highly quantitative experimental
              approaches and/or are applying mathematical modeling approaches will be invited
              to speak. The meeting will be an intensive mix of platform sessions, poster
              sessions and small workshops and tutorials. The venue for the meeting is a
              resort in the Berkshire mountains that is limited to a maximum of 125
              participants.  This setting and meeting size will be ideal for encouraging
              individual interactions between this diverse group of scientists. It will also
              serve as an excellent educational activity for graduate and
postdoctoral
              students working in this young and expanding field.
