Title       : Experiments With Dipole and Monopole Lenses for an SEM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0096536

Award Number: 0096536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $752997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert V. Crewe Crewe@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Oscar H. Kapp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              An Instrument development grant has been awarded to Albert Crewe of the
              University of Chicago to complete, test, and demonstrate a new and
              original
scanning electron microscope (SEM), using a novel lens system, whose
              expected
performance characteristics far exceed those of existing instruments.
              It is a dedicated low voltage, high resolution instrument that incorporates a
              permanent magnet lens, placed below the specimen.  Such lenses have not been
              used previously but they show promise of permitting a considerable increase in
              resolution. The special value of these lenses are that they allow the use of
              very small focal lengths with correspondingly low aberrations. This makes it
              especially valuable for use with low accelerating voltages, although
              the
lenses are not limited to this area. A second advantage is that simplified
              and more versatile column designs are allowed due to the post-specimen lens
              location. A third advantage is that the anticipated cost of the entire
              instrument, if made commercially, should be about half that of current high
              resolution scanning electron microscopes. Finally, the shape of the lens makes
              it easy to provide a large tilt angle for the specimen. The project involves
              the training of a number of students who will gain invaluable instrument design
              and development experience.

