Title       : Photoexcitation Mechanisms and Transport Properties of Polarons and Solitons in
               Conjugated Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0096820

Award Number: 0096820
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324737             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Moses moses@ipos.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan J. Heeger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is focused on the carrier photogeneration mechanism as
              well as the carrier dynamics in conjugated polymers. These will be investigated
              by means of two experiments: 1. Fast transient carrier density measurements in
              the sub-picosecond time regime, using transient photoinduced absorption probed
              in the 6-10 ?m spectral region, which spans the infrared active vibrational
              modes that arise from carriers on the polymer backbone; 2. transient
              photoconductivity measurements. The former measurement will determine the
              dependence of the carrier quantum efficiency on photon energy and interchain
              coupling strength, as well as carrier recombination dynamics, while the latter
              one will probe the carrier dynamics. The goal of this research is to
              investigate some of the most fundamental questions in the field of conjugated
              polymers: Are solitons primary excitations? What is the nature of
              soliton-soliton interaction? Can one cross the insulator-metal transition at
              high soliton excitation densities? Is carrier generation possible in strictly
              one-dimensional systems (e.g. on a single polymer chain)? The proposed research
              involves state-of-the-art experimental techniques, and thus will provide
              significant educational benefit to the students and post-doctoral fellows
              involved in the project. 
%%%
This research is focused on the carrier
              photogeneration mechanism and carrier dynamics in various conjugated polymers
              by means of transient carrier density as well as transient photoconductivity
              measurements. The goal of this research is to investigate some of the most
              fundamental questions in the field of conjugated polymers: Are solitons primary
              excitations? What is the nature of soliton-soliton interaction? Can one cross
              the insulator-metal transition at high soliton excitation densities? Is carrier
              generation possible in strictly one-dimensional systems (e.g. on a single
              polymer chain)? Or rather, is interchain coupling inherently required for
              carriers to escape geminate recombination? How are the carrier quantum
              efficiency, carrier recombination dynamics, and carrier transport affected by
              modifying the inter-chain coupling? What is the role of neutral excitons in the
              carrier photoexcitation process? The proposed research will provide the kind of
              data that should bring a closure to these core questions. Additionally, the
              proposed research involves state-of-the-art experimental techniques, and thus
              will provide significant educational benefit to the students and post-doctoral
              fellows in the Institute for Polymers and Organic Solids at UC Santa
              Barbara.





