Title       : CAREER: High-Performance Semiconductor Photodetectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0096190

Award Number: 0096190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lili He   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624882  He  Semiconductor optoelectronic devices, such as laser diodes, light
              emitting  diodes, optical waveguides, electrooptic modulators, and
              photodetectors,  have important applications in optical communication and
              control systems  because of their convenience, efficiency, and natural
              compatibility with  modern electronics. Research on high performance
              semiconductor  photodetectors using low temperature (LT) deposition technology
              is proposed  for the PI's career development plan. The PI's current research
              focuses on  the study of the microstructural and electrical properties of LT
              thin metal  films. The most important characteristics of the low-temperature
              deposited  thin metal films, compared with conventional room temperature
              deposited  films, are: (1) tremendously increased Schottky barrier height; and
              (2)  greatly lowered resistivity when they are very thin (less than 100 A);
              both  of which are superior qualities for many optoelectronic devices, such as
              a  metal semiconductor-metal (MSM) photodiode, which is one of the best 
              choices for high-speed photodetectors.    The proposed research plan is to (1)
              explore the electrical characteristics  of LT thin films on several new
              semiconductor materials, including InGaAs,  AlGaAs and SiGe, which are often
              used for photodetectors; (2) implement  this technique to device fabrication;
              (3) optimize device design; and (4)  carry out the device fabrication and
              characterization. It is anticipated  that the application of the
              low-temperature thin metal films will result in  a significant enhancement of
              device performance. Such a high-performance  photodetector will have an
              important impact in optoelectronic integrated  circuit (OEIC) technology.   
              The goal of the PI's education plan is to educate productive engineers for 
              today's industrial and academic needs and to provide newly developed 
              technology to aid students' professional development. Concurrently with the 
              PI's research program, two senior elective and graduate level courses in 
              optoelectro nic devices, as well as semiconductor material and device 
              characterization are being developed by the PI in the Department of  Electrical
              Engineering at Northern Illinois University. Innovation in these  courses will
              focus on the development of laboratory components for both  courses, which will
              provide a strong synergy between the PI's research  program and education
              goals.  ***
