Title       : Approaches to Studying World-Situated Language Use: CUNY Conference on Human
               Sentence Processing, March 15-17, 2001, Philadelphia, PA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2000   
File        : a0096377

Award Number: 0096377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34996              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Trueswell trueswel@cattell.psych.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aravind K. Joshi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant will fund a special conference session on 'world-situated language
              use in natural dialog', held in conjunction with the 14th Annual CUNY
              Conference on Human Sentence Processing.  The conference, held March 15-17,
              2001, at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, is the most prominent
              U.S. conference for the interdisciplinary study of human language
              understanding.  On an annual basis, it brings together roughly 250 linguists,
              psycholinguists and computational linguists interested in detailed processing
              accounts of language comprehension and production. 

The special session,
              entitled "Approaches to Studying World-Situated Language Use: Bridging the
              Language-as-Product and Language-as-Action Traditions," is designed as a step
              toward linking conversational/discourse research with the formal linguistic and
              mechanistic approaches typically found at the CUNY conference. Five prominent
              researchers working in this bridging area have been invited to give talks and
              participate in a panel discussion.  In addition, peer-reviewed submitted talks
              and posters on this topic will be presented in accompanying sessions. It is
              hoped that by holding this symposium at the CUNY Conference, timely
              cross-disciplinary discussions will occur so to inspire a new generation of
              psycholinguistic and computational research on questions such as how natural
              utterances with disfluencies are processed, how information from context,
              gesture and linguistic input are combined in real-time processing, how
              interlocutors coordinate attention, and how these coordination processes impact
              real-time language processing commitments.
