Title       : Analysis and Design of Volume Photonic Metal Grid Antenna Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2001  
File        : a0096395

Award Number: 0096395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergey N. Makarov makarov@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0096395
Makarov

A two-year program to investigate transmitting, scattering,
              and focusing phenomena of finite rectangular volume metal grids is proposed.
              The grid cell sizes are on the order of a wavelength or smaller. The project
              results will make a contribution to the development of large-scale antennas,
              including base station antennas, satellite antennas, and radars. One of the
              impacts could be the replacement of a reflecting metal sheet or a tiny metal
              texture by a specially designed 3D metal grid with frequency-selective
              reflectivity properties. Numerical and theoretical analyses will take up 65% of
              the project work while experimentations will consume the remaining 35%.  Today,
              numerical modeling of finite metal grids (and of any finite photonic crystals)
              constitutes considerable difficulties and is very time consuming. The speed
              issue of a numerical solver is a most critical parameter for the design
              process: many hundreds of trials may be necessary to identify a proper metal
              grid structure. As part of this proposal, a new iterative solver for
              magnetic/electric field integral equations will be developed. Its idea is to
              convert the primary equation to the normal (energy) form and then apply a
              generalized minimum residual (GMRES) optimization. The current solver
              performance is reported in the project description. Preliminary studies
              indicate that the solver is fast and requires a few tens of iterations for
              complicated metal grid structures. To date the solver uses the simplest
              (piecewise-constant) basis functions and none of the special anti-resonant
              techniques. The first goal of the project is therefore a modification and
              further development of the solver in order to be able to compute resonant
              volume metal grids with 100-225 cells and with 2 x 10 to the fifth power - 1 x
              10 to the sixth power boundary elements in 20-40 iterations.  Next, extensive
              numerical modeling will be performed with respect to three grid parameters: 
              cell spacing, thickness, and depth. The fourth parameter is grid curvature for
              curved meshes or a shaping factor for shaped grids. The objectives of the
              proposed modeling efforts are:  

i. Roadmaps of transmission spectra for
              various grid patterns.
ii. Search for shaped grids providing unusual
              transmission/focusing properties, including higher focusing gain than
              equivalent solid reflectors or lenses.

The first objective is becoming the
              standard step in the development of photonic metallic/dielectric filters. The
              desired pass band properties for the present project will beidentified using
              industrial links. The second objective is more questionable, but, as explained
              in the project description, may offer significant benefits. The experimental
              part of the work includes fabrication of the metal grids, transmission spectra
              measurements using a network analyzer and two small horn antennas, and surface
              current distribution measurements on the grid using an infrared detection
              system and a high-power microwave feed.
The proposal includes a substantial
              educational component geared toward general antenna theory. The teaching plan
              foresees one graduate (two years) project on a fast method of moments for
              antenna design, one or two short undergraduate projects, and incorporation of
              antenna-related materials into undergraduate and graduate courses, with
              particular emphasis on genetic optimization algorithms. As a result of the
              teaching plan, an introductory inantenna toolboxla for Matlab will be created.
              The toolbox will include receiving and transmitting (delta gap feed) antenna
              elements such as wires, rectangular meshes of wires,
plates, and possibly
              convex reflectors.

