Title       : Collaborative Research: Network Browser Security and Human Values: Theory and
               Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a0096131

Award Number: 0096131
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan E. Sieber                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195739             (Estimated)
Investigator: Batya Friedman batya@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The common good of our information infrastructure depends on well designed
              network security that is embraced by the public and private sectors.  Well
              designed network security requires well formed technical mechanisms and
              responsiveness to underlying moral and societal values, as well as a well
              thought out system of user interactions.  In recent years, significant efforts
              have been directed toward developing the technical dimensions of network
              security, but little systematic work investigates and integrates the
              corresponding dimensions of human values and user experience.  This
              collaborative project provides a model of interdisciplinary collaboration that
              can deepen our understanding of the cognitive, ethical and social implications
              of new types of inter-activity.  It will study and implement security for a
              network browser that integrates these three key considerations: technical
              excellence, responsiveness to moral and societal values, and sensitivity to
              users' perceptions.  It will:  (1) develop a conceptual framework, or model,
              for network security that accounts for human values and user experience; (2)
              design and implement a working prototype of a network security system guided by
              the conceptual model; and (3) apply the experience of this project toward a
              better understanding of methodology for the general purpose of designing
              technology that is responsive to human values.  Drawing on the technical,
              philosophical, and social science expertise of the three investigators, the
              work will begin with a close study of the network security in existing browsers
              such as Netscape 4.0 and Internet Explorer 4.0.  The goal is to characterize
              the technical mechanisms, grasp value implications, and understand users'
              perceptions of these systems.  Based on this study, the investigators will
              develop a conceptual model that represents the interaction among technical
              characteristics, values supported by (or embodied in) the system, and users'
              perceptions of their interactive experience with it. This model will guide the
              next phase of the project:  to design and implement a prototype for a security
              configuration that is explicitly responsive to values and users' perceptions. 
              User studies and further philosophical analysis of the prototype will help to
              refine the security configuration and, ultimately, to refine and assess the
              model itself.  Through industry contacts and other traditional methods, the
              investigators will disseminate the results of their study, including the
              conceptual model, prototype, and aspects of the multidisciplinary methodology
              they develop.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
