Title       : Valle Imperial Mathematics K-8 Local Systemic Change Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0096609

Award Number: 0096609
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monica B. Mitchell                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5671774            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Klentschy mklent@mail.ecsd.k12.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Juan Cruz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Love  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marsha King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie Garrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : El Centro School District
	      1256 Broadway avenue
	      El Centro, CA  92243    760/352-5712

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Valle Imperial Mathematics K-8 Local Systemic Change Project (VIM) is a
              collaborative initiative between the El Centro School District, the Imperial
              County Office of Education and San Diego State University, Imperial Valley
              Campus.  It is one part of a broad systemic reform initiative in Imperial
              County, California designed to implement standards-based instruction in
              mathematics.  This five year LSC project is designed to support all 1,230 K-8
              teachers of mathematics in Imperial County through the implementation of high
              quality, standards-based mathematics materials, instruction and assessment in
              their classrooms.  It focuses on rich standards-based mathematics content,
              constructivist instructional methods to promote student understanding, research
              on children's learning of critical mathematical constructs, strategies to
              increase mathematics achievement in language minority students, and the design
              and use of appropriate student assessment strategies.

The VIM project design
              will utilize a strategy to build leadership capacity with a cadre of teachers
              within the region.  Preservice will be restructured at San Diego State
              University with a focus on strengthening the mathematics background of
              prospective teachers.  Existing teachers will be afforded the opportunities to
              participate in a program to receive advanced degrees in Mathematics Education. 
              The project will utilize the regional fiber optic network as a means of
              extending teacher enhancement.  An interactive platform to enhance professional
              development and networking opportunities for teachers will be used to provide
              distance learning staff development.  The project design includes a strong
              research component focusing on student outcomes, the effects of teacher
              enhancement and distance learning.

