Title       : Architectures for Emerging Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0096126

Award Number: 0096126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Yavuz Oruc                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarita V. Adve sadve@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The broad objective of this research is to develop and evaluate general-purpose
              architectures for emerging and future media-processing applications. These
              applications are expected to require orders-of-magnitude higher performance
              than available on today's general-purpose systems. A key challenge is to design
              systems that will provide such performance improvements for media applications,
              without sacrificing performance for more conventional applications.

This
              research avails of a unique opportunity to bring together architecture
              researchers and applications researchers working on the technologies underlying
              media processing.  The research focuses on three classes of applications: (1)
              signal processing; specifically, video, image, audio, speech processing, and
              high-speed modems, (2) wireless communication, and (3) virtual environments and
              visualization. The approach is to use simulation to develop a quantitative
              understanding of the behavior of these applications, and use this understanding
              to develop new architectural techniques.  An initial quantitative study of
              image and video applications has motivated two architectural directions: (I)
              design of dynamically partitionable caches, and (II) use of reconfigurable
              logic for specialized media functions for a general-purpose system.

In the
              past, such architectural research has been impeded by a lack of access to
              applications.  The proposed collaboration with industry and other researchers
              will overcome this impediment and enable the design of future architectures
              based on future applications.



