Title       : Semiclassical Limits of Eigenfunctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a0096140

Award Number: 0096140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dmitry Jakobson jakobson@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is concerned with the study of the relationship between a geodesic
              flow on a Riemannian manifold on the one hand, and the asymptotic properties of
              the eigenvalues and the eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami operator on the
              other hand.  The principal investigator proposes to continue his study of the
              asymptotic behavior of the eigenfunctions on manifolds with either completely
              integrable or ergodic geodesic flows.  

The proposed research lies in the
              area of Quantum Chaos.  The subject originated in the study of the spectra of
              the atomic nuclei in the fifties.  Later it was recognized that similar
              phenomena occur in condensed matter physics, disordered systems, ergodic
              theory, random matrices, and analytic number theory.  The questions which are
              often considered include the study of the spacings between high energy levels
              of the system: do they behave like random numbers, or are they more regular?
              Other questions concern eigenfunctions: do they become uniformly distributed
              over the phase space or do they become highly concentrated in certain regions? 
              Many experiments suggest that the answers depend on the classical dynamics of
              the system. Considerable progress has been made in understanding the precise
              nature of that dependence, but many mathematical questions remain unsolved. The
              questions considered in this proposal are related to the problems that arise in
              building certain components of quantum computers.


