Title       : Collection Improvement and Computerization of the Pullen Herbarium (MISS),
               University of Mississippi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2001     
File        : a0096906

Award Number: 0096906
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucile M. McCook bymccook@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew W. Douglas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Pullen Herbarium of the University of Mississippi was founded in 1963 and is
              the largest public herbarium in the state.  It contains over 62,000 accessioned
              vascular plant specimens and a backlog of over 40,000 specimens including
              bryophytes, lichens and myxomycetes.  A majority of the specimens are from
              Mississippi and the southeastern United States.  The recent reinvigoration of
              botanical studies in the departments of Biology and Pharmacognosy and in the
              Thad Cochran National Center for Natural Products Research has led the
              University of Mississippi to invest in faculty, research infrastructure and
              curricula in the plant sciences.  In order to meet these challenges and serve
              as a repository for research vouchers, the Pullen Herbarium requires the
              installation of a mobile storage compactor system to increase collections
              storage, new cabinets to fill the compactor and to replace damaged cabinets,
              and the equipment, supplies and personnel to mount and accession the backlog. 
              Several hundred historically important collections from the turn of the century
              will also be conserved and digitally documented.  These collection improvements
              will increase total herbarium storage, allowing expansion.  Due to the dearth
              of information on the flora of Mississippi when compared to most other states,
              funds are also requested to computerize collection data from Pullen Herbarium
              specimens.  Personnel and equipment are required to enter specimen data into a
              relational database and build a searchable, multi-user platform on the World
              Wide Web, allowing information to be readily available for research, education,
              and public knowledge.  An integrated three-year plan for collection improvement
              and computerization is presented that will stimulate research on the plants of
              Mississippi, encourage interdisciplinary contact, train students in curation
              and plant taxonomy, make important data readily available for research, and
              conserve the Pullen Herbarium for the future.
