Title       : US - Africa Workshop: Linkages for Conservation Biology; Nairobi, Kenya, July
               2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0096562

Award Number: 0096562
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40068              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan H. Bornbusch abornbus@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Schoneboom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 5928,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0096562
Bornbusch

This award supports participants from the United States
              (four) and Africa (20) in the US-Africa Workshop on Linkages for Conservation
              Biology, in Nairobi, Kenya, from July 6-8, 2001.  Representatives from the
              Society for Conservation Biology (SCB),  private donor foundations, and several
              networking organizations, will also be attending, as well as additional
              scientists from throughout Africa.  The co-organizers are Dr. Alan Bornbusch
              and Mr. John Schoneboom, of the Africa Program at the American Association for
              the Advancement of Science (AAAS); and Dr. Robin Reid, of the Department of
              People, Livestock and Environment at the International Livestock Research
              Institute (ILRI) in Kenya. The goals of the workshop are to strengthen the
              African network of conservation biologists (possibly through the formation of
              an SCB-affiliated professional society), explore areas of mutual interest for
              cross-regional and international collaborative research activities, and
              identify methods for collecting and disseminating information on conservation
              biology as efficiently and effectively as possible in Africa. 

Conservation
              biology is the multidisciplinary study of the phenomena that affect the
              maintenance, loss, and restoration of biological diversity.  It can have a
              major role in guiding the sustainable development and use of natural resources
              and ecosystems.  But at the present time there is no Pan-African organization
              dedicated to conservation biology, and as a result few African scientists know
              about related research projects being conducted outside their own countries. 
              Furthermore, many US researchers are unaware of the research activities of
              their African peers.  Yet Africa has the potential to produce significant
              discoveries in such areas as conservation, biological diversity, medicine, and
              agricultural applications.  At the request of the SCB, the Africa Program at
              AAAS conducted a survey of members of the US and African conservation biology
              communities, and found strong support for the formation of an African
              conservation biology society.  The creation of such a professional society
              would enable African scientists to communicate among themselves, and with their
              international colleagues in conservation biology and other relevant
              disciplines.  This workshop is expected to identify specific ways that US and
              African conservation biologists can work together to enhance their respective
              capacities and impacts, create important new research and education
              opportunities, and develop specific strategies to foster long-term
              collaborations (such as the creation of a US-Africa network for conservation
              biology).  The African participants will also gain knowledge about promoting
              and managing scientific societies, while the US participants will gain
              important information on the needs and assets of their African colleagues. 
              This workshop is being jointly funded by the Division of International Programs
              and the Division of Environmental Biology.

