Title       : Development of an Open-source Real-time Experiment Interface System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0096596

Award Number: 0096596
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332766             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Christini dchristi@med.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Weill Med Coll of Cornell
	      1300 York Avenue
	      New York, NY  100214805    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research project is to develop a general-purpose,
              open-source, real-time experiment interface software system. The need for
              real-time interface systems is ubiquitous in biological research (e.g., cardiac
              arrhythmia control, stochastic dynamic clamping, study of gene regulatory
              networks). However, current options have significant drawbacks: common
              multi-tasking operating systems such as Windows are inherently non-real-time
              and therefore require add-on hardware for real-time functionality; MS-DOS is
              out-dated; and the cost of proprietary real-time operating systems may be
              beyond the reach of many academic researchers. 
The system to be developed in
              this research project will circumvent such shortcomings by utilizing the
              open-source Real-Time Linux (RT-Linux) operating system. RT-Linux is fast and
              stable, and can guarantee the timing of a real-time process while concurrently
              serving as a standard multi-tasking workstation.  The proposed software
              architecture will be designed to ensure that the resulting system will be
              applicable to a wide range of  applications. Flexibility will be achieved
              through modular software design,
flexible graphical layout generation, and
              hardware transparency. Sample systems, automated installation, comprehensive
              documentation, and a user/developer email list will streamline user
              implementation.  Because the proposed system will be developed under (and must
              always carry) an open-source license, anyone will be free to download the
              source code, use it as is, or modify it for a particular application. Due to
              the open-exchange ethic of open-source software, it is most likely
              contributions from outside (volunteer) developers will enhance the proposed
              software - thus the system would reap the benefits of efforts above and beyond
              those directly supported through this award.  Because of the many technical
              advantages of RT-Linux and the cost and flexibility advantages inherent to
              open-source, the proposed system has the potential to be an invaluable research
              tool in a wide range of research areas requiring real-time computation. This
              system has the potential to enhance undergraduate and graduate education,
              especially in classroom and laboratory settings where real-time analysis can
              permit the use of live rather than recorded experiments and demonstrations.

