Title       : Development of Rapid Freeze-Quench Sample Preparation Techniques for Use in High
               Frequency Electron Paramagnetic Resonance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0096713

Award Number: 0096713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331927             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Gerfen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva University
	      500 West 185th Street
	      New York, NY  100333201    212/960-5400

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award will support work whose objective is to permit the use of rapid
              freeze-quench (RFQ) sample preparation with high frequency electron
              paramagnetic resonance and electron-nuclear double resonance (HF-EPR/ENDOR)
              spectroscopy. While the RFQ technique is extensively used in conjunction with
              conventional low frequency EPR/ENDOR spectrometers, technical difficulties have
              prevented its optimal use at high frequencies.  RFQ arrests the reaction of
              enzymes on the millisecond time scale to facilitate the investigation of
              short-lived catalytic intermediate species. The technique involves rapidly
              mixing two reactants (e. g. an enzyme and its substrate) and freezing the
              resulting mixture within a known time period (from 5 - 1000 milliseconds) by
              spraying it into a cryogenic bath. However, the small wavelengths and
              correspondingly small sample tubes and resonant cavities commonly used for
              high-frequency EPR make the application of RFQ techniques difficult, and have
              thus prevented the study of RFQ samples with this spectroscopic technique. The
              objective will be pursued via two general routes. One is the modification of
              existing RFQ by adapting them to the small HF-EPR capillary sample tubes. The
              other, larger effort will be devoted to modification of high frequency EPR
              instrumentation so that it is compatible with existing RFQ technology. This
              will involve the development of  overmoded resonant EPR cavities that accept
              the standard, large RFQ sample tubes.  These tubes are currently prepared in
              most laboratories that use low frequency EPR. 
Both approaches - the
              adaptation of RFQ techniques to high-frequency capillary tubes and the
              development of overmoded resonant cavities that accept standard RFQ tubes -
              will permit the study of short-lived intermediates in normal enzymatic
              reactions.  Prior to the development of RFQ techniques, standard strategies for
              such studies involved the use of  inhibitors or substrate analogues that
              arrested reactions at an intermediate stage.  While such intermediates can
              provide important structural information about enzymes, they are less useful in
              providing information about electronic properties that are key to understanding
              the enzyme's role in the reaction.

