Title       : Fermat Adeles and Differential Modular Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0096946

Award Number: 0096946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandru Buium buium@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Some of the most interesting objects in number theory are encoded into integer
              valued functions f(p,a) whose arguments consist of a prime p and a tuple of
              integers a.  (The prototypical example is f(a,p)=(a/p), the Legendre symbol;
              more general examples are given by p-coefficients of L-functions of various
              algebraic-geometric objects depending on parameters a.)  Such functions f are
              generally not polynomials in (p,a) hence they ``transcend the language of
              algebraic geometry''.  The first main idea of the proposal is to enlarge usual
              algebraic geometry by ``adjoining'' one new operation, the ``Fermat quotient
              operation'' which, on the adeles of the rational numbers, acts as by sending
              the p-th entry x(p) of the adele into the Fermat quotient of x(p) with respect
              to p.  The main conjectural principle proposed will be that the ring of
              functions of this larger geometry (called the ring of Fermat adeles)  can be
              used to ``represent'' many of the interesting arithmetic functions f as above. 
              For each fixed p, such a geometry has been introduced by the investigator in
              his previous research; the main task in the present proposal is to make p vary
              ``geometrically''.  The strategy of the approach, at least for Abelian
              varieties, is to use Siegel differential modular forms (which are an analogue,
              in this larger geometry, of usual Siegel modular forms).  The study of Siegel
              differential modular forms is the second main theme of the proposal.  A
              different motivation for the study of Siegel differential modular forms can be
              described as follows.  On the ``moduli space'' A of principally polarized
              Abelian schemes of dimension g there is a natural equivalence relation ~ given
              by ``isogeny''. The quotient A/~ does not exist, in any reasonable sense, in
              usual algebraic geometry, but it has a nice substitute in the larger, ``Fermat
              adelic geometry''.  The embedding of A/~ into a projective space should be
              given by Siegel differential modular forms in a way similar to the embedding of
              A into a projective space, given by usual Siegel modular forms. A series of
              problems then arise as to the ``projective geometry'' and ``cohomology'' of
              A/~.  This point of view can be generalized to other quotients X/~ where X is a
              scheme of finite type over the integers and ~ is an ``arithmetically defined
              equivalence relation'' on X.

One of the main problems of number theory is to
              understand how various quantities that naturally depend on prime numbers vary
              as the prime number varies.  The variation of these quantities is not governed
              by classical algebraic geometry in the sense that these quantities are not
              polynomial or algebraic functions of the variable prime number.  The
              investigator proposes to develop a new geometry that would describe this
              variation.  This geometry would be obtained from the classical algebraic
              geometry by adjoining one more operation, the Fermat quotient.  Once geometry
              has been enlarged in this way, a series of puzzling quotient objects that did
              not have any geometric meaning in classical algebraic geometry start making
              sense geometrically.  This particular way of looking at arithmetic functions
              and quotient problems in arithmetic algebraic geometry should bring a new,
              geometric, intuition into the study of these objects.

