Title       : To Devalue or to Defend: The Political Economy of Exchange Rate Policy in the
               Developing World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a0096295

Award Number: 0096295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47676              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Leblang leblang@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The speed and force with which capital crosses national borders has led scholars
              and policymakers alike to question both the usefulness and practicality of
              fixed exchange rate regimes.  While fixed exchange rate regimes provide price
              stability and can act as a nominal actor for monetary policy, they are
              vulnerable to speculative attacks as evidenced by recent events in Europe. 
              While scholarly investigations have models to explain and/or predict the
              occurrence of speculative attacks, these models fail to take political
              uncertainty and political preferences seriously.

This research addresses two
              related questions regarding the political economy of exchange rate policy in
              the developing world.  First, what role do political factors play in the
              process of a speculative attack?   A casual glance at the political situations
              in East Asia provides some inductive evidence that markets react to political
              uncertainty.  During the 1997-1998 period Korea and the Phillipines had
              elections and the political situation in Thailand was uncertain because the
              governing coalition was made up of six parts.  Part of this research involves
              collecting data to measure political uncertainty including:  the timing of
              elections;  a change in government leadership; the effective number of parties
              in the legislature; electoral volatility; and, government cohesion.  The
              researchers hypothesize that speculative attacks are more likely when there is
              uncertainty regarding the future of government policies.

The second question
              attended to in this project asks why do some policymakers devalue or abandon
              their currency peg while others defend its value?  The decision to defend a
              currency's parity requires the government (monetary authority) to (1) spend
              foreign exchange reserves and/or (2) raise domestic short-term interest rates. 
              These policy changes have political implications in that they may lead to
              higher unemployment and government debt and lower investment and economic
              growth.  The research argues that the key factors influencing a policymaker's
              objective function when confronted with the decision to devalue or defend their
              currency's peg are determined by the country's political institutions.  Leaders
              in a dictatorship do not face as great a risk of political loss if confronted
              with economic crisis.  Further, politicians in countries with proportional
              electoral systems risk political/electoral defeat if they are forced to raise
              interest rates if they fail to take actions to reduce unemployment. 
              Politicians in countries with majoritarian electoral institutions fall between
              these two extremes.

The research uses binomial and multinomial probit to
              test a number of hypotheses related to these two questions on a sample of
              non-OECD countries over the period 1970-1998 using yearly and monthly data.  No
              data set currently exists that contains comparable political data on developing
              countries covering electoral rules, electoral institutions, party
              fractionalization and legislative volatility on a monthly basis.  These
              variables are collected from sources such as Keesing's Contemporary Archive of
              World Events, the Country Reports and Country Profiles of the Economist
              Intelligence Unit, the Lijphart Elections Archive, and numerous other
              sources.

