Title       : Semiparametric regression methods for cross-sectional and longitudinal data with
               errors-in-covariates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0096412

Award Number: 0096412
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149679             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Rathouz prathouz@health.bsd.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is to develop a new statistical methodology to address the problem
              of measurement error in regression covariates.  The method is embedded in a
              very general quasilikelihood framework that only requires specification of the
              mean and variance of a response variable y given covariates (u,w), thereby
              encompassing a broad class of models.  The covariate u is not observed
              directly, but rather is measured through a surrogate x.  Similarly to y, a
              model for the mean and variance of x given (u,w) is also posited.  In the first
              phase of the project, the covariates u will be treated as a fixed "nuisance
              parameters" --- quantities that are not of interest to the researcher, but are
              required to fit the model of interest.  The research will exploit recent
              developments in the statistical methodology for eliminating nuisance parameters
              in estimation functions (M-estimators).  An alternative approach is to treat
              the mismeasured covariates u as unobserved random variables.  This approach
              holds potential to increase statistical efficiency, but may be sensitive to
              assumptions made about the distribution of u given other covariates w.  A
              second phase of this project will develop a robust approach to
              errors-in-covariates wherein a working model for the distribution of u given w
              is employed to increase efficiency, while protecting against bias due to
              misspecification of that distribution.  This work will be an extension of the
              nuisance parameter approach.  The main area of application for the project is
              non-linear regression models, and models for longitudinal data will receive
              particular attention.  This will be accomplished by exploiting the natural
              connection of generalized estimating equation models for longitudinal response
              data to quasilikelihood models for univariate responses.

A very large
              proportion of statistical methods in use today are based on regression models
              which express the average value of a response variable as a function of given
              values of other co-variables.  Questions of scientific interest can then be
              formulated in terms of how the average response varies across a range of values
              of the covariates.  In standard regression models, noise in the data is assumed
              to occur as unexplained variability in the response around its mean value, and
              the covariates are not considered to be subject to such variability.  For
              example, age and sex are usually measured very accurately.  However, it is
              often the case that some covariates are prone to considerable errors of
              measurement.  Errors-in-covariates arise especially in observational studies
              which often rely upon self-report or other imperfect measures for variables
              such as dietary or alcohol intake, workplace or environmental exposures,
              clinical measures (e.g., blood pressure), and measures of income and wealth. 
              Errors may be due to reporting biases, variability in recall, laboratory
              variability, intra-individual variability over time, inter-informant error, or
              differences in perspective of respondents.  This research project will develop
              a new method for estimation of non-linear regression models when one or more
              covariates are subject to error.  The project is important because (i) it
              represents the first application of a new technique for doing statistical
              estimation in a broad class of problems, which includes errors-in-covariates as
              a special case; (ii) the technique requires fewer modeling assumptions than
              those previously developed; and (iii) the approach will be extended to
              longitudinal data analysis, for which the problem of errors-in-covariates has
              received relatively little attention.  Many problems in social sciences and
              public health require longitudinal data, so advanced regression methods for the
              analysis of these data are critical to furthering these inquiries.

