Title       : Geometric Algorithm Design and Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2001   
File        : a0096248

Award Number: 0096248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219272             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. T. Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Fundamental geometric problems in computational geometry and  those that arise
              in VLSI computer-aided design will be  investigated in this project.  A new
              model of Voronoi diagram  based on distance measures that are not symmetric is
              proposed  and its characteristics and efficient algorithms for its  computation
              will be thoroughly studied.  Bi-criteria optimization  problems in the plane,
              such as shortest path tree or minimum  spanning tree routing with constraints
              on maximum delay, Steiner  minimum tree routing with fixed orientations,  and
              other optimization problems such as topological via  minimization will be
              investigated.  Not only the computational  complexity of these optimization
              problems will be studied, but  also efficient heuristics and implementations
              will be developed.  Web-based visualization software tools that help design and
               dissemination of usable geometric codes will be implemented.  All software
              will be implemented in C++ and Java programming  languages with the use of
              visualization package developed at  Northwestern University.    The goals of
              this research are to apply geometric techniques  to tackle problems that arise
              in computational geometry as well  as other engineering fields in general and
              VLSI CAD in  particular, in order to increase the real impact of computational 
              geometry on applied areas.
