Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Flotation Technology for the Trona Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2001     
File        : a0096920

Award Number: 0096920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan D. Miller jdmiller@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5940,9161,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0096920
Miller 

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Professor Jan D. Miller, Department of Metallurgical Engineering,
              University of Utah at Salt Lake City, Utah and Dr. Mehmet S. Celik, Mining
              Engineering Department, Istanbul Technical University (ITU), Istanbul, Turkey. 
              They plan to study the application of a new floatation technique in the
              processing of trona ore to remove insoluble contaminants.  Trona is the source
              of soda ash, which is widely used in many consumer products.  Current methods
              of recovery involve extraction of trona by conventional underground or solution
              mining methods, and in both cases the ore is dissolved to remove impurities. 
              Preprocessing by floatation has not been possible until recently, when a unique
              flotation process was discovered at the University of Utah to allow for such
              preprocessing.  Utilizing this process for preconcentration of trona, will make
              efficient use of trona resources, and will minimize the environmental impact of
              the process operations.

Scope:  The collaborators will combine their
              expertise in this research and will build on earlier successful collaboration
              in the area of soluble salt flotation.  The proposed work should result in a
              procedure, for trona extraction, that is more efficient, and more
              environmentally benign than existing methods.  The project has potential
              benefits to the United States and Turkey, because the United States is the
              largest producer of trona and Turkey ranks second in terms of trona reserves. 
              The researchers and institutions involved in the project are well known for
              their contribution in the area of soluble salt flotation. The project meets INT
              criteria for support of cooperative projects that are mutually beneficial. 
              This project is funded by the Division of International Programs and the
              Division of Chemical and Transport Systems.
