Title       : Study of Nitric Oxide Chemistry/Biochemistry in S. Cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0096380

Award Number: 0096380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon M. Fukuto   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nitric oxide (NO) is made in mammalian cells for a variety of physiological
              reasons.  For example, it can serve as a vascular mediator, a
              cytotoxic/cytostatic species and a neurotransmitter.  The biological chemistry
              associated with many of the actions of NO is, for the most part, extrapolated
              from purely chemical and/or in vitro systems.  Thus far, determining the
              intimate chemical details responsible for the biological activity of NO has
              been difficult due to the limitations of in vitro or in vivo mammalian systems.
               However, the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae offers an ideal experimental
              system in which NO chemistry can be delineated in a whole cell environment. 
              Due to the fact that S. cerevisiae grows and survives under anaerobic or
              aerobic conditions, the effect of dioxygen on the chemical interaction of NO
              with specific proteins can be examined.  The ease of genetic manipulation of
              yeast allows the ability to control intracellular conditions in predictable and
              important ways.  Thus, the effects of NO under a variety of cellular conditions
              can be examined.  Moreover, since many of the protein relationships have been
              fully elucidated, alteration of protein activity by NO can be monitored by
              examining an overall effect on yeast cell biology.  
	This project involves a
              systematic examination of the chemical and biochemical interaction of NO with
              two yeast metal metabolism proteins, Ace1 (a copper-responsive transcription
              factor) and Fre1 (a membrane spanning metal reductase).  These proteins were
              chosen for study since they represent two important classes of proteins which
              are known interact with NO; metal-thiolate proteins and heme proteins.  The
              intimate details of the NO-protein interactions will also be examined using
              chemical model systems and purified proteins.  In this way, the cellular
              biochemistry of NO can be validated.


