Title       : Discrete and Rhythmic Dynamics in Multipoint Movements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0096543

Award Number: 0096543
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dagmar Sternad dxs48@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will investigate the generation of perceptually controlled
              behavior in biological and artificial systems.  Its focus is to understand
              intralimb coordination that consists of both discrete and rhythmic elements,
              such as in drawing or handwriting.  The hypothesis underlying the work is that
              unconstrained multijoint movements can be understood in terms of two
              fundamental units of action, discrete movements and rhythmic movements.  This
              "D-R" hypothesis is partially motivated by the fact that, from the perspective
              of dynamical systems theory, fixed-point and limit cycle dynamics are two
              primary stable regimes in a complex dynamic system.  The research will involve
              the development of a dynamical model for multijoint movements, consisting of
              two separate pattern generators that produce rhythmic and discrete movement
              trajectories.  A series of experimental studies will investigate this "D-R"
              hypothesis in three stages.  First, the basic hypothesis that two regimes exist
              and that they interact will be tested in experiments examining controlled
              single-joint and two-joint movements that involve both rhythmic and discrete
              elements.  Second, a subset of the same movement tasks will be examined, with
              additional recording of cerebral blood flow using functional magnetic resonance
              imaging.  The "D-R" hypothesis expects that rhythmic and discrete movements
              will exhibit different brain activation patterns, and the research will test
              their interaction.  Third, complex unconstrained arm movements will be studied
              in a three-dimensional drawing task.  The behavioral experiments will conclude
              by testing the modeling propositions in the complex perceptual-motor skill of
              rhythmically bouncing a ball.  Complementing the experiments, the model
              equations will be implemented on an anthropomorphic robot arm with seven
              degrees of freedom, in order to synthesize movements on the basis of the
              proposed organizational dynamics.

This research is fundamental to
              understanding how humans perform their everyday activities, the vast majority
              of which involve coordination of multijoint movements with perceptual
              information.  In addition, from the standpoint of complex system theory, the
              investigation of the human body and its central nervous system, among the most
              complex of systems, is extremely useful to the goal of understanding the
              fundamental organizational properties of complex systems.  Furthermore,
              obtaining a deeper understanding of what could be elementary units in the
              control of perceptuomotor tasks has the potential to advance knowledge for
              diagnosis and treatment of movement disorders, as well as to advance methods of
              training and rehabilitation.  In addition, the work on the anthropomorphic
              robot is ideally suited for studying control principles that can be used for
              the development of new technologies concerning general purpose autonomous
              movement systems, limb prostheses, and, in the long run, techniques for
              functional stimulation in patients.  The planned combination of fMRI
              experiments and behavioral experiments will also contribute to bridging
              psychological and neurobiological disciplines.
