Title       : The Development and Implications of Moral Emotions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a0096950

Award Number: 0096950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75009              (Estimated)
Investigator: June Price Tangney jtangney@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the continuation of work on a longitudinal study of the
              development and implications of moral emotions (shame, guilt and empathy). A
              secondary focus is on the development of constructive versus destructive anger
              management strategies. The on-going longitudinal family study is based on a
              cohort of  380 children, their parents and their grandparents. The diverse
              intergenerational sample was initially studied when the children were in the
              5th grade. Information regarding children's psychological, social and academic
              attributes was provided by peers, teachers, and the children themselves.
              Parents and grandparents reported family environment, childrearing attitudes,
              and attachment style. Follow-up assessments were completed when the children
              were in the 7th/8th grade, and phone interviews were conducted with a
              sub-sample of the children at ages 18-19.

These data can help to answer
              questions about individual differences in moral emotional style, and how those
              differences predict social, emotional and behavioral adjustment. The data also
              provide information about the developmental origins of moral emotional style,
              including the parental and family factors that shape children's emerging
              tendencies to experience shame, guilt and empathy, and the experiences in late
              childhood and adolescence that cause shifts in moral emotional style. One goal
              of the project is to understand how children develop adaptive as opposed to
              maladaptive means of handling anger.

Together, the data collected over time
              and across generations should substantially extend the literature, providing
              clear directions for early intervention with children "at-risk" for the
              development of maladaptive patterns of moral affect and behavior. By
              identifying specific characteristics that are most highly associated with key
              moral behaviors, this project can help pinpoint specific avenues for
              intervention. The findings should be of broad interest to parents, teachers,
              and clinicians, and the results should inform those seeking to intervene with
              individuals who display a pattern of aggressive and antisocial behavior.

