Title       : Crystallization of Polymers and Copolymers at Very High Supercoolings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2003    
File        : a0096505

Award Number: 0096505
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Phillips pphillip@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The solidification of polymers and copolymers under conditions relevant to
              industrial processing operations is of considerable importance to the design of
              polymers and to operation of the plastics industry in all its forms.  One of
              the most sought after conditions is crystalline polymers cannot be studied at
              high supercoolings, or low temperatures as the polymers usually solidify before
              the desired isothermal condition can be achieved.  Two of those polymers are
              linear polyethylene and nylon 66.  The recently developed Ding-Sprueill method
              of rapid cooling which utilizes a micro-thermocouple embedded in the sample and
              direct continuous measurement of temperature has proved to over come the
              difficulties in an unexpected way.  As the polymer film is cooled rapidly the
              heat of crystallization maintains the polymer at a constant temperature
              determined by the relative rates of cooling and heat liberation.  The proposed
              research seeks to continue current successful studies of polyethylene and its
              copolymers, which have led to the discovery of new laws of polymer
              crystallization.  These laws have not been observed previously experimentally,
              nor are they predicted by any available theories.  It is proposed additionally
              to apply the method to nylon 66 and its copolymers.  The P.I's group, under
              current NSF support, have shown that nylon 66 and its copolymers do not follow
              secondary nucleation as the mechanism of crystal growth, unlike other polymer
              systems.  They therefore compose a unique group of polymers that follow surface
              roughening as the mechanism of growth.   The proposed research is intended to
              shed considerable light on the mechanism of crystallization of these two
              generic forms of interest to basic physics, assist in resolving several current
              controversies on mechanisms of crystallization, and at the same to generate
              understanding of the crystallization behavior of two very important industrial
              polymers under conditions which are directly applicable to manufacturing
              operations.  Experimentation will include studies of detailed morphologies
              developed over wide crystallization temperature ranges under conditions
              hitherto unattainable as well as studies of the crystallization kinetics and
              the melting behavior.  Experimental methods to be used include transmission
              electron microscopy, atomic force microscopy, optical microscopy, small angle
              x-ray scattering and small angle neutron scattering.
%%%
This research is in
              the area of structure, crystallization and processing of industrially important
              polymeric materials. 

