Title       : Research on Ocean-Atmosphere Variability and Ecosystem Response in the Ross Sea
               (ROAVERRS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a0096152

Award Number: 0096152
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1793               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin R. Arrigo arrigo@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9421496  Arrigo  Research on Ocean-Atmosphere Variability and Ecosystem Response
               in the Ross Sea (ROAVERRS)    This project describes an interdisciplinary
              study of meteorologic  forcing phenomena, sea ice dynamics, ocean hydrography,
              primary  productivity, and benthic-pelagic coupling in the southwestern  Ross
              Sea, Antarctica.  The primary goal is to examine how changes  in aspects of the
              polar climate system, in this case wind and  temperature, influence marine
              productivity on a large Antarctic  continental shelf.  In the Ross Sea, winds
              off the continent and  mesocyclones influence the spatial and temporal
              distribution of  ice cover as well as upper ocean mixed-layer depth and thus 
              control primary production in sea ice and open water systems.   The structure,
              standing stock and productivity of bottom-dwelling  biological communities are
              also linked to meteorologic processes  through interseasonal and interannual
              variation in horizontal and  vertical fluxes of organic carbon produced in the
              upper ocean.   Linkages between atmospheric, oceanographic, and biological 
              systems will be investigate during a two and half year field  study of the
              southwestern Ross Sea ecosystem.  Direct  measurements include:  (1) regional
              wind and air temperature, (2)  ice cover, ice movement, and sea surface
              temperature, (3)  hydrographic characteristics of the upper ocean and primary 
              productivity in sea ice and upper water column, (4) vertical flux  of organic
              materials and ocean circulation, and (5) abundance,  distribution, and
              respiration rates of biological communities on  the sea floor.  Based on
              archived meteorologic data, these  scientists expect that atmospheric
              variability during the study  period will allow them to monitor changes in
              airflow patterns in  the southwestern Ross Sea and to determine their influence
              on  oceanographic and biological patterns.  This study will  contribute to our
              knowledge of atmospheric and oceanographic  forcing of polar marine ecosystems,
              and hence lead to a better  underst anding of the polar marine ecosystem
              response to climate  variability.
