Title       : Regularity, Convergence, and Uniqueness Problems for Harmonic Map Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1999  
File        : a0096062

Award Number: 0096062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4700               (Estimated)
Investigator: Changyou Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Kentucky
	      University Station
	      Lexington, KY  405060001    606/257-9000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706855    Wang    Work on this project concerns several analytic problems
              arising   from the area of geometric variational calculus: weakly   harmonic
              maps, weak flows of harmonic maps into general   Riemannian manifolds,
              p-harmonic maps. Smoothness of solutions to   such problems often breaks down.
              Of particular interest are the   partial regularity and uniqueness of weak
              flows of harmonic maps   in suitable classes, sequential compactness of the
              solution space   including weakly harmonic maps and weak flows of harmonic
              maps,  relationships between flows of Ginzburg-Landau type and   harmonic maps,
              behavior of solutions near singular points, and  existence and geometric
              properties of self-similar solutions to   harmonic map flows. This work will
              involve geometric measure   theory and PDE methods in geometric fashion. The PI
              also proposes   to formulate heat flow of harmonic maps between Alexandrov
              spaces.     Partial differential equations are the basic tools to describe  
              physical problems. Harmonic maps model extremal (or optimal)   objects with
              respect to physically natural energy functionals  in families of objects
              satisfying common constraints. The heat  flow of harmonic maps studies the
              long-time dynamical behavior  of objects in such families.  The study will
              enhance our   understanding of these maps, improve methods to control the 
              singular sets, and predict singular behavior of solutions to  these problems.
              The results will have applications to material  science including liquid
              crystals and elasticity/plasticity.
