Title       : A Framework for Path and Resource Sensitive Optimizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a0096122

Award Number: 0096122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajiv Gupta gupta@cs.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary L. Soffa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The current design for compilers typically includes optimization  modules in
              order to provide the performance required in today's  application programs. The
              extensive research performed on code  optimization in the last 25 years has
              focused on developing the  necessary data flow and code improving algorithms
              for particular  optimizations.  Although these efforts have been enormously 
              successful, a number of problems with the optimization models that  are
              currently used are surfacing. One problem relates to where  optimizations are
              applied in the program code. Another problem is  that the optimization models
              that have traditionally been used are  inflexible and simplistic in that they
              do not take into account  the available machine resources or characteristics. 
              This  research is exploring techniques which address these problems  through
              the development of a framework for path and resource  sensitive optimizations. 
              The machine characteristics, the  available resources and the most beneficial
              paths of a program to  optimize, including interprocedural paths, are factors 
              in the  path and resource sensitive optimization algorithms. The data flow 
              analysis used by the optimization algorithms is being enriched  with 
              capabilities to exploit machine characteristics and  profiling information in a
              systematic fashion.
