Title       : Metabolic and Endocrine Control of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a0096981

Award Number: 0096981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305426             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill E. Schneider js0v@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  Energy availability is an environmental factor that plays a role in
              regulating reproduction in animals, both wild and domestic, but we know very
              little about the mechanisms that link energy availability to fertility and
              reproductive behavior.  When food is scarce, reproductive functions such as
              seasonal breeding, puberty, and lactation in mammals may be strongly reduced. 
              Not long ago the molecule leptin, naturally made and secreted by fat body
              cells, was discovered to act as a hormone affecting metabolism.  It now appears
              that leptin may signal the brain about how much metabolic fuel is available for
              an animal, and it may also act as a modulator of reproductive readiness.  This
              project addresses those hypotheses using pharmacology, molecular biology and
              behavioral approaches on a rodent species chosen for its comparatively short
              and very regular periodic ovulatory (estrous) cycle.  The project determines
              the critical events involving leptin's association with the phenomenon of
              anestrous (the disappearance of the usual estrous) when oxidizable metabolic
              fuel is low, even when body fat levels may be high.  The project will also
              localize where in the brain the leptin acts to influence estrous cyclicity.
  
              Results will give a novel perspective for understanding the relationship
              between energy levels and reproductive functions, and how organisms adapt their
              reproductive strategies to environmental perturbations, so the impact will
              extend beyond neuroendocrinology.  In addition, the project will foster
              considerable integration of education with research, and of fostering careers
              of women in biology, because of the location at a largely undergraduate school
              and because of the strong involvement of the principal investigator with
              teaching and mentoring students.


