Title       : Stratification and Migration Dynamics in Russia, 1985-2002: The Impact of Market
               Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0096607

Award Number: 0096607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154454             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore P. Gerber tgerber@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Theodore Gerber
SES- 0096607

This study examines the impact of dramatic
              changes in economic and political institutions on several key aspects of social
              stratification. Having undergone a massive and rapid transition from state
              socialism since early 1992, contemporary Russia provides an especially suitable
              setting in which to test and develop theories regarding the impact of
              institutional change on stratification processes. General theories of
              stratification, the nature of market institutions, and market behavior have
              been deployed by sociologists analyzing how market transition reshapes the
              social order and the life chances of different groups in former state socialist
              societies. But these theories remain provisional because they have not yet been
              put to adequate test in Russia, despite Russia's central importance as a
              proving ground for theories of post-Socialist stratification. Because Russia
              was the oldest, purest, and most geo-politically powerful state socialist
              system, the market transition there has been the most dramatic case of radical
              institutional change.

The first phase of the study involves collecting new,
              multi-level survey data to analyze stratification dynamics. In September
              2001-January 2002 a nationally -representative survey of Stratification and
              Migration Dynamics in Russia (SMDR) will collect employment/activity, job,
              residential, and household composition histories for 7,200 respondents from the
              end of 1985 through the present, as well as the work histories of their
              spouses/partners. The survey will also include sociodemographic variables,
              measures of current earnings, wage arrears, and alternative sources of income,
              and information on affiliation with the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
              (CPSU). The survey data will be matched with newly available data on annual
              regional economic conditions, such as unemployment rates, mean real wages, and
              relative size of the service sector, during most of the years covered in the
              study.

In the second phase of the study, dynamic multivariate methods will
              be used to model the effects of individual, household, and contextual variables
              on individual-level exposure to different types of employment change, job
              mobility, and migration using the SMDR data. Special attention will be devoted
              to testing 22 hypotheses derived from theories of the impact of market
              transition and general theories of stratification originally formulated in
              studies of democratic capitalist societies. The statistical results will
              provide an empirical basis for assessing, reformulating, and expanding, these
              theories. They will thereby advance the broader agenda of research on how
              institutions shape and re-shape stratification processes.

