Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Combination of High Hydrostatic Pressure
               (HHP)and Bacteriocins to Inactivate Foodborne Bacteria in Milk and Orange Juice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2001   
File        : a0096915

Award Number: 0096915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27887              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gonul Kaletunc kaletunc.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5940,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0096915
Kaletunc

Description:  This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Gonul Kaletunc, Department of Food, Agriculture and Biological
              Engineering, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio and a Turkish team led by
              Dr. Faruk Bozoglu, Food Engineering Department, Middle East Technical
              University, Ankara, Turkey.   They plan to investigate the antimicrobial
              effectiveness of High Hydrostatic Pressure (HHP) alone and in combination with
              bacteriocins in bacteriological food liquids such as broth, milk and orange
              juice.  A Gram-positive pathogen, Listeria monocytogenes CA and a Gram-negative
              foodborne pathogen, Salmonella enteridis FDA, and a spoilage bacteria
              Pseudomonas fluorscens FM1 will be used to inoculate milk and orange juice
              products prior to pressure treatment.  The data will provide quantitative
              information on the deactivation kinetics of selected microorganisms as a
              function of pressure and bacteriocin concentration.  Inclusion of the thermal
              and rheological characterization of pressure/bacteriocin treated products and
              their comparison with those of thermally-processed materials will provide
              information on the stability, quality, and consumer acceptability of the
              products in comparison to conventionally used thermal processing.

Scope: 
              This is a relatively new area of basic research with the potential for
              significant industrial application in the food and other industries.  Dr.
              Bozoglu has expertise in food microbiology and has been working on HHP
              application to food preservation.  A graduate student in his laboratory would
              be involved in the project.  Dr. Kaletunc's expertise is in the physical
              characterization of food materials, and her laboratory is equipped with
              especially modern equipment needed for this research.  This proposal meets the
              INT objective of supporting collaborative research by US and foreign scientists
              in areas of mutual benefit.  The Division of Bioengineering and Environmental
              Systems and the Division of International Programs are co-funding this project.
