Title       : Inelastic Electron Tunneling Spectroscopy Studies of Advanced Gate Dielectrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0096762

Award Number: 0096762
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $351507             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tso-Ping Ma t.ma@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project has two related thrusts; the application of Inelastic Electron
              Tunneling Spectroscopy(IETS) to achieve greater understanding and improvement
              of gate oxides, and the materials science of jet vapor deposited(JVD)
              dielectrics. With gate oxides only a few monolayers thick, it becomes
              increasingly difficult for  conventional dielectric characterization tools,
              such as infrared spectroscopy and Raman spectroscopy to reveal structural and
              compositional information accurately. In addition, large gate leakage currents
              also make a number of widely used electrical measurements, such as C-V, G-V,
              and charge-pumping, either extremely difficult or impossible to implement. IETS
              relies on tunneling current to probe the ultra-thin gate dielectric in a
              metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) sandwich and becomes more sensitive when
              the tunneling current increases. Examples of information from IETS include
              phonon modes of the gate electrode, phonon modes of the substrate, various
              vibrational modes of the gate dielectric, bonding structures and impurities in
              the gate dielectric, and traps as well as other electronic defects; all can be
              obtained on a sample volume of less than 10 -9 cc.  Better understanding of the
              interactions between the tunneling electrons and the gate dielectric is
              expected. Information obtained from IETS will be correlated with
              characteristics of CMOS devices made with the same gate dielectrics, with a
              goal toward the optimization of high-k gate dielectrics.
%%% 
The project
              addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with
              high technological relevance. These studies will improve the fundamental
              understanding of gate dielectrics, which are key to advanced silicon-based
              microelectronics. An important feature of the program is the integration of
              research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area. 
*** 

