Title       : Functional Morphology of Aquatic Locomotion in Fishes: Function of Median Fins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a0096221

Award Number: 0096221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George V. Lauder glauder@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1103,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lauder  9807012         The study of how animals move and generate force against
              the  environment has been a topic of interest to biologists for hundreds of 
              years. One key reason for this interest is that it is very difficult to 
              understand how muscles and bones function to cause movement unless one is  able
              to measure the effect of muscle contraction. This appears as force  exerted on
              the environment. However, despite the importance of the ability  to measure
              forces, analysis of the effect of muscle contraction has  remained inferential
              for many moving organisms because of our inability to  directly measure force
              when animals move in air or water. On land, animals  exert force on the ground
              and these forces can be measured directly. But  such direct measurements are
              not possible in fluids, and biologists have  lacked a means of making such
              measurements.       This proposal will apply the results of a technique
              developed  recently by engineers called Digital Particle Image Velocimetry
              (DPIV)  which allows direct quantification of flow in moving fluids and the 
              calculation of the force exerted on the fluid by organisms. This technique 
              will be applied to a classical problem in vertebrate biology: the function  and
              evolution of fins in fishes. Because of the prominence of median fins  in early
              vertebrate fossils, their importance in locomotion, and the  diversity of
              median fin shapes in fishes, the evolution of fins has been  discussed in
              virtually every textbook of comparative anatomy, paleontology,  and functional
              morphology.       This study will use DPIV to visualize directly water velocity
              over  fins of fishes and to calculate the forces that result from movement. The
               PI will use DPIV in conjunction with analysis of three-dimensional fin 
              movements and recordings of the electrical activity generated by fin  muscles
              to test hypotheses about how fishes generate force on the water.  Preliminary
              data for this study are presented which demonstrate feasibility  of applying
              this technique and init ial results show the character of the  data that would
              result from this research.       This proposal will introduce a powerful new
              technique for the  experimental study of aquatic locomotion, and by directly
              quantifying for  the first time flow around and behind fins, this study will
              provide novel  data on mechanisms of aquatic propulsion and contribute to
              clarifying a  classic issue in vertebrate functional morphology.
