Title       : POWRE: Behavior of Minimal Submanifolds with Finite Total Scalar Curvature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2000   
File        : a0096135

Award Number: 0096135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74301              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen E. Moore moore@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will support an extended visit to Stanford University to allow the
              author to continue work on two projects investigating the class of minimal
              submanifolds in Euclidean space that have finite total scalar
curvature. The
              author has made progress on the following question: How many points can be
              omitted by the Gauss image of a complete nonplanar minimally immersed
              hypersurface with finite total scalar curvature? The conjecture is that two is
              the maximum possible number of omitted points. In the case of MxM subset RxRxR,
              two results were previously known. Osserman proved in 1959 that the maximum
              number of omitted points is bounded by three. Jorge and Meeks gave an argument
              in 1983 which implies that the maximum
number of omitted points is bounded by
              two in the case where the surface is embedded. The first project is to complete
              a program developed by the author to prove the conjecture and to show that if
              two points are omitted, then they must be antipodal. Funds from the grant will
              allow the author to continue consulting with
several geometric analysis
              experts at Stanford University.

For the second project, the author will
              begin a collaboration with Rafe Mazzeo of Stanford, to generalize connected-sum
              gluing constructions of Mazzeo and others to give higher-dimensional examples
              of minimally immersed hypersurfaces with finite total scalar curvature. The
              success of such a project would establish
the importance of this class of
              minimal submanifolds, which the author has studied extensively. It would also
              lead the way to other major questions in the area, including an investigation
              of the moduli space problem for various classes of examples. Funds from the
              grant will also support the collaboration necessary for
this project.  This
              POWRE project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary
              Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
