Title       : Synthesis, Reactions, and Applications of Organic "Super" Photoacids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0096941

Award Number: 0096941
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laren M. Tolbert laren.tolbert@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on the synthesis and photochemistry of new super
              photoacids, including their application to biological and photoresist systems.
              Proton transfer represents one of the two most fundamental processes in nature,
              yet techniques for studying the dynamics of this process have relied on
              relatively inefficient, commercially-available materials. This is in contrast
              to electron transfer, which has seen an overwhelming synthetic, mechanistic,
              and dynamic effort. Although many similarities exist between the two, including
              solvent-dependent kinetics rationalized through Marcus theory, photoexcitation
              creates electrochemical driving forces, which are readily rationalized by an
              analysis of oxidation/reduction potentials. The occurrence of proton transfer
              in the excited state presents unique opportunities to study the chemistry and
              dynamics of this fundamental process using ultrafast time-resolved techniques,
              if the electronic structure of the excited state can be understood. This
              project involves the design and synthesis of new substrates that test concepts
              of structure, driving force, and entropy and that allow correlations to be made
              with theory. This approach uses a knowledge of the electronic structure of
              excited-states of acids to design molecules which exhibit enhanced
              excited-state acidity. Some of these, which are termed "super" photoacids, are
              the strongest reversible photoacids known. Synthetic methodologies will be
              developed to achieve molecules whose photoacidity can be tailored thereby
              providing new methods for studies of proton transfer reactions and novel
              polymerization catalysts. The research introduces graduate and postdoctoral
              students to new concepts in acid-base chemistry and kinetics, and to the
              methodologies to examine these transient effects.

With this award, the
              Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the research of Professor
              Laren Tolbert of the School of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Georgia Institute
              of Technology. Professor Tolbert will focus his research efforts on the
              synthesis and excited state chemistry of molecules, called photoacids, whose
              acid-base properties change on optical excitation. These molecules, which can
              exhibit immense, but transient, changes in acid-base properties, provide new
              methods to study acid-base chemistry, and novel approaches to photoactivated,
              polymerization catalysts. Professor Tolbert is expanding his research efforts
              through collaborations with Professors Robert Dickson in his Department,
              Juergen Ruehe of Frieburg University and Menachim Gutman at the University of
              Tel Aviv. Through Professor Tolbert's research, graduate and postdoctoral
              students will be exposed to new concepts in acid-base chemistry, and the
              methodology to examine these transient effects.

