Title       : Nanopore Instrument for Analyzing Single Polymer Molecules in Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2001     
File        : a0096747

Award Number: 0096747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267547             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Deamer DEAMER@CHEMISTRY.UCSC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugh Olsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Haussler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Instruments for characterizing individual atoms and molecules have extensive
              applications in the biological and physical sciences, and play an important
              role in manufacturing techniques for miniature machines and electronic devices.
              With the exception of the light microscope, all such instruments work with
              solid or tethered molecules, and none have the capacity to analyze large
              numbers of single polymer molecules in solution.  Recent work has shown the
              potential for development of instruments with such capability that are based on
              nanometer-sized pores (nanopores) in otherwise impermeable membranes. The
              diameter of the pore permits passage of polymers like DNA, but only one at a
              time. These existing experimental detectors employ artificial lipid membranes
              with pores formed by alpha-hemolysin, a naturally occurring proteinaceous
              toxin. Measurement of the properties of DNA molecules as they transit such
              pores has shown that the length of individual molecules can be determined
              rapidly and reliably.  To date, these experimental instruments have had limited
              use because of the difficulty of preparing the membranes and because of the
              membrane's fragility and short lifetime.   

This award provides support for
              development of a new type of nanoporous membrane that can be used as a robust
              replacement for the alpha-hemolysin membranes.  Several strategies to produce
              the new membranes from mica will be explored, including the use of radiation
              followed by an acid etch.  Mica-based membranes should be exceedingly stable in
              operation.  A successful effort is likely to lead to development of an
              instrument capable of rapid measurement of the length and number of individual
              DNA molecules found in mixed populations, and, potentially, to development of
              an instrument that can perform rapid sequencing of long DNAs without the need
              for chemical or radioactive labeling procedures.



