Title       : High Energy Collisions at Hadron Colliders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0096707

Award Number: 0096707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James J. Whitmore                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2816205            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul D. Grannis grannis@sbhep.physics.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. McCarthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Schamberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roderich Engelmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1221      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL USER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests support for the research program of the high energy
              physics group at SUNY Stony Brook to explore the character of particle
              interactions at the smallest distance scales achievable.  The group proposes to
              exploit the upgraded D0 detector currently beginning Run II at the Fermilab
              Tevatron collider.  In addition, the group requests support for its work on the
              ATLAS detector currently being built for the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC)
              and expected to become operational in 2006.
For several years the main D0
              responsibility of this group has been the liquid-argon calorimeter electronics
              upgrade to accommodate the higher luminosity and shortened inter-bunch time
              interval of the Run II Tevatron collider, and for the first and second hardware
              levels of the trigger, particularly for the preshower and tracking detectors. 
              The group will pursue more incisive triggers on low transverse momentum
              electrons, such as those from J/Y and semileptonic b-quark decay.  The group
              intends to focus its future physics analysis capability on issues of
              electroweak symmetry breaking.  Specifically, they propose to work on the
              search for resonances decaying to b b-bar jets, including the Z boson and the
              hypothesized Higgs particle, as well as make refined measurements of the
              top-quark and W boson masses.
	The ATLAS work of the group will be centered on
              building and commissioning the high voltage feedthrough system for the
              liquid-argon calorimeters, and the design and test of the readout driver system
              used to collect trigger and offline data from the calorimeters.  The group has
              entered the building phase for the high voltage system.  The readout driver
              prototype boards are currently being tested and refined.  During this award
              period, the group expects to bring both of these projects to completion.  They
              also will continue their commitment to education and outreach through
              participation in the QuarkNet program, and several local initiatives related to
              high schools.

