Title       : Empirical Applications of Contract Theory: the Case of Insurance Contracts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0096516

Award Number: 0096516
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169344             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pierre A. Chiappori pchiappo@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
In the last twenty years, contract theory has developed at a rapid pace. But,
              until recently at least, empirical applications have lagged behind. This
              project is aimed at filling this gap. It is based on the view that insurance
              provides a nearly ideal field for empirical work on contracts. Individual
              insurance contracts (automobile, housing, health, life, etc.) are largely
              standardized. The insurer's information is accessible, and can generally be
              summarized through a reasonably small number of quantitative or qualitative
              indicators. The 'performance' - whether it represents the occurrence of an
              accident, its cost, or some level of expenditure - is very precisely recorded
              in the firms' files. Finally, insurance companies frequently use data bases
              containing several millions of contracts, which enables testing of most
              predictions of contract theory in a detailed way, using standard econometric
              tools. Three directions will be investigated. 

The theory has emphasized the
              role of information asymmetries in the design of optimal contracts, and more
              specifically the distinction between adverse selection and moral hazard.
              Adverse selection arises when one party to the contractual relationship - say,
              the subscriber to an insurance contract - has better information than the other
              party - say, the insurer - about some parameters that are relevant for the
              relationship. Moral hazard occurs when the accident probability is not
              exogenous, but depends on some decision (e.g., effort of prevention) that is
              made by the subscriber but cannot be monitored by the insurer.  In general,
              different insurance contracts provide different incentives, hence result in
              different observed accident rates. The empirical distinction between moral
              hazard and adverse selection is crucial, in particular because the implications
              in terms of welfare and regulation are totally different. However, in many
              cases, moral hazard and adverse selection are very difficult to disentangle.
              The first aim of the present project is to show how the empirical distinction
              between moral hazard and adverse selection can be implemented when data
              relative to the dynamics of the relationship are available. 

A second goal
              is to study the structure of insurance pricing in the industry. Given the data
              available, we shall be able to estimate the total risk distribution of each
              insuree, as a function of her characteristics (age, type of car, location,
              etc.). This involves not only the probability of an accident, but also its
              expected severity and the corresponding costs. This regression, in other words,
              should provide a very accurate description of the 'product' sold by the
              insurance company. In a second stage, it can be related to the pricing policy.
              One may check whether the premium charged to a particular consumer only depends
              on her risk, or whether it may for any given level of risk vary with other
              characteristics, such as age, sex, etc. Conclusions can be drawn on the
              industrial organization of the field. 

The third research direction adopts a
              more normative viewpoint. A striking feature of modern biology is the
              increasing ability to identify the genes that either are responsible for or
              tend to create predispositions to various diseases. This possibility will lead
              to a spectacular amelioration of prevention and treatments. However, the
              availability of more precise information on the risk destroys insurance
              possibilities, which is welfare decreasing.  A first task is to obtain a first
              evaluation of the associated welfare loss.  This requires, in particular, an
              evaluation of the benefit provided by insurance coverage. One purpose of the
              study (and a quite difficult one) is to provide an preliminary evaluation of
              this order of magnitude. The most radical solution proposed involves a
              regulation that would strictly prohibit the use of genetic testing by insurance
              companies. Such a proposal however requires a thorough investigation. From an
              economist's point of view, it amounts to introducing a strong adverse selection
              component. Agents will presumably be informed of their risk, at least if (as it
              will probably be the case) individuals have free access to genetic testing. The
              problem, now, is to assess the impact of this asymmetry on the market for
              health or life insurance. This is a crucial issue, if only because the solution
              might well reveal worse than the initial problem. If the final outcome is a
              global collapse of the insurance markets at stake, everybody (including the
              population at risk) will end up in a much worse situation. The last goal of the
              project is only to provide some preliminary elements for assessing the scope
              and 

