Title       : Banach space structures of L^p-spaces and non-commutative Hardy spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0096696

Award Number: 0096696
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93331              (Estimated)
Investigator: Narcisse J. Randrianantoanina randrin@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research will focus on problems concerning  Banach  space 
theory 
              and its connections with operator algebras and operator theory. The main aim of
               this research is the investigation of structures of non-commutative L^p-spaces
              and non-commutative Hardy spaces. The basic permanence question in this
              direction of research  is wether or a given property can be lifted from a given
              function space to its  non-commutative version. One of the questions that  will
              be considered is the classification of non-commutative spaces according to type
               and cotype. Another significant question is whether or not reflexive subspaces
              of preduals of von Neumann  algebras have the fixed  point property. Basic
              Banach space structure of the newly defined script-L^p-spaces and
              several
non-commutative generalizations of Hardy spaces are at the center of
              this 
investigation. Another direction of research  to be considered  is the
              study of  ideals  of  operators on C*-algebras.

This proposal represents
              work of an interdisciplinary nature on 
mathematical analysis. Banach space
              theory, which is the main topic of this proposal,  studies  notions of
              distances on infinite dimensional vector spaces. It provides general  framework
               for several fields of mathematics. The theory of function spaces played a 
              crucial  role in the development  of Banach space theory for several decades.
              The current  project studies a relatively new concepts of non-commutative
              analog of  function spaces  in which  functions are replaced by operators.
              These spaces includes  C*-algebras, preduals of von Neumann algebras among many
              others. C*-algebras turn out to be one of  the most
important structures in
              mathematics. They have significant applications to 
other parts of sciences
              (for examples,  geometry, mathematical physics and quantum mechanics), so it is
              important to consider them from many different point of view. In  this case as
              Banach spaces.






