Title       : Using Intranets in Technical and Institutional Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2001     
File        : a0096169

Award Number: 0096169
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235590             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberta E. Lamb lamb@cba.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               Information infrastructures have historically benefited some individuals and
              organizations more than others. With the emergence of new information and
              communication technologies (ICTs), the convergence of older forms, and the
              federally encouraged expansion of information infrastructures, many worry that
              the distribution of benefits will become more uneven as some organizations
              shape these technologies to serve their specific needs. We do not fully
              understand why some organizations find ICTs useful--even essential--while
              others do not. Researchers have tried to explain this divergence in terms of
              the technical potential of ICTs and task-technology fit. However, new findings
              suggest that external environmental factors and interorganizational
              relationships strongly drive information investments and the use of
              ICTs.

This study will examine empirically how new ICTs come to be shaped and
              deployed the way they are. Specifically, it will focus on characterizing the
              ways in which technical and institutional influences interact to shape the
              intranet implementations of midwest firms in four different industries. A
              unique combination of qualitative methods has been designed to guide the
              research through three phases of data collection and analysis.  The study takes
              a novel approach that could foster a new way of thinking about ICTs.





