Title       : Evolutionary Genomics of Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0096033

Award Number: 0096033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $739216             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Doebley jdoebley@wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Kresovich  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The complete DNA sequence of crop genomes will dramatically change the landscape
              in which plant breeders, biotechnologists, and biologists in general operate.
              Among the wealth of new opportunities will be one to exploit genomic sequence
              data to better utilize naturally occurring variation for agronomically
              important traits in crops. As new genes of biological and agronomic importance
              are determined, we need to identify the amount, distribution and nature of
              functional variation in these genes that exist in the germplasm pools of crop
              species. The proposed research will create the necessary infrastructure to do
              this in maize. These investigators will define where in the maize germplasm
              pool and where in the maize genome useful variation is most apt to be found.
              They will examine nucleotide diversity in a set of candidate genes for
              agronomic traits and test whether specific DNA sequence polymorphisms can be
              associated with variation in the phenotype for these traits. The overall goals
              of this project are to better understand the distribution of genetic diversity
              within the maize genome and to facilitate the identification of polymorphisms
              at the nucleic acid level in candidate genes that control variation at the
              phenotypic level in agronomically and biologically important traits.

The
              project has four components: (1) To examine how diversity is distributed among
              breeding lines, landraces and wild relatives of maize. Genetic diversity in the
              maize germplasm pool will be assayed using microsatellites (simple sequence
              repeats; SSRs). Agronomic trait data for maize germplasm will be organized and
              published. This portion of the project will help to define the degree of
              genetic similarity among maize lines, to estimate the level of genetic
              diversity in different segments of the germplasm pool, and to identify a core
              set of accessions that amply represent diversity in maize. (2) To examine how
              genetic diversity is distributed across the maize genome. Forces such as
              recombination rates, chromosomal position, linkage relationships, past
              selective sweeps, and nucleotide composition can all influence the level of
              nucleotide polymorphism in particular genes such that genes in different
              contexts in the same genome can exhibit vastly different levels of
              polymorphism. These investigators will measure how the above forces have shaped
              diversity across the maize genome. (3) To develop and test methods to associate
              phenotypic variation for specific agronomic traits with sequence variation in
              candidate genes. Association analyses of this type are now being widely used in
              the study of the inheritance of complex diseases in humans. Association
              analyses have yet to see significant use in agronomic research, despite their
              potential to provide more rapid and more specific results than quantitative
              trait locus mapping. (4) Because each of the first three sections involves
              extensive statistical analyses of multilocus genotypic data, the project
              includes a Biostatistics/Informatics Group that will devise new or refine
              existing statistical procedures for the analysis of the data collected. This
              group will also oversee World Wide Web publication of the information
              produced.

