Title       : The Effects of Prior Conduct, Legal Standards, and Investigative Interviews
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0096347

Award Number: 0096347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176628             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Wiener richard_wiener@baruch.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Baruch College
	      One Bernard Baruch Way
	      New York, NY  100105526    646/312-2205

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Workers are more likely to find that social sexual misconduct constitutes sexual
              harassment when the law encourages them to take the perspective of the
              complainant, (i.e., apply the reasonable woman as opposed to the reasonable
              person standard). To explain these findings, we developed a two-stage
              processing model in which workers reach a preliminary harassment judgment based
              upon well-rehearsed and easily retrievable attitude structures, such as hostile
              and benevolent sexism.   In two studies full-time workers will view videotapes
              depicting action sequences in two influential sexual harassment cases. The
              first study manipulates legal standard (reasonable person vs. reasonable woman)
              and the complainant's initial behavior.  Study 2 uses a similar paradigm but
              imposes the reasonable person standard on all participants. However, half the
              participants will expect a scrutinizing interview following the videotapes. We
              predict that those who do not expect an interview will react to their own
              hostile and/or benevolent sexist attitudes triggered by the complainant's
              conduct. However, those who anticipate an interview in which they must explain
              their judgments will correct their initial biases and examine the action
              sequence from an impartial point of view. A successful test of these hypotheses
              would suggest that in reasonable woman jurisdictions, organizations can
              sensitize workers by training them on the subtleties of the law, that is the
              difference between the reasonable woman and person's perspectives. In
              reasonable person jurisdictions, organizations could routinely interview all
              workers involved in or reporting suspicious conduct. 



