Title       : The Role of the Maternal Factors in Ascidian Development andEvolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a0096266

Award Number: 0096266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Billie J. Swalla bjswalla@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  This proposal describes experiments done with ascidian embryos, the simplest
              chordate embryos known. These embryos develop in a very similiar manner to
              other chordate embryos, including humans. The patterns of early cleavage, axis
              formation and gastrulation are well described in ascidians and a number of
              embryological experiments have shown that maternal factors in the egg are
              important in specifying tissues in the larvae. Dr. Swalla's lab has used two
              closely related ascidian species with very different larval phenotypes to
              isolate and characterize maternal factors necessary for normal larval
              development. They have isolated three novel genes that are present in the
              species that has a tailed tadpole larva and are absent in the species that has
              a tailless larva. Two of these genes are likely to be transcription factors
              that bind DNA and turn genes off and on, while the other is likely to be a
              signalling molecule involved in cell-cell communication. The experiments
              described in this proposal will investigate the role these proteins may play in
              development by characterizing the localization of the proteins in the eggs and
              embryos with antibodies and by examining possible protein-protein interactions.
              These results will give  insight into how maternal proteins may be involved in
              developmental processes and cell specification during embryonic development. A
              long term goal of this laboratory is to then find similiar genes in vertebrate
              embryos and see what their role might be in these embryos.
