Title       : Magnetic and Thermodynamic Study of Solid 3He
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0096791

Award Number: 0096791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330300             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Dwight Adams adams@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate magnetic and thermodynamic properties of solid 3H
              near the nuclear ordering transition.  The nuclear magnetism of bulk 3He will
              be studied as a function of pressure and magnetic field.  The magnetic
              properties of a new form of 3He will also be studied.  The new form consists of
              nanoclusters of 3He that have been precipitated in a matrix of 4He.  Surface
              effects may be significant since an appreciable fraction of he 3He is within a
              few layers of the surface.  Ferromagnetism in the high-pressure hcp phase will
              be investigated by measuring the frequency spectrum and the magnetization.  A
              companion study at the Hahn-Meitner Institute Berlin will use neutron
              scattering to characterize the hcp phase, as well as the high magnetic field
              phase of the low pressure, bcc phase.   The critical field for the transition
              from the high-field phase to the disordered paramagnetic phase will be
              investigated through the field-dependence of the melting pressure.  Graduate
              students, undergraduates and postdoctoral associates involved in the project
              will receive training in cutting edge techniques, which prepare them for a
              range of careers in academe, industry, and government.

This project will
              study the magnetic properties of the helium isotope, 3He, at ultra-low
              temperatures, where the nuclei of the atoms interact and order themselves in
              fashion analogous to the way iron atoms couple to form a ferromagnet (though at
              much higher temperature). The study of 3He at ultralow temperatures can shed
              light on fundamental magnetism that may have implications for high temperature
              materials such as iron.  There are several different magnetic and structural
              phases of 3He that occur as a function of pressure and magnetic field.  Nuclear
              magnetic resonance (NMR) and other magnetic techniques will be employed. 
              Another study will look at the magnetic properties of small nanoclusters of 3He
              that can be formed in a matrix of 4He.  These nanoclusters have interesting
              magnetic properties that depend on their small size and on the interaction of
              their surface atoms with the surrounding 4He atoms.  Collaboration with the
              Hahn-Meitner Institute in Berlin will combine neutron scattering with low
              temperature physics techniques to prepare and study the low- and high-pressure
              nuclear magnetic phases of 3He. Graduate students, undergraduates and
              postdoctoral associated involved in the project will receive training in
              cutting edge techniques, which prepare them for a range of careers in academe,
              industry, and government.

