Title       : A Noninvasive MRI-Based Method to Determine Three Dimensional Cartilage
               Deformations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0096436

Award Number: 0096436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308098             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maury L. Hull mlhull@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael H. Buonocore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Articular cartilage is critical to the normal function of human diarthrodial
              joints.  The tissue has unique mechanical and tribological properties which
              allow for daily activities (i.e. locomotion) by providing a nearly frictionless
              and wear-resistant joint surface.  Osteoarthritis is the most common rheumatic
              disease and is associated with various degrees of cartilage degradation.
              Despite the unique function of normal cartilage and the prevalence of
              osteoarthritis, previous studies have not quantified the three-dimensional (3D)
              mechanical deformation of cartilage using noninvasive experimental methods. 
              The lack of such comprehensive information regarding cartilage deformations
              seriously limits our understanding of normal cartilage load-deformation
              behavior and hence our ability to completely describe, accurately diagnose, and
              effectively treat cartilage disorders.  Thus the goal of this research is to
              develop a method to noninvasively determine the 3D deformation of
              cartilage.

To meet this goal, three hypotheses will be tested as follows:
              (1) a noninvasive magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) pulse sequence can be
              designed to directly observe cartilage deformation at high spatial resolution
              of 50 microns, (2) deformation can be measured using the new noninvasive method
              with less than 5% relative error in strain, and (3) 3D cartilage deformation in
              osteoarthritic cartilage samples is altered from deformation in normal
              samples.
 
To test the first hypothesis, tissue deformation will be observed
              using a specific MRI pulse sequence that superimposes a grid pattern on the
              cartilage which can be observed to move with the tissue as it deforms.  To test
              the second hypothesis, the accuracy of the noninvasive method will be
              determined using a MRI-compatible phantom. The 3D finite strain tensor field
              will be computed from high-resolution MRI images from samples of normal and
              osteoarthritic tissues to test the third hypothesis. 

The development of the
              new noninvasive method is motivated by many basic science and clinical research
              questions.  Once the method is proven by testing the above hypotheses, it will
              permit noninvasive investigation of the effects of gender, age, degeneration,
              treatment, repair and healing on cartilage load-deformation.  This research
              represents the foundation of a long-term research program which aims to
              increase our understanding of normal and abnormal 3D cartilage deformations in
              vivo.




		
		









