Title       : Wireless Transmission of Low Bit-Rate Video
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a0096168

Award Number: 0096168
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 15,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $683666             (Estimated)
Investigator: Magda El Zarki elzarki@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Saleem A. Kassam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The goal of this research is the development of enhanced service options  for
              low bit rate video applications to improve their transmission over  packet
              based wireless channels. The encoding process will be studied in  detail to
              better understand the underlying characteristics of the service.  This research
              will draw on expertise gained from previous work in the area  of variable bit
              rate video transmission over ATM based BISDN networks.  Current work will focus
              on the H.263 standard which encompasses a very  complex encoding process that
              incorporates several different options. The  impact of these options on the
              transmission of video data over a packet  based wireless channel has not yet
              been studied extensively. The research  plan involves studying the different
              encoding options and then  investigating network access and error recovery
              schemes for the  transmission of packetized video data.  The orthogonal
              frequency division  multiplexing and multicarrier modulation (OFDM and MCM)
              wireless  transmission schemes and antenna diversity strategy studied are
              interesting  for video applications because of the flexibility with which
              channel  resources may be dynamically allocated for layered video coding 
              transmission.  Nonlinear receiver structures and nonlinear processing for 
              image quality enhancement to combat the effects of interference on video 
              quality will also be studied.  The research project includes the set-up of  a
              wireless testbed that will be housed in both the Signal Processing  Research
              Laboratory and the Video Processing and Telecommunications  Laboratory.  The
              testbed will be used to conduct experiments on indoor  wireless video
              transmission.
