Title       : Geometry and Representations of Reductive Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a0096110

Award Number: 0096110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58855              (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel R. Evens evens.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Evens

Evens will continue his work on the relation between geometry
              and representation theory. In his work with Lu, he will attempt to generalize
              
their previous theorem relating the new field of Poisson geometry to the
              classical 19th century problem of computing intersection multiplicities. 
In
              particular, he hopes to find a Poisson structure to help compute quantum
              cohomology of the flag manifold. In his work with Grojnowski, he 
will
              continue his study of multiplicities of restrictions of representations of real
              semisimple groups, with the goal of solving certain multiplicity 
one
              problems. He will study characteristic cycles for nilpotent orbits and their
              relation to certain problems in representation theory.

The use of symmetry
              in the study of geometrical problems has been one of the great unifying themes
              of modern mathematics.  Ideas based 
on considerations of symmetry have had a
              profound impact on elementary questions in arithmetic and on physics,
              especially to quantum 
mechanics. There are certain topological constructions
              which are analogous to the problem of counting points in a finite set. The
              investigator 
plans to apply these constructions to problems motivated by
              number theory and theoretical physics.

