Title       : CAREER: Phospholipid Tubule and Protein-lipid Self Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0096330

Award Number: 0096330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358501             (Estimated)
Investigator: Britt N. Thomas britt.thomas@chem.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Britt Thomas of the University of Wyoming is supported by the   Experimental
              Physical Chemistry Program to investigate phospholipid   tubule self-assembly
              and phospholipid membrane-protein interactions using   X-ray scattering
              techniques.  The self-assembly studies will explore the   roles played by
              molecular tilt, twist, conformation, and chirality in   tubule formation.  A
              comparative study of various genetically-engineered,   membrane-bound proteins
              will extend the X-ray diffraction techniques used   to elucidate
              characteristics of these more complex systems.  The   education plan of this
              CAREER award involves the creation of an   interdisciplinary teaching program,
              in which two complementary upper   level courses are developed and added to the
              Chemistry and Molecular   Biology Department curricula.  The hallmark of nearly
              all technologically useful biomaterials is the   self-assembly of
              highly-ordered supramolecular structures from simpler   components. 
              Phospholipid membrane structures serve as the stage upon   which some of the
              most important processes of life occur, including many   catalytic reactions,
              protein production and folding, and photosynthesis.    Results from this study
              will be used to improve the understanding of   lipid membrane properties, and
              could subsequently impact the   technological development of membrane-based
              optical switches, molecular   electronics, molecular sieves, and
              chemical/biological sensors.  The   educational component of this award will
              encourage collaboration among   students and faculty in two separate academic
              departments at the   University of Wyoming, by enhancing cross-disciplinary
              teaching and   research efforts.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
