Title       : The Molecular Design of Surface Active Polymers that Create Functional Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a0096314

Award Number: 0096314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 12,  2000      
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey T. Koberstein jk1191@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9810069  Koberstein    The proposes research program constitutes a fundamental
              study of  functional polymer surfaces directed toward the objective of 
              devising new methods for decorating polymer surfaces with  functional groups. 
              The specific approach adopted is the  molecular design and synthesis of surface
              active delivery  vehicles that  carry functional groups to the surface of a 
              polymeric matrix by self assembly processes. Two distinct but  integrated
              research thrusts are pursued:  a core program that  focuses on elucidating the
              equilibrium and dynamic surface  properties of end-functional and
              center-functional homopolymers  as model systems for functional polymer
              surfaces, and a directed  program of studies aimed at developing surface
              delivery vehicles  for decorating biomaterial surfaces.  The comprehensive core
               research involves synthesis of model polymers,theoretical  modeling and
              experimental characterization of functional polymer  surfaces including
              development of a new surface.analysis  technique.  The applied research program
              is focused on decorating  commercial biomaterial surfaces with cell adhesion
              ligands and  growth factors that can induce the formation of bone cells at an 
              implant surface placed in vivo.  %%%  The proposed research describes novel
              methods that allow precise  controlof the chemical functionality at polymer
              surfaces and will  impact a broad range of polymer applications that ranges
              from  adhesives to lubricants and non-stick or release coatings.  Of 
              particular interest to society is the need to create new  biomaterial surfaces
              that are designed to effectively interface  with living tissues.  As the human
              lifespan has continually  increased there has emerged an urgent need for
              synthetic  replacements for damaged or missing tissue.  New methods are 
              described to synthesize the next generation of implantable  biomaterials that
              are not only biocompatible, but are designed to  induce a direct biological
              response such as bone regeneration.  This novel approach to ti ssue engineering
              has the potential to  improve the quality of life of many individuals who are
              in need  of tissueregeneration or repair.  ***
