Title       : Surface Plasmon Resonance Biosensor Data Processing and Analysis Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0096729

Award Number: 0096729
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324196             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Myszka   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the development of improved Data Processing and Analysis
              Software to be used with surface plasmon resonance (SPR) biosensors.  In the
              last 10 years, the use of SPR sensors have become a standard method for
              measuring biomolecular interactions such as those involving antibodies,
              receptors, enzymes, and oligonucleotides.  Many of the instruments that are
              available today are automated and, therefore, capable of generating a wealth of
              information about an interaction.  However, there are currently no automated
              programs available to process biosensor data, and the use of available manual
              evaluation software is tedious and time consuming The goal of this project is
              the development of new software designed to reduce the time required for
              processing biosensor data from hours to seconds, while at the same time,
              significantly improving the quality of data through the use of novel
              referencing techniques. Additional developments are planned that will extend
              the capabilities of biosensors in the area of active concentration
              determination. Specialized error space analysis routines will also be
              incorporated to provide detailed information about the results of biosensor
              analysis. The new software, as well as educational manuals and tutorials, will
              be made freely available through the Internet. Access to this automated data
              processing software will turn the potential of real-time biosensor analysis
              into a reality.

