Title       : Convective Interaction with Large-scale Tropical Dynamics--A Mesoscale Modeling
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a0096195

Award Number: 0096195
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Melinda S. Peng                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 31,  2000   
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264319             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam H. Sobel sobel@appmath.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher S. Bretherton  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Vertical fluxes of momentum due to cumulus convection are a significant but
              poorly understood contributor to atmospheric circulations, particularly in the
              tropics and subtropics.  Reliable observations of cumulus momentum flux are
              scarce.  It is very difficult to judge the accuracy of the widely varying
              parameterizations of cumulus momentum fluxes currently used in different global
              weather and climate models.  Tropical convection also exhibits many types of
              mesoscale organization.  An important issue for parameterization is whether the
              cumulus momentum fluxes can be predicted adequately without knowing the
              mesoscale organization of the convection.

	This project will bolster
              observational knowledge of cumulus momentum fluxes using three extensive and
              complementary new data sets.  Specifically, momentum fluxes will be computed
              (1) as budget residuals in global reanalyses for the TOGA-COARE region, other
              convective regimes, and as zonal averages, (ii) from an extensive set of
              dual-Doppler airborne radar analyses of tropical mesoscale convective systems
              from TOGA-COARE, and (iii) from output from cloud ensemble model simulations of
              tropical convection.  The TOGA-COARE experiment is particularly promising to
              study because the persistent deep convection coupled to the large temporal
              variations in vertical wind shear can be expected to produce large and easily
              detectable changes in the cumulus momentum fluxes.

The goals of the project
              are to quantify the significance of cumulus momentum fluxes on large scale
              transient and mean circulations in the tropics, particularly the intraseasonal
              oscillation, and (ii) to determine the relative importance of the circulations
              in the convective versus stratiform region of mesoscale convective systems in
              producing the momentum fluxes, in a variety of wind shear regimes, and (iii) to
              compare the results to several different parameterizations that have been
              proposed.  

These analyses should help to improve the performance of weather
              and climate models in the tropics.

