Title       : Summer Undergraduate Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0096577

Award Number: 0096577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vasant Waikar waikarvb@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick N. Dowling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Summer Undergraduate Mathematical Science Research Institute (SUMSRI) which
              is funded by the NSF, and the NSA, is designed to prepare participants for the
              rigor of graduate school.  We feel that this
preparation will help
              participants to successfully compete for and complete the graduate school.  The
              Principal Investigators: Vasant Waikarand Patrick Dowling, are professors at
              Miami University in the Department of Mathematics and Statistics.  SUMSRI will
              be housed at Miami U. in Oxford,Ohio.  We are especially interested in, but not
              limited to, African Americans and other underrepresented minorities and women
              in the mathematical sciences.  SUMSRI will provide approximately 15 nationally
              selected, and mathematically talented undergraduate students an intensive
              research experience.  The primary goal of the institute is to convince
              participating students to pursue advanced degrees like a Ph.D. in
              the
mathematical sciences.  We will also encourage participants to attend
              national meetings (for example, the AMS-MAA Winter Meeting,the Conference of
              African American Researchers in the Mathematical
Sciences (CAARMS), SIAM
              meetings, NAM Mathfest, MAA Mathfest, American Statistical Association Meeting,
              Pi Mu Epsilon meetings) and give talks or poster presentations.

The
              institute will run for seven weeks in the summer of 2001.  During these seven
              weeks the students will participate in research seminars in mathematics,
              statistics, or computer science.  At least one colloquium talk will be given
              each week.  We will also have panel discussions on information about graduate 
              school, fellowship sources, and career opportunities in the mathematical
              sciences. The program will also include
a technical writing seminar, a GRE
              preparation workshop, and two short courses in abstract algebra and real
              analysis.  The institute seeks mature students who have completed at least two
              years of undergraduate
mathematics with distinction.  SUMSRI will provide each
              participant with room, board, books, supplies, one round trip ticket, and a
              $2500 stipend.  Minorities and women are strongly encouraged to apply.
