Title       : The New Immigrant Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0096867

Award Number: 0096867
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2160000            (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Smith james_smith@rand.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rand Corporation
	      1700 Main Street
	      Santa Monica, CA  904072138    310/393-0411

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1388,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Immigration has a major impact on American society, but there is a large gap
              between information needs and existing data. The fundamental questions
              concerning the short run and long run prospects for immigrant children and the
              children of immigrants, changes in the health and skill composition of entry
              cohorts of immigrants over time, the transitions between legal and illegal
              statuses, the contributions of immigrants to the economy and their assimilation
              remain unanswered. This project addresses these information needs by conducting
              for the first time, a comprehensive, multi-cohort longitudinal survey of new
              legal immigrants to the United States based on nationally representative
              samples of the administrative records, compiled by the U.S. Immigration and
              Naturalization Service (INS), pertaining to immigrants newly admitted to
              permanent residence. 

The New Immigration Survey is a follow-up to a pilot
              project, which received co-funding from NICHD, NIA, NSF and INS, that has
              attempted to evaluated the cost and feasibility of fielding the full survey
              proposed here.  The results obtained from the pilot project have informed all
              elements of the design for the full New Immigrant Survey.

To monitor changes
              across cohorts, new samples will be drawn periodically.   To monitor adaptation
              over time, each sample will be interviewed at regular intervals over the life
              cycle. To assess the immigrants' legacy, information will also be obtained
              about and from their children, both the immigrant children they brought with
              them and the U.S. citizen children born to them.  The project also puts into
              the public domain public-use databases from these surveys that provide an
              important source of information to assess U.S. immigration laws, the
              assimilation and experiences of immigrants, and the impact of immigration in
              the United States. These data provide prospective and retrospective information
              about pre- and post-immigration education, work, health, migration, marriage,
              and fertility for new immigrants. They also provide useful data on health, on
              economic status, on schooling, and on children's well being from a population
              heterogeneous in English and native languages.

