Title       : Developing and Testing of Bioreactors for Methane Hydrate Biogeochemical Studies
               in the Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0096475

Award Number: 0096475
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $521239             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas H. Bartlett dbartlett@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Miriam Kastner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This technology development project addresses methane hydrates, which represent
              the most abundant hydrocarbon source on Earth. Decades of geochemical studies
              have established the importance of anaerobic methane oxidation (AMO) in methane
              hydrate containing marine sediments, but the organisms responsible for this
              major process in the Carbon cycle have never been isolated; and no pure
              cultures of microbes capable of net AMO have yet been obtained. The project
              entails an interdisciplinary integrated experimental and field program to
              determine the mechanism of AMO by following AMO under controlled
              variable-defined laboratory conditions that provide a thermodynamically
              favorable environment for microbial methane consumption over methane
              production.  In order to create conditions which support AMO, newly designed
              anaerobic high pressure/low temperature bioreactors will be constructed and
              tested. The source of microorganisms inoculated into the bioreactors will come
              from sediment samples with AMO activity. These sediments will be recovered
              under in situ conditions from the Cascadia Margin off the Oregon coast. A
              variety of geochemical assays on the culture medium and the resulting methane
              hydrate will be performed during enrichments in the bioreactor, and the
              biogeochemistry of the environment will be continuously monitored and
              characterized. The bioreactors will provide an experimental platform for future
              analyses of isotopically labeled biogeochemical equilibrium and kinetic
              experiments under well defined controlled conditions.




