Title       : Market Based Mechanisms for Regulating the Environment: How Effective Have They
               Been?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2001  
File        : a0096896

Award Number: 0096896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183796             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Bui ltbui@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Economists' professional preference for markets has been instrumental in the
              move to adopt market-based solutions to the regulation of environmental
              externalities. But the ex ante promise of efficiency compared to command and
              control approaches does not translate automatically into actual gains. As the
              costs of compliance with environmental regulations continue to grow, and we
              increasingly resort to market-based solutions for environmental problems, the
              realized effectiveness of such measures deserves careful study.  This project
              examines a market-based environmental regulation called the Toxics Release
              Inventory (TRI). The TRI has been referred to as "...one of the great
              unintended successes in the recent history of American public policy"' and is
              based on the informal, "information" regulation of manufacturing plants through
              the mandatory public disclosure of their toxic releases. There are no formal
              regulations for toxic releases in this country and since the first year of TRI
              reporting in 1987, TRI reported releases nation wide have fallen by more than
              40%.

The apparent success of the TRI has led to its popularity both amongst
              policymakers and environmentalists. Several states have either adopted or are
              currently considering the adoption of state level community right-to-know laws
              that would expand the level of reporting required by TRI facilities.
              Environmental groups are pressuring Congress to do the same at the federal
              level. This is a somewhat troubling trend as there are several unanswered
              questions about the TRI. For example, nothing is well known about how the TRI
              actually works, or how it affects firm behavior. Given that TRI data are
              self-reported, and published "as is" with users having virtually no ability to
              verify the accuracy of the reports, having a better understanding of the
              effects of TRI regulation on firms is crucial for policy makers to make an
              informed decision regarding the effectiveness of the TRI as a policy
              tool.

To answer some of these questions, this project uses data provided by
              the TRI and links this data to the Pollution Abatement Control Expenditure
              Survey (PACE), the Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM), and the Census of
              Manufactures (CM). This will be the first full linking of these data sets.
              Variation in state level community right-to-know requirements are used to try
              to separate TRI induced responses by firms from other trends.  Attention is
              focused initially on petroleum refineries -one of the most heavily regulated
              industries in the country which showed some of the largest reductions in
              reported TRI releases before expanding the study to include other industries. 
              An events-study methodology is used to look at stock market reactions to TRI
              announcements to determine whether the regulation actually provided new
              information to stockholders. This provides evidence as to whether investors
              believed that the unexpected information on TRI releases could have an effect
              on firm profitability that could influence firm behavior. Then, the
              investigator looks more closely at plant-level responses to the TRI and
              estimates (1) the relationship between reported TRI reductions and pollution
              abatement expenditures to estimate whether reported reductions are related to
              abatement activities of regulated pollutants, and (2) the relationship between
              reported TRI releases and plant level productivity.

