Title       : Probabilistic Mechanisms for Cost Sharing, Rationing, and Queuing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a0096230

Award Number: 0096230
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165273             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herve Moulin moulin@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The celebrated `tragedy of the commons` arises when a certain  technology with
              increasing marginal cost is the common property of  its users. Examples include
              the exploitation of fisheries and other natural resources, as well as queuing
              problems where users want a service and the externalities result from
              congestion. The first theme of this project is to compare, in a very simple 
              model of the tragedy, two natural mechanisms where users have free access to
              the technology (think  of the congestion externalities on the internet where
              entry by new users is not restricted).  In one mechanism, Average Cost, each
              user pay the same average cost; in the other, Random Priority, users are
              randomly ordered ( without bias) and successively given the opportunity to buy
              at the `true` marginal cost.  In the queuing example the AC game correspond to
              the unorganized queue, where the server draws one agent at random in the queue,
              whereas RP corresponds to the organized queue, where each agent receives a
              randomly drawn number and the server follows this ordering.  Both mechanisms,
              AC and RP, lead to inefficient overproduction, but  the question is which one
              leads to a less severe `tragedy`? Preliminary investigations show that RP tends
              to overproduce less, but that which game collects more social  surplus depends
              much on the configuration of the demand (namely the social value of the goods 
              produced). Specifically, a spread-out demand (heterogeneous users) tends to
              slightly favour AC, but a concentrated demand (fairly homogeneous users)
              strongly favors RP; moreover, the more crowded the commons, the more RP
              outperforms AC.  Systematic investigation of these comparisons is
              mathematically difficult, and is pursued both formally and numerically in this
              project.   The second, related, theme of the project is rationing.  A rationing
               problem is an elementary model of distributive justice, where the pie is a
              certain amount of a single commodity and must be divided among a given set of
              beneficiaries.  The beneficiaries differ only in the extent of their
              (numerical) claims (or demands) on the pie. The sum of the claims is larger
              than the pie.  In certain rationing problems, in particular queuing problems,
              the demands and the pie come in indivisible units, and a probabilistic
              allocation method is a natural way to restore equity. Our second model
              formalizes probabilistic rationing, assuming that the pie and the claims are
              deterministic and integer valued. We determine which probabilistic method is
              the natural counterpart of the familiar proportional rationing method.  All the
              usual axioms that  are the key to the critical comparison of deterministic
              rationing methods can be easily adapted in the probabilistic model: the axioms
              of Consistency and Distributivity appear most promising among these. If
              rationing models are helpful to discuss some aspects of actual queuing
              algorithms, they fail to capture an essential ingredient of queuing, namely the
              order of arrival in the queue. For instance, two of the most common algorithms,
              FiFO=first in, first out, and FiLO=first in, last out, are predicated on this
              information. Our third model formalizes an abstract queuing algorithm and will
              use axioms inspired from the rationing literature to single out important
              algorithms such as FiFO and FiLO. Again, Consistency and Distributivity will
              play a leading role. A probabilistic version of queuing is explored as well. 
              It allows us to discuss, by the axiomatic methodology, the actual algorithms
              used on the Internet and in other networks.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
