Title       : An Effective Framework for Realizing Derivation Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2002    
File        : a0096322

Award Number: 0096322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gopalan Nadathur gopalan@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9251,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9803849  Many reasoning and specification tasks require the analysis of 
              logically complex syntactic objects. Such tasks arise, for  instance, in using
              typing systems, in describing and prototyping  programming languages, in
              effecting program transformations, in  demonstrating program correctness, in
              realizing theorem provers,  in describing the semantics of natural languages
              and in  constructing corresponding parsers for them.  A satisfactory  framework
              for performing such tasks is obtained from using lambda-  terms to represent
              the objects that are of interest and a  constructive logic to describe their
              properties. This research  addresses questions of implementation and use of
              lambda  Prolog, a programming language that provides such a framework.  The
              starting point for this work is an implementation of lambda  Prolog that
              embodies the first serious attempt to realize many of  its new features in an
              efficient manner. Using this system, the  project conducts an extensive
              empirical study of the impact on  efficiency of choices in the representation
              of lambda terms and  in the compilation of unification and other operations on
              these  terms. Refinements to the structure of lambda terms and to other 
              language features are considered towards understanding the  tradeoffs between
              efficiency and expressiveness. Issues relevant  to constructing a flexible
              programming system around the language  are studied. Finally, the strength of
              the programming system and  of the methods supported by it are tested by
              employing them to  implement a compiler for lambda Prolog.***
