Title       : Characterization of Dissolved Organic Matter in Seawater by Ultrafiltration and
               Chemical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1999   
File        : a0096082

Award Number: 0096082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8199               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald Benner benner@biol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9413843  BENNER           Research on the sources and reactions of dissolved
              organic  matter (DOM) in seawater will focus primarily on the 20-30% of  total
              dissolved organic matter which can be gently isolated in  relatively large
              amounts by tangential-flow ultrafiltration.  The  three central objectives of
              research are:     1.   To identify the biological sources and transformations
              of the       major DOM components.    2.   To elucidate compositional trends
              among DOM constituents of       different size.    3.   To characterize in
              detail the compositions and associations of       the various organic materials
              comprising seawater DOM.         Research to determine the biological and
              diagenetic origins of  DOM will emphasis rapid processes occurring in the upper
              column  where large differences in DOM concentrations and compositions are 
              observed.  A better understanding of compositional trends among  dissolved
              organic materials of different size will help to  delineate processes affecting
              DOM cycling and to judge how  representative ultrafiltered isolates are of bulk
              DOM. More  detailed characterizations of the compositions and forms of 
              ultrafiltered DOM will aid in distinguishing its biological  sources,
              identifying key transformations, and deconvoluting  functional relationships
              among DOM constituents. This line of  research has already provided new
              insights on both the reactive and  refractory components of the immense
              seawater DOM pool and should  continue to yield information useful over a wide
              range of  oceanographic studies.
