Title       : US - Kenya Dissertation Enhancement: Maasai Settlement, Landscape Mosaics, and
               the Spatial Patterning of Vegetation and Wildlife in East African Savannas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a0096706

Award Number: 0096706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Coughenour mikec@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 5991,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0096706
Coughenour

This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US
              graduate student, Mr. Jeffrey Worden, working under the guidance of Professor
              Michael Coughenour, with the Natural Resource Ecology Laboratory at Colorado
              State University, to conduct a study in the Kajiado District of  Kenya on the
              human-wildlife-vegetation interactions in an East African savanna.

Much of
              Kenya's wildlife lives outside the official Maasailand conservation areas, and
              as a result  it is inextricably linked to the Maasai pastoral herding patterns.
               But the Maasai's escalating use of land for pastoral purposes has resulted in
              a decline in both livestock and wildlife populations during the last 30 years. 
              Worden hypothesizes that: 1) changes in Maasai settlements and escalating
              pastoral land use will show evidence of the process of sedentarization, which
              segregates areas of high intensity near populated areas from areas of
              intermediate and low usage; 2) the highest levels of vegetative complexity and
              heterogeneity will exist in intermediate areas of moderate pastoral land use;
              and 3) that wildlife density and diversity will be highest in the intermediate
              pastoral land usage areas.  The study will be conducted in the Kajiado
              District, an area of East Africa that is noted for having a large amount of
              biological diversity as well as containing the cultural heritage of the Maasai.
               Three regional locations in unprotected areas of the Kajiado District will be
              examined using aerial imagery, field surveys, and local interviews.  The
              collected data will be analyzed at multiple scales (local, landscape, and
              regional) to examine the overall hypothesis that vegetation diversity and
              landscape heterogeneity should be greater in areas of intermediate use by human
              populations. The results are expected to identify the impact that changing
              patterns of pastoral land use have on vegetation resources, as well as how the
              vegetation changes affect wildlife populations.  Dr. Robin Reid and other
              researchers at the International Livestock Research Institute will provide
              guidance on this project to Mr. Worden.  

The results are expected to
              increase the current knowledge about landscape ecology and human-environment
              interactions of savanna and pastoral ecosytems, and should be of value to
              ecologists, social scientists, and resource managers.  This project will also
              support an international research experience very early in the career of an
              outstanding graduate student.  This project is being jointly funded by the
              Division of International Programs and the Division of Environmental
              Biology.


