Title       : Social Support and Caregiving Processes in Close Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0096506

Award Number: 0096506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287006             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Collins ncollins@psych.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              When people are faced with stressful or threatening events, they often turn to
              close others for comfort, assistance, and support. A large body of research
              indicates that receiving social support, or feeling confident that it will be
              available when needed, helps people to cope more effectively with stressful
              life events and has long-term benefits for health and psychological well-being.
              However, although the links between social support and important personal
              outcomes are now well-documented, researchers know surprisingly little about
              the specific ways in which social support processes are carried out in close
              relationships, or about the role that social support plays in the development
              and maintenance of those relationships. The primary goal of this research is to
              address this critical gap in the literature by studying social support as an
              interpersonal process within adult intimate relationships. To accomplish this
              goal, a series of laboratory studies will examine how partners behave when one
              member of the couple is undergoing a stressful laboratory experience. Using a
              variety of research methods, the cognitive, emotional, and behavioral responses
              of both members of the couple will be examined under a number of different
              laboratory conditions. In doing so, this research will explore a variety of
              factors that may explain why some people are more effective support-seekers and
              more responsive support-providers. These factors include personality factors
              (e.g., attachment style, communal orientation), relationship characteristics
              (e.g., closeness, commitment), and situational variables (e.g., feelings of
              empathy, perceptions of partner need). Finally, the links between supportive
              social interactions (as observed in the laboratory) and personal well-being
              (e.g., depression, health symptoms) and relationship functioning (e.g.,
              satisfaction, trust) will be examined over time. The broad goals of this
              research are to gain a better understanding of the processes underlying
              effective support-seeking and care-giving behavior in close relationships, and
              to develop a more comprehensive theoretical model to explain these processes.
              By understanding the specific factors that enhance or inhibit effective social
              support processes, we will have a better set of tools for identifying
              individuals (and couples) who are at risk for poor outcomes, and a stronger
              theoretical and empirical basis for developing interventions aimed at improving
              care giving processes in couples, and thereby promoting health and
              well-being.

