Title       : Moment Frame Connections Revisited: A Fundamental Fracture Mechanics Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0096192

Award Number: 0096192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196839             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wai-Fah Chen chenwf@wiliki.eng.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                9703864  Chen  The 6.8 magnitude earthquake that shook California's San 
              Fernando Valley on January 17th in 1994, did not cause the  collapse of any
              steel structures but connections,  confidently designed and constructed in the
              past with  traditional code simplifications and common site-welding 
              techniques, were discovered no to meet our expectations.    This project will
              study the performance of structures  depends on the performance of connections.
               This will be  accomplished by analyzing the fracture strength and  toughness
              of the moment connection.  The load effect as  determined by a structure's
              global response, and its  performance as controlled by local material
              properties and  geometric configuration will be considered.  The interaction 
              and relative importance of horizontal and vertical seismic  forces will be
              evaluated.  The effect of composite action  (concrete floor-slab on steel
              girder) and panel zone  deformation will be included.  Locally, a detailed
              nonlinear  finite element model will provide the stress state  information
              needed to perform a fracture analysis.  The  fracture strength of the moment
              connection will consider the  effect of reduced toughness in the heat treated
              region; line  and semi-elliptic cracks will be used to simulate weld  flaws;
              stress intensity factors at these locations will  quantify the effect these
              weaknesses have on the ultimate  strength of the joint.    It has been
              recognized that the best means to describe the  strength performance of
              structural members, must now be  followed by a similar "back to the basics"
              approach to  connection design.  Fracture mechanics is proposed to  provide
              that foundation: empirical relationships based upon  theoretical analyses will
              be presented to estimate the  ultimate strength resistance of moment
              connections to  seismic loads and brittle fracture  ***
