Title       : STS and the Liberal Arts: A Workshop on Undergraduate Education -- October
               28-29, 2001, Cambridge, MA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0096514

Award Number: 0096514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheila S. Jasanoff   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wesley M. Shrum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : 4S
	      Dept. of Sociology
	      Baton Rouge, LA  708035411    225/388-5311

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract:  SES 00-96514
Sheila Jasanoff
STS and the Liberal Arts: A
              Workshop on Undergraduate Education

This project involves a one-day workshop
              to introduce the field of Science and Technology Studies (STS) to deans and
              other academic administrators from a nationwide selection of four-year colleges
              and research universities and to promote wider discussion of the field's
              possible contributions to undergraduate education.  The venue is Cambridge, MA,
              October 28-29, 2001 in conjunction with the Annual Meeting of the Society for
              Social Studies of Science (4S).   With STS education growing in recent years,
              this is an especially opportune time for an international professional society
              such as 4S to contribute proactively to this process. Speakers include leading
              STS scholars and teachers from the US and Europe, as well as administrators who
              have experience with STS programs at their campuses.  

The workshop is
              designed to address three specific goals. The first is informational. The
              meeting should disseminate knowledge and experiences about the disciplinary
              content of STS and the design of successful undergraduate programs to a wider
              cross-section of the educational community. The second is intellectual. The
              workshop promotes reflection by both scholars and administrators on the
              unifying characteristics of STS, its relationship with more traditional
              disciplines, the connections between teaching and research, and the positive
              roles that STS can play in fostering engaged and informed citizenship in
              technological societies. The third is network-building. A number of the
              participants at the workshop will not previously have encountered STS in
              systematic or programmatic forms. Meeting core figures in the field, and
              perhaps experiencing parts of the preceding annual meeting, should put them in
              touch with people and resources if they wish to engage in follow-up activities.
              

