Title       : The Co-evolution of Organizations and Careers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a0096016

Award Number: 0096016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Heather A. Haveman hah15@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a study of the co-evolution of organizations and careers in the American
              magazine industry before the Civil War.  The modern era has been dominated by
              formal organizations, which have considerable power to determine the lives of
              individuals. But at the same time, these formal organizational comprise their
              individual members; hence, organizational members can collectively shape
              organizations. For decades, sociologists have pondered the question of how
              formal organizations affect their employees and how, in turn, employees
              influence organizations. This project will augment our knowledge of
              organization-employee relations by using the empirical case of the magazine
              industry to answer two basic questions: (1) How do individual employees
              contribute to organizational resources that, in turn, improve organizational
              activities, performance, and ultimately organizational survival chances? (2)
              How do the changing structures of industries and their constituent
              organizations alter the career paths of industry employees? Answering these
              questions will fill gaps in both organizational theory and the literature on
              careers.     First, this project will develop and test a theory of how the
              resources accruing to individuals from their human and social capital combine
              to affect the capabilities and thus the fates of entire organizations. Second,
              it will expand our knowledge of how organizational dynamics - organizational
              founding, growth, change, and failure - create and destroy jobs wholesale and
              so radically alter the opportunity structures facing individuals.    To test
              relationships concerning the co-evolution of organizations and employees'
              careers, this project will collect and analyze data on the magazine-publishing
              industry and its employees from its inception in 1741 to the Civil War.  Data
              will be drawn from publicly-available archives in the Library of Congress, the
              New York City Public Library, and various university libraries, to create three
              longitudinal data bases, one each for magazine-publ ishing companies,
              magazines, and magazine-industry employees. A variety of econometric techniques
              - event-history analysis, event-count analysis, and pooled time-series
              regression - will be used to analyze the dynamics of magazine-publishing
              organizations and their employees. These quantitative data and analyses will be
              supplemented with a systematic qualitative analysis of the abundant historical
              data sources.    In addition to answering key questions about reciprocal and
              dynamic relations between organizations and employees, this project will shed
              light on how industry-level change affects the structure of opportunity. By
              focusing on the early magazine industry in America, it will examine how
              economic and technological revolutions that transformed the face of publishing
              reconfigured the pathways to upward mobility for generations of Americans. 
              From this study of the American past will come insights about the relationship
              between organizations and individuals, and between social capital and human
              capital, that will strengthen our understanding of the policy choices we face
              today in the areas of organizations and occupational careers.
