Title       : Molecular Approaches to Investigating and Developing Polymers, Organogels, and
               Ionic Liquids through Photochemistry, Photophysics, and Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0096405

Award Number: 0096405
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $434200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Weiss weissr@gusun.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this renewal award the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              supports the work of Dr. Richard G. Weiss of the Department of Chemistry at
              Georgetown University in Washington, D.C.   The work involves a broad program
              of research in the area of liquid crystals, organogels, and polymers, including
              the use of phosphonium salts for carrying out selective photochemical reactions
              and as NMR solvents, the study of the photo-Fries reaction of optically active
              substrates in polymer matrices, the use of polymer films as reaction media for
              promoting diastereoselective photoreactions, intramolecular photocyclizations,
              the preparation of high energy intermediates, and the use of high energy
              particles to induce selective chemical reactions normally caused by photons.  
              A variety of experimental techniques will be used, including single-crystal and
              powder x-ray diffraction, differential scanning calorimetry, polarizing optical
              microscopy, static fluorescence and phosphorescence, time-correlated single
              photon counting, and dipolar nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.

Dr.
              Weiss' work covers a variety of subjects at the interface of organic chemistry
              and materials science, with the unifying theme of static and dynamic molecular
              interactions in anisotropic environments, i.e. in environments where the
              material has different properties in different directions, such as in an
              oriented liquid crystal or a stretched polyethylene film.   The new devices and
              materials which might result include sensors, membranes which separate
              molecules on the basis of size and shape, and ordered ionic liquids that may be
              useful as 'green solvents' for selective organic reactions, or permit 3D
              structures of solutes to be determined by nuclear magnetic resonance
              spectroscopy.   The work is expected to provide excellent training for the
              students, each one of whom is assigned a research project rather than a
              technique, and who may participate in a number of international collaborations.
