Title       : Molecular Mechanisms of Chloroplast Division in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a0096223

Award Number: 0096223
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 31,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $351879             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine W. Osteryoung osteryou@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604412  Osteryoung    Technical abstract:  Organelle replication is critical
              for growth and development in all eukaryotes.  However, very little is known
              about the molecular mechanisms by which organelles divide or how their numbers
              are controlled.  Dr. Osteryoung has identified a cDNA from Arabidopsis
              thaliana, designated cpFtsZ, that may play a central role in the division of
              chloroplasts.  This nuclear gene encodes a chloroplast-localized homologue of
              the bacterial protein  FtsZ.  FtsZ is a key structural component of the
              bacterial cell division machinery that assembles to form a ring-like structure
              at the division site during bacterial cytokinesis.  Discovery of eukaryotic
              cpFtsZ suggests that division mechanisms in organelles and prokaryotes are
              similar, and for the first time opens the door to a molecular dissection of the
              organelle division process in eukaryotes.  The goal of this project is to begin
              a detailed analysis of the role of cpFtsZ in chloroplast division, using
              Arabidopsis thaliana as a model system.  To test the hypothesis that cpFtsZ is
              important for chloroplast division, transgenic plants will be generated with
              enhanced or reduced expression of cpFtsZ, and the effect of such genetic
              manipulations on chloroplast number will be assessed.   The question of whether
              the cpFtsZ gene maps to and/or complements any of the known mutations in
              Arabidopsis that affect chloroplast division will be addressed.  The
              localization of the cpFtsZ protein within the chloroplast will be investigated
              in dividing and non-dividing chloroplasts.  The relationship between cpFtsZ
              expression and chloroplast division will be examined by analyzing the spatial
              and temporal patterns of cpFtsZ expression in relation to patterns of
              chloroplast division.  Because preliminary data suggest that there are multiple
              FtsZ homologues in Arabidopsis, additional FtsZ related genes will be isolated
              and the subcellular localization of their gene products will be established. 
              Additional plastid-localized FtsZ homologues , if extant, would suggest the
              possibility of differential regulation in different cell types or of functional
              heterogeneity among related proteins.  The longer-term goal of this project is
              to develop a comprehensive model describing the biochemical and molecular
              processes that govern chloroplast division in higher plants.    Lay-language
              abstract:   In plants, the chloroplast is the key subcellular organelle that is
              responsible for photosynthesis, the process that converts sunlight energy to a
              form of chemical energy, i.e.,  through photochemical conversion of carbon
              dioxide plus water to sugar.  This fundamental life process is what enables
              much of life (plants and animals) as we know it to exist on earth. Chloroplasts
              are generally regarded as having evolved from free-living bacteria that entered
              into a close symbiotic (endosymbiotic) relationship with other cells.  Although
              most of the components of the chloroplasts are made of gene products encoded by
              the plant cell's nuclear genes, chloroplasts are nonetheless semi-autonomous,
              in that they have their own genes and protein synthetic machinery, and they
              increase in number by a process of division much like cell division.  When
              plant cells divide, as they must as the plant grows and develops, it is
              critical that the chloroplasts also divide so that they can be distributed
              among the progeny cells.  How this occurs is as yet a mystery.  Dr. Osteryoung
              has discovered a gene in plants that is homologous to a gene that plays a key
              role in bacterial cell division.  She hypothesizes that this protein functions
              in chloroplast division in a manner similar to how it functions in bacterial
              cell division.  The goal of this project is to test this hypothesis.  The
              results of this research are expected to advance our understanding of how
              chloroplasts divide in order to be properly distributed among the various cells
              of a growing and developing plant.    ***
