Title       : Microvoltammetric Electrodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0096837

Award Number: 0096837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $692000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Mark Wightman rmw@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Mark Wightman of the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill is
              supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program for his research on
              microvoltammetric electrodes.  The project entails numerous applications of
              microvoltammetry utilizing electrogenerated chemiluminescence (ECL).  ECL of
              molecules used in organic LEDs will be studied to develop an understanding of
              the mechanisms of light production from recombinant processes, and to
              investigate the role of inorganic and organic dopants in these processes. 
              Stochastic approaches will be used to gain insight into ECL mechanisms in
              aqueous solution.  The ECL reaction between tris(bipyridyl)ruthenium(II) and
              tripropylamine will be studied and then augmented with studies of reactions
              between the ruthenium species and amino acids.  ECL at microelectrodes will be
              used as a source for near-field optical microscopy imaging.  The PI will
              fabricate thin layer cells to produce very bright ECL light sources.  In
              addition, ECL will be used in detection schemes for chemical analysis.
              

Light emitted when current is run through an electrode offers many possible
              applications in analytical chemistry.  The funded work will explore the
              mechanism of light production and many potential uses of this light in
              detection of species in solution and in biological tissue and other matrices. 
              Applications in biology and materials science are likely to result.


