Title       : Calibration and Reconstruction of Past Temperature Changes from Glacial Varved
               Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a0096751

Award Number: 0096751
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106886             (Estimated)
Investigator: Konrad A. Hughen khughen@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Hughen
OPP-0096751

Donard Lake, Baffin Island, contains annually
              laminated sediments produced by the summer melting of the Caribou Glacier,
              which currently dominates its catchment.  Donard Lake laminated sediments are
              classic glacio-lacustrine varves and contain a record of summer temperature
              variations, potentially as far back as 5,000 years before present.  Previous
              efforts to calibrate Donard Lake varve thickness using a single core showed a
              correlation of varve thickness to temperature (r=0.57), but also a large amount
              of unexplained variance.  The correlation was greatly improved when both
              temperature and varve thickness data were smoothed into three-year averages
              (r=0.82), suggesting that the low correlation for annual data was caused by
              error and random noise contained in the single-core varve chronology.  Research
              on varved sediments in other Arctic lakes has shown that averaging together
              measurements from multiple cores is necessary for accurate calibration studies,
              to eliminate errors in the annual chronology and to reduce noise from random
              variability contained within individual cores.  Detailed calibration data sets
              are critical to improving the utility of laminated sediments records as
              paleotemperature proxies, both for accurate quantitative reconstructions of the
              magnitude of temperature change at individual locations, as well as for the
              development of integrated spatial networks of paleoclimate records throughout
              the Arctic.
The Principal Investigator will use a suite of five new sediment
              cores, retrieved with the sediment-water interfaces intact, to construct a
              high-quality, multiple-core varve chronology for Donard Lake.  Cross
              correlation of the multiple cores will provide a precise layer-count chronology
              for confirmation of annual deposition using a combination of independent dating
              methods, including 137 Cs and 210Pb.  The cross-correlated chronology will also
              allow averaging of each year's varve thickness measurements between several
              cores, providing a lake-wide varve thickness record that is much less
              influenced by random noise from individual cores.  This varve thickness record
              will be calibrated to summer temperature using monthly instrumental
              meteorological data from nearby Cape Dyer, resulting in precise and accurate
              temperature calibration relationships for Donard Lake varves.  The
              meteorological data will also be used to investigate the possible influence of
              precipitation on varve thickness.  The multiple-core varve chronology used to
              calibrate varve thickness to temperature will be extended back in the new cores
              for approximately 500 years.  This new, 500-year record of temperature change
              in the eastern Canadian Arctic will provide important quantification of the
              precise magnitude of warming at the end of the Little Ice Age, and will help
              efforts to discriminate between natural and anthropogenic forcing of global
              climate change.  In addition, the annual nature of the paleotemperature record
              will also allow precise determination of variance and rates of change during
              the past five centuries and place recent climatic changes into a longer-term
              perspective of natural
              variability.

















ABSTRACT
Hughen
OPP-0096751

Donard Lake, Baffin Island, contains annually laminated sediments produced by the summer melting of the Caribou Glacier, which currently dominates its catchment.  Donard Lake laminated sediments are classic glacio-lacustrine varves and contain a record of summer temperature variations, potentially as far back as 5,000 years before present.  Previous efforts to calibrate Donard Lake varve thickness using a single core showed a correlation of varve thickness to temperature (r=0.57), but also a large amount of unexplained variance.  The correlation was greatly improved when both temperature and varve thickness data were smoothed into three-year averages (r=0.82), suggesting that the low correlation for annual data was caused by error and random noise contained in the single-core varve chronology.  Research on varved sediments in other Arctic lakes has shown that averaging together measurements from multiple cores is necessary for accurate calibration studies, to eliminate errors in the annual chronology and to reduce noise from random variability contained within individual cores.  Detailed calibration data sets are critical to improving the utility of laminated sediments records as paleotemperature proxies, both for accurate quantitative reconstructions of the magnitude of temperature change at individual locations, as well as for the development of integrated spatial networks of paleoclimate records throughout the Arctic.
The Principal Investigator will use a suite of five new sediment cores, retrieved with the sediment-water interfaces intact, to construct a high-quality, multiple-core varve chronology for Donard Lake.  Cross correlation of the multiple cores will provide a precise layer-count chronology for confirmation of annual deposition using a combination of independent dating methods, including 137 Cs and 210Pb.  The cross-correlated chronology will also allow averaging of each year's varve thickness measurements between several cores, providing a lake-wide varve thickness record that is much less influenced by random noise from individual cores.  This varve thickness record will be calibrated to summer temperature using monthly instrumental meteorological data from nearby Cape Dyer, resulting in precise and accurate temperature calibration relationships for Donard Lake varves.  The meteorological data will also be used to investigate the possible influence of precipitation on varve thickness.  The multiple-core varve chronology used to calibrate varve thickness to temperature will be extended back in the new cores for approximately 500 years.  This new, 500-year record of temperature change in the eastern Canadian Arctic will provide important quantification of the precise magnitude of warming at the end of the Little Ice Age, and will help efforts to discriminate between natural and anthropogenic forcing of global climate change.  In addition, the annual nature of the paleotemperature record will also allow precise determination of variance and rates of change during the past five centuries and place recent climatic changes into a longer-term perspective of natural variability.


















