Title       : SGER: Developing Phidippus Audax (Araneae, Salticidae) as a Model Organism for
               the Study of Spatial Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0096686

Award Number: 0096686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth M. Jakob ejakob@psych.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Many animals benefit by learning about the spatial location of food, refuges, or
              other resources. A small set of species has been studied in depth, and it is
              clear that there is tremendous variation across species both in the extent of
              their abilities and how they gather and use spatial information. This variation
              suggests that examining a wider variety of taxa would be valuable. The goal of
              this project is to establish jumping spiders, in particular Phidippus audax, as
              a tool for the study of spatial navigation and learning. These spiders hunt for
              prey during the day and return repeatedly to silken nests at night, a simple
              spatial task. They can be studied in the laboratory and field, and rely heavily
              on visual cues, which are easy to manipulate experimentally. 

In this
              project, two aspects of spatial navigation will be examined. (1) In idiothetic
              orientation, an animal keeps track of its distance and direction as it travels,
              much as a ship at sea does; animals that use this method can move away from
              their nest in a circuitous path, but then return in a straight line. Field
              observations of jumping spider behavior by other researchers suggest that they
              may be using idiothetic orientation, but data are few. In this project, we will
              conduct observational field studies of spider behavior to determine whether
              their behavior is consistent with idiothetic orientation. We will also conduct
              controlled laboratory tests of whether spiders use idiothetic navigation to
              return to prey. (2) Animals also use landmarks, or environmental cues that
              signal the location of a goal. Tests in the field in which landmark placement
              is manipulated will be used to assess whether jumping spiders use them to find
              their nests or return to places where they have captured prey. In the
              laboratory, manipulative experiments will provide more information about
              exactly how spiders incorporate information from landmarks, including whether
              they favor close versus far landmarks, whether and how information about
              landmark size is used, and whether and how information about the relationship
              between two landmarks is used. Taken together, these observations and
              experiments will establish jumping spiders as a new model system for the study
              of spatial learning.

