Title       : CAREER: Contracts and Incentive Schemes for Coordinating Production and Sales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a0096259

Award Number: 0096259
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sandra L. Schneider                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen L. Donohue kdonohue@csom.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Contracts and Incentive Schemes for Coordinating Production and Sales  The
              purpose of this project is to develop a comprehensive set of incentive and
              contractual schemes to coordinate forecasting, sales, and manufacturing efforts
              in industries characterized by uncertain demand, short product life cycles, and
              long production lead times.  Recent market trends favoring increased product
              variety and virtually zero customer lead times have escalated the need for
              coordination in fashion industries such as apparel, personal computers, and new
              title publishing.  The benefits of coordination are numerous.  Coordinating a
              firm's sales targets to reflect the actual capabilities of its manufacturing
              facilities helps avoid unfilled orders and wasted sales efforts.  Coordinating
              production to match the arrival of early demand information from customers
              reduces costs by eliminating excess inventory and wasted production efforts. 
              The obstacles to coordination also are numerous.  Most conflicts stem from a
              disagreement over the timing and quantity of products produced.  Manufacturing
              may complain that sales sets unrealistic production goals or deviates from
              forecast, leaving them with excess inventory or   scrambling to meet unplanned
              orders.  Sales may complain that manufacturing is unresponsive to customers
              needs and produces too little, too late.  This project examines the source of
              these conflicts and develops a series of normative models to realign the
              behavior of manufacturing and sales organizations. The project consists of four
              integrated components:  (1) an empirical investigation of how coordination
              within and between firms differs in selected industries plagued by uncertain
              demand, short product life cycles, and long production lead times, (2) an
              analytical study of internal incentive schemes which avoid problems of moral
              hazard and promote optimal profit for the firm, (3) an analytical study of
              external supplier contracts which encourage risk sharing and promote optimal
              profit for the channel, and (4) a simulation study which integrates results of
              the two analytical studies by testing the behavior of various incentive schemes
              across multiple echelons of a supply chain.  The project's educational goals
              follow in the spirit of improving coordination efforts between sales and
              production.  Currently, industry demand is at an all time high for
              undergraduate students with expertise in information technology and decision
              analysis tools such as simulation, math programming, risk assessment, and
              process analysis.  The `production` of such students has not risen to meet this
              demand.  My primary educational goal is to build-up our department's
              undergraduate program so enrollments are more in line with this exciting demand
              trend.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
