Title       : Information Hiding, Tracing and Watermarking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a0096247

Award Number: 0096247
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yvo G. Desmedt desmedt@cs.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              With the introduction of multimedia, documents as pictures, sound recordings,
              books, etc. are becoming electronic.  Copyrighting electronic media is a
              pressing matter, since digital data can easily be copied.  It can be achieved
              by introducing a (digital) watermark to the original document.  Several
              watermarking schemes have unfortunately been broken.  A fundamental question is
              how to achieve truly secure watermarks.  One should take into account that the
              watermark should not degrade the quality of the original.  However, if the
              watermark can be removed, one can make illegal copies.  To solve this problem,
              the watermark is hidden.  A hidden document may be abused by spies for covert
              communication, which one should prevent as much as possible.  Watermarks can
              also be used to enhance confidentiality of such documents as commercial digital
              blue prints.  In such applications law enforcement wants to trace a receiver of
              the document who leaked or fold the document to the competition.

This
              research focuses primarily on:
1.  whether watermarks can be designed using
              only low-bandwidth covert channels,
2.  how to generate from the original,
              modified copies that are computationally indistinguishable from the original
              one (current research on indistinguishability has mainly focused on producing
              data which is indistinguishable from a uniform random source),
3.  how to make
              watermarks that can be verified without the use of a computer (a jury nowadays
              must trust an insecure computer),
4.  how to improve tracing algorithms that
              allow to identify (some of) those involved in the illegal distribution (or
              leakage) of a document.

