Title       : Web Based Robotics: Supporting Wide Area Educational Access to Autonomous Mobile
               Robot
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0096311

Award Number: 0096311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew P. Bernat                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74816              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Gallagher jgallagh@cs.wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31)

In recent years, courses in the design and programming
              of mobile autonomous robots have become popular at technical institutions. 
              These activities offer students experience in a number of practical areas,
              including electrical circuit analysis, computer programming, project
              management, and technical writing.  This proof-of-concept project overcomes the
              previous limited availability of such opportunities, particularly in
              under-resourced urban areas, by providing wide access to those experiences.  It
              is developing a complete autonomous robots course to be delivered over the
              World Wide Web through the State University of New York Learning Network. 
              Students are able to develop control code for a remote robot, test the code by
              uploading the program over the internet, and then observe the actual robot's
              performance over a live video feed.  

The project is investigating the
              pedagogical techniques best suited for web-based courses in order to develop a
              production quality educational package for the autonomous robots course to be
              offered to students across the state of New York.  Access to the course is
              provided through commonly available, inexpensive computers linked to the WWW.  
              The formative and summative evaluation of the course conducted by an external
              evaluator includes comparing its effectiveness with a traditional on site
              course. Dissemination of the evaluation results and the course materials is
              being accomplished by a web site and conference presentations.  An instructor's
              manual with syllabus and sample projects is being developed to enable other
              sites to adapt the course, if it proves to be successful.
