Title       : The Back of an Envelope: An Architecture for Knowledge Based Design Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2000   
File        : a0096138

Award Number: 0096138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Gross mdgross@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              People draw diagrams and sketch to explore ideas, understand  problems, generate
              alternatives, and communicate.   However,  today's menu and text based
              human-computer interfaces do not  take advantage of this commonly used
              modality.  The Back  of  an  Envelope project aims to support freehand drawing
              as  an  interface  to  knowledge  based design  tools.   It  employs  advances 
              in gesture recognition, interpretation  of  visual  languages,  and  pen based
              computing, and  explores  how  to  combine  these technologies to build drawing
              interfaces  for  end  user  applications.  The Back of an Envelope has  three 
              specific  objectives: develop a framework for using freehand  drawing  to 
              communicate with computer-based  design  tools,  construct a working prototype
              that links a drawing interface  with design tools, and assess the prototype's
              performance in  design  studios  and classroom settings.  The  project  also 
              aims  to elucidate roles that graphical communication  plays  in 
              problem-solving and design.  The project's  significance  is  that it expands
              the range of modalities available to end  users,  enhancing traditional text
              and menu interfaces  with  freehand drawing.  This enables designers to employ
              computer  aided  design tools earlier in a design process,  when  they  are 
              sketching  and making diagrams. Besides computer  aided  design,  the Back of
              an Envelope interface framework can  be  employed in other problem solving
              applications.
