Title       : An Integrated Processor Management Scheme for Parallel Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2000   
File        : a0096111

Award Number: 0096111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mukesh Singhal                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62904              (Estimated)
Investigator: Prasant Mohapatra   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The performance of massively parallel multicomputers depends  largely on their
              processor management scheme. Unfortunately,  the schemes employed in the
              current generation of commercial  multicomputers do not efficiently utilize the
              system  resources. Processor management is concerned with processor  allocation
              and job scheduling. Processor allocation also  affects the interprocessor
              communication latency.  Researchers have addressed these issues independently
              of  each other. However, it is essential to evaluate the  combined effect of
              these issues on system performance. Thus,  this project focuses on an
              integrated study of processor  allocation, job scheduling, and interprocessor 
              communication. The research objectives will be accomplished  in three phases.
              The first phase  encompasses the design and  development of efficient processor
              allocation and job  scheduling schemes while employing a suitable message 
              routing algorithm for interprocessor communication. In the  second phase, the
              integrated effect of allocation,  scheduling, and interprocess communication on
              system  performance is to be studied. The third phase of the  proposed research
              is concerned with the experimental  validation of these schemes.  ***
