Title       : Molecular Genetic Characterization of Epidermal Cell Interaction Mutants of
               Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0096345

Award Number: 0096345
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 8,  2000     
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Pruitt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan J. Lolle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Pruitt  97-23563      The long term goal of this research project is to
              elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which epidermal cells interact with each
              other and with pollen. Toward this end a comprehensive genetic analysis of
              mutants showing ectopic fusion of above ground organs in Arabidopsis has been
              undertaken. To date 30 independently isolated mutations causing this fiddlehead
              (fdh)-like phenotype have been mapped and partially characterized. These 30
              mutations putatively identify 9 different complementation groups.  Cytological,
              biochemical and molecular characterization of the fdh-1 mutant demonstrated
              that fdh-l mutant plants differ from their wild-type counterparts in only  two
              ways. First, fdh-1 plants exhibit changes in the lipid composition of the crude
              wall (including the cuticle), and second, exhibit markedly enhanced wall
              permeability relative to wild-type plants. These findings suggest that
              differences in wall composition may be important in regulating the
              responsiveness of the epidermis to contact with other epidermal cells. In
              addition to this contact-mediated fusion response, fdh-l plants are capable of
              interacting with pollen. Furthermore, experiments utilizing pollen from
              Arabidopsis and closely related species reveal that pollen will germinate and
              grow on the fdh-l shoot surface whereas pollen from hydration-defective mutants
              will not. Taken together these data suggest that fdh-l plants express factors
              on the shoot surface that mediate not only epidermal cell-cell interactions but
              also pollen recognition and that the observed specificity of the interaction
              with pollen parallels that of wild-type stigmatic papillar cells.  The
              objectives for the upcoming research period are: 1) to complete the genetic and
              phenotypic characterization of the fusion mutants in this collection, 2) to
              isolate some of the affected genes and 3) to screen for mutations in other
              genes involved in the regulation of this developmental pathway.
