Title       : LTREB: Stream Ecosystem Structure and Function within a Maturing Deciduous
               Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0096276

Award Number: 0096276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis A. Kaplan lakaplan@stroudcenter.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Bott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John K. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard W. Sweeney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laurel J. Standley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Denis Newbold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stroud Water Research Cent
	      970 Spencer Road
	      Avondale, PA  19311    610/268-2153

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726986  Kaplan  Over the past 30 years, the Stroud Water Research Center has
              developed and used long-term ecological data for White Clay Creek watershed in
              three interrelated areas of inquiry: biogeochemistry, microbial ecology, and
              macro-invertebrate ecology. These studies represent a unique documentation of
              the temporal variability in a protected Piedmont stream ecosystem. The depth
              and detail in these data provide the baseline for a wide variety of research
              projects concerning the dynamics of stream ecosystems, and are essential in the
              evaluation of long-term patterns of environmental change. This current project
              will (1) maintain existing watershed installations needed to continue
              acquisition of long-term data on White Clay Creek, (2) address the data
              management needs of the long-term research project, including making the data
              available to the research community, and (3) test hypotheses concerning stream
              ecosystem structure and function under stable and/or recovering conditions that
              can only be examined with long-term data. This study is valuable in that it
              provides a long-term perspective on how land use history and atmospheric
              deposition affect stream water quality, organisms in stream communities, and
              ecosystem structure and function.
