Title       : Conference: International Meeting on Proteins that Bind RNA to be held in
               Austin, TX
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0096418

Award Number: 0096418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gaetano T. Montelione guy@nmrlab.cabm.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Second International Conference on Proteins that Bind RNA will be held at
              the Lakeway
Inn Conference Center in Austin, Texas, from March 4-8, 2001. The
              First International
Conference on Proteins that Bind RNA was held in May 1998
              in Avalon, New Jersey. This
series of international meetings brings together
              molecular biologists and structural
biologists who share a common interest in
              RNA-binding proteins. The meetings focus on the
biological role of RNA-binding
              proteins and how structural analysis provides insights into
the function of
              RNA-protein complexes. The format is designed to maximize the exchange
              of
information, foster collaborations, and to set the stage for future
              directions in
research. Speakers include an interdisciplinary mix of
              established scientists and young
investigators in the areas of molecular
              biology, genetics and structural biology of
RNA-binding proteins. The format
              includes a mix of distinguished invited speakers and
talks chosen from
              submitted abstracts. Extensive poster sessions provide breadth to the
meeting
              and encourage cross-talk among investigators and students. Meeting topics
              include
the role of RNA-binding proteins in the following processes:
              post-transcriptional RNA
processing (such as splicing, editing, nuclear
              transport and mRNA decay), transcriptional
termination, the function of
              ribozymes in-vivo, enzymatic RNP molecules, translation,
developmental
              control, viral replication and human disease.
