Title       : US-Mauritius Workshop: Integrated Analysis and Management of Natural Resources:
               The Mauritius Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a0096812

Award Number: 0096812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32846              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthias Ruth mr217@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 5928,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
0096812
Ruth

This award supports ten US participants in the US-Mauritius
              Workshop on Integrated Analysis and Management of Natural Resources: The
              Mauritius Context, in Reduit, Mauritius, from June 25-29, 2001.  There will be
              approximately seventeen additional participants from Mauritius, including
              researchers from the University of Mauritius, resource managers, and policy
              makers, as well as a marine conservationist from Kenya.  Representatives of
              funding organizations and observers from SADC (Southern African Development
              Community) will also attend.  The participants represent a broad spectrum of
              scientific disciplines, including: biology, industrial ecology, agronomy,
              hydrology, geography, and oceanography. The co-organizers are Professor
              Matthias Ruth, of the School of Public Affairs at the University of Maryland;
              Dr. Arjoon Suddhoo, Executive Director of the Mauritius Research Council; and
              Dr. Indurall Fagoonee, Pro-Vice Chancellor of the University of Mauritius.  The
              purpose of the workshop is to initiate an integrated analysis of the country's
              natural resources and their uses, identify resource conservation measures, and
              prepare a long-term research and education program.

Mauritius, with its
              small size, remote location, large population, and limited resource base, is a
              microcosm of the social and environmental issues that are being encountered
              elsewhere in the world.  Continued economic development and population growth
              have adversely affected its land and marine resources, and these pressures are
              expected to significantly increase over the next decade. Furthermore, its
              extensive coastline makes it susceptible to climate change-induced sea level
              rise, which will also adversely affect its natural resources.  Additionally,
              the once expanding Mauritian economy is now being threatened by other countries
              who can provide the same products at a cheaper price.  Mauritius is now
              considering the provision of  high-value items and services, such as textiles
              and tourism, and its policy makers want any such expansion to be based on the
              sustainable development of its human and natural resources.  This workshop will
              concentrate on four key issues and the interrelationships among them: 1)
              Physical Infrastructure Development; 2) Water Resources; 3) Land Use and
              Agriculture, and 4) Marine Systems.  In addition two cross-cutting research
              themes, Island Streams and Industrial Ecology, will be explored in detail. 
              Workshop participants will synthesize and organize existing data on the natural
              resources in Mauritius, and develop a framework for the integrated analysis of
              that data.  Graphical computer modeling tools will be used to organize and
              display information and to develop and execute the models that deal with these
              issues.  The workshop will include field visits to a national environmental
              reserve.  University of Mauritius faculty and students will also give poster
              sessions at the workshop.  Few US researchers have collaborated with any
              Mauritian colleagues, and the co-organizers expect this workshop to promote the
              development of linkages which will lead to future cooperative research
              activities.  Workshop results will also enable researchers worldwide to gain
              new knowledge about natural resources and their use in Mauritius, as well as
              information on the ecological and societal impacts of land use changes. The
              project supports the participation of one US graduate and two junior
              investigators.

This workshop is jointly supported by the Division of
              International Programs, the Division of Environmental Biology, and the Division
              of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences.

