Title       : Simple Quantum Groups, Quantum Isometry Groups and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2000        
File        : a0096136

Award Number: 0096136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 15,  1999   
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65765              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shuzhou Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc A. Rieffel  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Shuzhou Wang 

This project is devoted to the study of compact
              quantum groups and their applications. The main goals in this study are to
              classify simple compact quantum groups and their representations, and to
              investigate quantum isometry groups of non-commutative spaces. A part of the
              project is to make precise the notions of simple compact quantum groups and
              quantum isometry groups. 
As a first important application, the quantum
              isometry group of Connes' finite space for the 
Standard Model of particle
              physics will be studied. As another application of ideas from quantum groups, a
              new approach to the well known problem of constructing ergodic actions of
              compact simple group on the Murray-von Neumann factor will be examined.
              

There are various kinds of symmetries in nature.  A square or a star shaped
              object have the simplest symmetries. To systematically study more complex
              symmetries, mathematicians discovered a notion, called a group, which provided
              the most effective way to encode the symmetries of interest.  Lie groups form
              one of the most important classes of groups. They are ubiquitous in mathematics
              and physics.  However, it began to be apparent that groups are inadequate in
              many important situations.  In the mid 80's, mathematicians and physicists
              discovered a new notion, called a quantum group, to meet this challenge.  A
              quantum group is not a group in general, but it encodes more general symmetries
              than a group.  Quantum groups are very useful in quantum mechanics and quantum
              field theory, as well as non-commutative geometry and other fields of
              mathematics. The most natural examples of quantum groups are deformations (in a
              technical sense) of Lie groups.  More recently, the author of this project
              discovered several new classes of quantum groups that are not deformations of
              Lie groups. Because of the discoveries of the author, it becomes a paramount
              problem to classify simple quantum groups, which are the building blocks of
              quantum groups.   The main goals in this project are to tackle this problem and
              to apply simple quantum groups to various problems in closely related branches
              of mathematics and physics.  We believe that successful solutions of the
              problems in this project will not only bring us to a new horizon in the theory
              of quantum groups, but they will also have wide impact in other fields of
              mathematics and physics. 


