Title       : RUI: Molecular Evolution of the Glucose Phosphate Isomerase Locus in Argopecten
               irradians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2001   
File        : a0096161

Award Number: 0096161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 10,  2000   
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90918              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen K. Krause mkrause@mwc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. McDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mary Washington College
	      1301 College Avenue
	      Fredericksburg, VA  224015300    703/899-4100

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9615567  KRAUSE  The degree to which genetic variation for metabolic enzymes
              can potentially translate into biochemical, physiological and fitness
              differences among individuals is largely unknown.  Previous studies suggest
              that protein variation for an enzyme involved in energy metabolism from the bay
              scallop, Argopecten irradians, directly affects biochemical and
              production-related traits.  Scallop size, reproductive output,  and certain
              biochemical traits are associated with genetic variation for the enzyme glucose
              phosphate isomerase (Gpi).  The proposed research will build on previous work
              and examine DNA sequence variation for the Gpi gene.  DNA from individuals with
              different Gpi protein variants will be sequenced following isolation and
              amplification by the polymerase chain reaction.  A variety of statistical tests
              will be applied to the nucleotide sequence data in order to test hypotheses
              regarding the relative strength of random and selective forces maintaining
              genetic variation at Gpi.  Also, the relationships among nucleotide variation
              and previously characterized protein and size differences among scallops will
              be explored.  The results from this study will contribute to the general body
              of knowledge describing the relative roles of random and selective forces in
              evolution.  More importantly, these data will begin to address the functional
              relevance of nucleotide variation and the hypothesis that genetic differences
              for this glycolytic enzyme translate into fitness differences among individuals
              in a population.
