Title       : Xibun Maya and the Luxury Economy within Classic-to-Colonial Mesoamerica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0096603

Award Number: 0096603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211634             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. McAnany tricia@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Patricia McAnany and her colleagues
              will conduct four seasons of archaeological and paleoenvironmental research in
              the Sibun River Valley of Belize. Limited survey to date indicates that this
              well watered agriculturally rich valley was inhabited during the Classic Mayan
              period and the direct descendents of this group were described in Spanish
              colonial documents. Cacao, the basis for chocolate (and not cocaine), occurs
              wild in the region, constituted an important crop in colonial times and is
              cultivated today. In fact one of the two largest archaeological sites in the
              valley - the Hershey site - is so named because it is located in a cacao
              orchard previously owned by Hershey Foods. The goal of Dr. McAnany's research
              is to reconstruct the political economy of this region from Classic (ca. 800
              AD) through colonial times and to accomplish this she, together with graduate
              and undergraduate students, will collect both archaeological and
              paleoecological data. The team will reconstruct vegetation history, carry out
              geomorphological and soil studies, excavate both open air and ritual cave sites
              and place these data in a geographic information system. Five transects have
              been chosen for survey and excavation and these will be supplemented by pollen
              and sedimentological data derived from cores drilled into a sample of oxbows
              lining the river. A study of current vegetation communities will provide a
              context within which to interpret the paleoenvironmental data. Approximately 7%
              of the structures encountered in the survey transects will be excavated and the
              artifacts thus recovered - especially luxury items such as jade and imported
              pottery - will provide insight into the degree of wealth and its distribution
              within the Sibun River Valley communities.

Archaeological research in the
              lowland Mayan tropics has focused primarily on major centers which, based on
              reconstructed population size and impressive ceremonial architecture, served as
              primary centers. However it is also clear that hinterlands which contained
              valuable raw materials, such as cacao, interacted extensively with larger
              centers and were incorporated, to a greater or lesser extent into Classic Mayan
              kingdoms. However the degree and method of integration is both poorly
              understood and essential to reconstructing how the ancient Mayan world
              functioned. This project will provide a necessary and lacking view from the
              hinterlands and because the Sibun River Valley likely was an important
              prehistoric center for the production and export of cacao, it offers an
              excellent venue to examine center - periphery relations. The project includes
              both graduate and undergraduate students and thus also serves an important
              training function.

