Title       : The Role of Natural Legacy on Ecosystem Structure and Function in a Polar
               Desert: The McMurdo Dry Valley LTER Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0096250

Award Number: 0096250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4259979            (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Berry Lyons   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9251,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9810219
LYONS
The McMurdo Dry Valleys (MCM) region is among the most extreme
              deserts in the world; far colder and drier than any other Long Term Ecological
              Research (LTER) site. The biological systems within the MCM are relatively
              simple with no vascular plants and vertebrates. During the first six years of
              this LTER project, the perennially ice-covered lakes, ephemeral streams and
              extensive areas of soils were investigated in order to assess the role of
              physical constraints on the structure and function of the ecosystem. It is
              clear that the production of liquid water in both terrestrial and aquatic
              portions of this environment is a primary driver in ecosystem dynamics. Thus,
              the role of present day climatic variation is extremely important. However, one
              of the most significant discoveries was that past climatic legacies strongly
              overprint the present ecological conditions in MCM. In the second phase of this
              LTER, the research will be extended through the continuation of the
              investigation of the MCM as an "end-member" system, with the aim to better
              ascertain the role of the past climatic legacies on ecosystem structure and
              function. The conceptual model now includes legacy as an important regular of
              MCM. A series of eight hypotheses in three major focus areas: hydrology,
              biological activity and diversity, and biogeochemical processes will be tested
              through a continuation of monitoring programs and long-term experiments.
              Understanding the structure and function of the MCM ecosystem requires
              understanding hydrological response to climate both now and in the past.
              Current patterns of biological activity and diversity reflect both past and
              present distributions of water, nutrients, organic carbon and biota.
              Biogeochemical processes responsible for the transport, immobilization, and
              mineralization of nutrients and other chemicals provide the linkages between
              the MCM biota and the physical environment. The timing, duration and location
              of biogeochemical processes in the past and present are controlled by water
              availability. Efforts will continue to focus on the integration of the
              biological processes within and among the lakes, streams and terrestrial
              ecosystems comprising the MCM landscape. The interdisciplinary research team
              plans to continue to use modeling and other integrative studies to synthesize
              data and to examine the knowledge of the MCM ecosystem.

