Title       : Facultative Matrotrophy in the Livebearing Fish, Gambusia geiseri: Implications
               for the Evolution of Matrotrophy in the Family Poeciliidae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a0096568

Award Number: 0096568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edith C. Marsh-Matthews emarsh@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alyce A. DeMarais  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Livebearing fishes of the Family Poeciliidae exhibit a variety of developmental
              strategies. In the
guppy, young develop in the ovary from the energy stored in
              large, yolky eggs (lecithotrophy), whereas in
the least killifish, the eggs
              are very small, with little yolk, and most energy for development and growth
              is
transferred from the mother to the embryo through a placenta-like structure
              (obligate matrotrophy). Other
species exhibit a mixed strategy in which energy
              stored in relatively large eggs is supplemented by
maternal transfer of
              nutrients during embryonic development (supplemental matrotrophy). The type
              of
strategy exhibited by a given species has been suggested to reflect the
              productivity of the environment
that it inhabits. Obligate matrotrophs are
              predicted to occur only in highly productive environments where
food for the
              mother is abundant and predictable. In less productive or less predictable
              environments,
lecithotrophy is the expected strategy. Species that exhibit
              supplemental matrotrophy may inhabit
unpredictable environments but be capable
              of exploiting excess food if it occurs and passing extra energy
on to
              developing offspring (facultative supplemental matrotrophy).

The largespring
              gambusia has traditionally been considered to be strictly lecithotrophic,
              but
recent studies have demonstrated mother-to-embryo transfer of nutrients in
              this species despite the
absence of an obvious placental structure. This study
              proposes to use radiolabeled nutrients to quantify
matrotrophic contribution
              in largespring gambusia in order to address the following questions: What
              is
the nature of the mother-embryo transfer surface and how does it limit the
              amount or types of nutrients
transferred? To what extent does the largespring
              gambusia exhibit matrotrophy under natural conditions?
How does matrotrophic
              contribution vary with environmental conditions within a given population
              and
among different populations? Understanding the occurrence of facultative
              matrotrophy, both across
habitats and temporally within habitats, may help
              explain the variety of developmental strategies within
the Family Poeciliidae
              and the relationship of those strategies to environmental productivity.
              Furthermore,
the strategy of facultative matrotrophy itself may reflect an
              adaptation to unpredictable environments that
allows species exhibiting this
              strategy to occupy habitats that undergo natural environmental variation.
This
              strategy, then, may provide an important buffer against human-induced
              environmental changes.
