Title       : New Approaches to Estimating Consumption and Saving Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a0096076

Award Number: 0096076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24197              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan A. Parker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The household decision to allocate output between consumption and savings is one
              of the most important determinants of business cycles and economic growth.
              Consumers purchase roughly two thirds of national output annually, and
              recessions often are amplified and sometimes are caused by reductions in
              household demand for consumption goods. As an example, the leading candidate
              for the cause of the 1991 - 92 recession is a decline in consumption demand,
              yet the cause of this demand shift remains poorly understood. The difference
              between household consumption and income, savings, determines the supply of
              resources available for new investment, which together with investment demand
              determine the price of new investment- the interest rate of the economy.   To
              understand business cycles and growth, then, requires understanding the forces
              that drive household decisions to consume and invest. This grant pro-posal
              describes empirical and methodological projects that construct and estimate
              models of consumer behavior and build these into structural models of aggregate
              consumption. These models will give a structural understanding of the role of
              uncertainty and precautionary saving in aggregate consumption
              fluctuations.

This research is important for three main reasons. First, the
              proposed methods deliver consistent estimation of consumption and asset
              allocation behavior even in the presence of precautionary saving effects or
              liquidity constraints. The majority of the literature to date, largely due to
              the noise inherent in household measures of expenditures, estimates models
              which are not robust to predictable fluctuations in the variance of
              consumption.  Second, these projects will evaluate the importance of the
              precautionary motive for saving across different households and time periods.
              In addition to simply being of interest for predicting and understanding
              movements of consumption, studying precautionary saving will yield both
              information about and tests of structural models of imperfect consumption
              insurance. Third, aggregation from household-level estimation will yield a
              better understanding of consumption movements in business cycle models, changes
              in the U.S. saving rate, and the importance of imperfect insurance for
              aggregate consumption and asset returns. By actually placing the estimated
              structural model into a general equilibrium framework, this research will
              provide a more realistic "consumption function" that represents the optimal
              consumption decisions of the heterogeneous population of households in the U.S.
              The model can improve inference concerning other features of the
              macroeconorny.


