Title       : The Mechanism of Glycine Betaine Mediated Cellular Osmoregulation-Revision 2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  1999   
File        : a0096007

Award Number: 0096007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sidney K. Pierce pierce@chuma1.cas.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Pierce  9604679        This proposal requests funds to continue a study of the 
              mechanisms that regulate the concentration of the  intracellular osmolyte,
              glycine betaine, in response to high  salinity stress. Glycine betaine is an
              extremely common and  important osmolyte in a wide variety of species ranging
              from  bacteria to plants and animals. Although a great deal is  known about the
              salinity-induced regulation of glycine  betaine in bacteria, far less is known
              about its regulation  in plants, and even less in animals. The PI had found 
              previously that oysters (Crassostrea virginica) from the  Atlantic coast
              utilize substantial amounts of glycine betaine  to regulate intracellular
              osmotic concentrations following  high salinity stress. Conspecific oysters
              from the Chesapeake  Bay have much smaller levels of glycine betaine that do
              not  change following salinity stress and the Bay oysters are not  as salinity
              tolerant. In addition, the PI's previous work has  indicated that the basis of
              this difference in glycine  betaine accumulation and salinity tolerance lies
              within  synthetic pathways that reside in the mitochondria.  Furthermore, in
              bacteria and plants, salinity-induced glycine  betaine accumulation is
              regulated by a family of genes that  is osmotically-activated. Almost nothing
              is known about  osmotically activated genes in animals. The experiments 
              described in this project propose to exploit the differences  between Atlantic
              and Bay oysters in glycine betaine  metabolism to begin to understand how this
              important, but  scarcely studied osmolyte is regulated in animals cells. 
              Further, since all of the Bay oysters are parasitized by the  haplosporidian
              parasite, Perkinsus marinas, which has  devastated the Bay oyster fishery, the
              initial experiments  will focus on the possibility that the parasite is causing
               the biochemical differences between the two oyster groups.  The results will
              contribute a great deal to the understanding  of glycine betaine regulation,
              salinity tolerance mechanis ms,  cellular osmoregulation and, perhaps, uncover
              some of the  biochemical consequences of that parasite on oyster  metabolism.
