Title       : The Structure, Evolution, and Deployment of the Hox Cluster in a Basal Cnidarian
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2000      
File        : a0096261

Award Number: 0096261
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299978             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Q. Martindale mqmartin@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Finnerty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9727224  Martindale    The Structure, Evolution, and Deployment of the Hox
              Cluster in a Basal Cnidarian    Modern day animals exhibit a bewildering array
              of forms, or "body Plans."  Classical biological approaches, such as
              paleontology and comparative embryology, have so far proved unable to elucidate
              the evolutionary transitions responsible for new body plans.  Fortunately,
              molecular biology has revealed underlying evidence of continuity.  For example,
              animals as divergent as mice and fruitflies have been found to use a common set
              of genes to establish their anterior-posterior axis during development.  These
              genes, known as Hox genes, are important because they represent a conserved
              feature of development that is shared by animals whose body plans have diverged
              during evolution.  Only by recognizing such conserved features can we hope to
              identify the evolution of novel mechanisms responsible for new body plans.   We
              have recovered Hox genes from a sea anemone, a simple marine animal whose body
              plan is radically different from both mice and flies.  Evidently, the Hox genes
              are very ancient and must have evolved prior to the evolutionary split between
              these highly divergent organisms, over 500 million years ago.  Interestingly,
              sea anemones do not possess an anterior-posterior axis.  This inconsistency
              raises two important questions:  (1) What is the present-day role of Hox genes
              in animals such as sea anemones that lack an anterior-posterior axis? And (2)
              What does this reveal about the ancestral role of the Hox genes?  Our research
              seeks to establish the role of Hox genes in the sea anemone by examining the
              chromosomal organization of these genes, and by determining where and when
              these genes are "turned-on" in the developing organism.  In doing so, we expect
              to gain insight into the role of these genes during evolution and their
              significance for the evolution of animal body plans.
