Title       : Categories and Criteria of Evaluation of Research Proposals in the Social
               Sciences and the Humanities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0096880

Award Number: 0096880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102503             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele Lamont mlamont@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-0096889
Michele Lamont
Princeton University	

The study will analyze the
              categories and criteria used by scholars to evaluate research proposals in the
              social sciences and humanities.  Data will be gathered on the process used to
              evaluate research and training projects seeking funding from the American
              Council of Learned Societies, the Social Science Research Council, the Woodrow
              Wilson National Fellowship Foundation - Women's Studies program, the Princeton
              Society of Fellows, and an anonymous foundation in the social sciences. Of
              these programs, two are interdisciplinary competitions in the social sciences,
              two are interdisciplinary competitions in the humanities, and one is concerned
              specifically with funding research in the field of Women's Studies.  The
              primary focus of the analysis is to explore (1) differences in how proposal in
              the social and sciences and humanities in general are evaluated,  (2)
              investigate differences in the evaluation process of "interpretive and
              "empirical" disciplines, and (3) compare the criteria used in the elite
              competition, the Princeton Society of Fellows, with those used by other
              programs.

The study asks: What categories of evaluation are used?  How much
              weight is given to formal and informal categories of evaluation such as
              excellence, significance, originality, feasibility, social usefulness,
              political relevance, elegance, sophistication and objectivity?  What criteria
              are used to assess proposals along these dimensions? Data will be collected
              through observing funding panels, interviews with panel members and an analysis
              of written evaluation of proposals submitted.  Fieldnotes, interviews and
              written evaluations will be analyzed qualitatively and quantitatively using
              content analysis. 

Unlike most studies of the peer review process, this
              study is not aimed primarily at determining whether the evaluation  process is
              fair, but rather at understanding the substance of how quality is assessed.  It
              will contribute directly to promoting excellence in the social sciences and
              humanities.  It is expected that empirical knowledge generated will aid experts
              in addressing normative questions, such as what should count for excellence  in
              the fields under consideration.  The project will also make a contribution to
              the study of distribution of grants and fellowships, a neglected topic in the
              sociology of higher education and sociology of knowledge.




