Title       : Markov and Related Models, with Application of MCMC and Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a0096134

Award Number: 0096134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55370              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Tweedie tweedie@biostat.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9218,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9803682
Tweedie

There has been a virtual explosion in the last several years
              of the use of Markovian models, in at least three different areas: development
              of algorithms for efficient computation of the stationary measures for Markov
              chains, fed for example by the use of MCMC (Markov chain Monte Carlo)
              approaches to statistical inference and spatial modeling; development of more
              complex stochastic models for networks of queues, especially in communication
              and manufacturing systems; and modeling of physical phenomena by non-linear
              time series models, which needs approaches different from those of traditional
              linear models.  This proposal concerns the development and application of new
              methodologies motivated by problems in these diverse applications areas.  The
              investigator will carry out research in five main aspects of the theory of
              stochastic models which can benefit all of these applications:  (i) Methods of
              applying coupling theory and minorization theory to the development of perfect
              sampling strategies; (ii) Methods of computational evaluation of the rates at
              which models achieve a stable regime; (iii) Properties of stochastically
              ordered or partially stochastically ordered models, especially in continuous
              time, for both diffusions and jump-continuous processes; (iv) Robustness of
              model behavior against perturbations in assumptions; and  (v) Use of
              non-Markovian and other general stationary processes in describing systems and
              developing algorithms.

Overall this project can be expected to deliver new
              methodologies which will provide a significant theoretical underpinning, and
              methods of speedup, to simulation and modeling methodologies currently being
              used more and more widely in solving problems in areas as diverse as
              manufacturing plant design, atmospheric and climatology modeling, and economic
              theory.  In the analysis of complex network, queueing and storage systems,
              applications envisaged include the currently high-priority area of
              manufacturing systems, and more general queueing systems with feedback.  High
              dimensional spatial models being used for the understanding of environmental
              issues should also be faster to analyze using some of the proposed methods. 
              The development of simulation approaches for non-linear time-series models in
              this context can be expected to provide new results in models of physical,
              social and economic phenomena.

