Title       : Dynamics of Heavy Precipitation over Mesoscale Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  2002  
File        : a0096876

Award Number: 0096876
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417030             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuh-Lang Lin yl_lin@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Kaplan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Better prediction of flooding in mountainous terrain has been identified as a
              high priority research area under the interagency U.S. Weather Research
              Program.  Under this award, the Principal Investigator (PI) will perform
              numerical and observational studies aimed at improving scientific understanding
              of mesoscale orographic rainfall and flooding.  The data set to be used is that
              collected during the international Mesoscale Alpine Programme (MAP).  The
              following questions will be addressed:

1. What are the effects of
              atmospheric stability and mountain geometry on the formation and propagation of
              orographically induced mesoscale convective systems?
2. What are the basic
              ingredients for producing orographic heavy rainfall or flooding?
3. How do
              upper-tropospheric high potential vorticity (PV) air masses or troughs interact
              with deep warm desert air from North Africa to develop heavy orographic
              rainfall or flooding in the Alps?

To address the first question, the PI
              hypothesizes that propagation of convective systems is controlled by the
              upstream Froude number and the vertical moisture flux is enhanced by the Alpine
              concave geometry in the Lago Maggiore area of Italy.  The PI will then perform
              a series of numerical sensitivity experiments involving different atmospheric
              instabilities and mountain geometry.  The research will analyze radar, wind
              profiler, and satellite data to verify numerical model results and increase
              understanding of the underlying dynamics.

With respect to the second
              question, it is hypothesized that the basic ingredients for producing
              orographic heavy rainfall or flooding are: high precipitation efficiency, the
              presence of low-level jet, a steep mountain, favorable mountain geometry,
              strong vertical motion induced by the synoptic system, and slow movement of the
              orographically induced convective system.  To test this hypothesis, the PI will
              produce synoptic and mesoscale analyses of MAP cases as well as historical
              Alpine and US flooding events to explore the relative importance and
              relationship between these ingredients.

To address the third question, the
              PI hypothesizes that an upper-tropospheric high PV air mass or trough helps
              transport deep moist air from the ocean, enhances the southerly low-level jet,
              and induces upper-level divergence in phase with the orographically forced
              upward motion, which is favorable for the development of deep convection. 
              Numerical simulation experiments and data analysis will be conducted to explore
              this hypothesis.

Successful completion of this research will provide
              insights into the important factors that control orographic precipitation. 
              This potentially could lead to improved flash flood and other precipitation
              forecasts in mountainous terrain.

