Title       : Using Power to Elevate Status: Observers of Power Use and Philanthropy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2003  
File        : a0096481

Award Number: 0096481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94226              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Lovaglia michael-lovaglia@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa Troyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sociological research distinguishes between power, defined as the structural
              capacity to attain resources, and status, defined as a position of prestige and
              honor based on expectations for an individual's contributions to goals. 
              Research has demonstrated how status can lead to power, but has had more
              difficulty demonstrating that a position of power can be used to elevate an
              individual's status.  Whereas status can be used to gain a material advantage
              that leads to power, use of power often produces a negative reaction in those
              on whom it is used and therefore interferes with the status advantage that
              might come from power.  To help understand this puzzling inconsistency
              involving these two otherwise closely related concepts, this project develops a
              theory that describes two ways power can be used to elevate status.  First,
              power users may elevate their status in the eyes of observers of the power use
              (i.e., those who do not experience the negative reactions that those directly
              exploited by power do).  Second, power users may gain status through
              philanthropy, or voluntary contributions to the community.  Philanthropy may
              ameliorate negative reactions to power use and change the perception that power
              users are selfish.  

The project tests the two components of the theory with
              two experiments.  In the first experiment, observers watch power being used in
              a network exchange setting, and then have the opportunity to cooperate in a
              task with either a high power or low power participant from the exchange they
              observed.  The influence of the high or low power participant from the previous
              exchange on the cooperative task provides a measure of status. In the second
              experiment, partners in a power exchange network differ according to how much
              the dominant partner contributes to the success of the group, and then give
              ratings in subsequent exchanges of the status or influence of the
              power-wielding partner. Besides demonstrating the validity of the theory, the
              results shed light on the willingness of people to volunteer for activities
              that provide little in the way of power gain, but may increase status.

