Title       : Activity of Individual Aquatic Bacteria by Flow Cytometry; Instrumentation and
               Protocols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a0096748

Award Number: 0096748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102323             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don K. Button dkbutton@ims.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award will support the development of flow cytometry instrumentation and
              associated protocols that can analyze aquatic bacteria with emphasis on their
              growth and viability status. Flow cytometry has become an established research
              tool for study of blood cells and of a variety of cells and organisms that can
              be grown in culture.  However, its use to analyze natural populations of
              bacteria such as those found in aquatic systems is complicated by the small
              cell size typical of such bacteria. Few commercial instruments are dedicated to
              the detection of these small targets. The main effort of this project is to
              design additional modifications to a commercial flow cytometer to enhance its
              ability to determine the growth and viability status of aquatic bacteria.
              Output signals will be organized for manipulation to reflect the rate of growth
              in mixed populations as judged by DNA content. Two additional probes for
              activity will be tested in the system, one for RNA content and the other for
              membrane potential, both important indicators of bacterial growth and
              viability. The equipment will be particularly important in study of the
              microbial generation of  greenhouse gasses at high latitudes where both ice
              cover and bacterial activity is highly temperature sensitive. 
