Title       : Benthic Microalgal-Macrofaunal-Solute Interactions in Coastal Marine Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0096335

Award Number: 0096335
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Simone Metz                             
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 28,  2000      
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252258             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Tenore tenore@cbl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberta L. Marinelli  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9629596  Marinelli                                    This project under the
              Faculty Early Development Career Program is  a combined research and education
              effort with two thrusts.  The  focus of the research program is an
              interdisciplinary study of  benthic ecological and geochemical processes in the
              nearshore zone.   The focus of the educational plan is the development of an 
              interdisciplinary program in coastal studies (particularly sediment  studies)
              at Skidaway Institute of Oceanography.  The research and  education plan are
              united under the common view that the study of  coastal processes and coastal
              biogeochemistry should be approached  in an integrated, quantitive way.     The
              proposal research will examine the effect of individual infauna  and benthic
              assemblages on microalgal productivity and sediment  nutrient fluxes using a
              combination of laboratory experiments,  field experiments and numerical models
              of biological and  geochemical processes.  This approach incorporates ecology, 
              geochemistry and mathematics to examine two biogeochemically  important
              processes in the coastal zone: primary production and  sediment-seawater
              nutrient exchange.    The education plan will: (1) Instigate a Summer Program
              in Coastal  Oceanography at Skidaway Institute of Oceanography, and (2) develop
               interactive materials for instruction over the distance learning  network,
              Georgia's two-way interactive video system that links  classrooms from
              different colleges within the University System.   The summer program courses
              will consist of (1) a survey course in  Coastal Oceanography and Field Methods,
              (2) a follow-up Independent  Study course and (3) a field course in Sediment
              Processes. The  distance learning initiative will test the effectiveness of
              using  internet facilities to enhance interactive learning among remote  sites.
