Title       : Protein Characterization by Capillary Isoelectric Focusing, Gas-Phase
               Electrophoretic Mobility and Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0096578

Award Number: 0096578
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510602             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murray V. Johnston mvj@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award will support the development of a new instrument and related
              methodology for separation and characterization of individual components in
              protein mixtures.  The instrument consists of an automated capillary
              electrophoresis (CE) system coupled to a gas-phase ion mobility analyzer (GEM).
               The CE unit provides initial separation of molecules through capillary
              isoelectric focusing (CIEF); molecules emerging from CIEF are sized and counted
              by the GEM analyzer.  The analyzer includes a charge reduction electrospray
              source, a differential mobility analyzer and condensation particle counter. 
              The electrospray takes the CIEF effluent and provides singly-charged,
              individual molecules for gas phase analysis.  Because a gas phase ion mobility
              spectrum can be acquired quickly, a complete three dimensional characterization
              (number of molecules vs. gas phase mobility vs. isoelectric point) can be
              obtained almost as rapidly as CIEF can be performed. Development efforts will
              focus on two main areas: development of an effective interface between CIEF and
              GEM, and the effective coupling of the GEM output to conventional protein mass
              spectrometers.
Research in proteomics is dependent upon the continued
              development and application of instrumental methods to separate, identify and
              measure the amount of proteins in biological samples.  Two dimensional gel
              (2D-gel) electrophoresis is currently the core analytical and preparative
              technology of proteomics research, but is typically a time-consuming procedure.
               It has the additional drawbacks of being difficult to control and difficult to
              use preparatively.  Although the instrument to be developed in this project is
              unlikely to provide the resolution permitted by 2-D gels, it's speed,
              reproducibility and simplicity of operation are likely to make it the
              instrument of choice in a number of applications where the highest degree of
              separation is not necessary, and where further characterization of the products
              of separation is desired.


