Title       : Information Processing Models for Attention, Categorization, and Multiple Choice
               Paradigms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1999   
File        : a0096035

Award Number: 0096035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffery N. Rouder rouderj@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to investigate the perceptual and
cognitive
              processes used in the categorization of complex stimuli.
There are two
              broadly-defined explanations of categorization
decisions: decisions may be
              based on abstract rules, or they may be based
on recall of particular examples
              from memory.  These explanations are
implemented as formal models (e.g.,
              Nosofsky's GCM Model and Ashby's
GRT model).  A series of probability-learning
              experiments will help
determine which of the two explanations provide a better
              account
across various stimulus conditions.  Preliminary results indicate
              that
people use memory exemplars when there are a few
              to-be-classified
stimuli, but they use rules when there are several
              to-be-classified
stimuli.  The working hypothesis is that people are flexible:
              using
either rule-based or exemplar-based strategies depending on
              the
cognitive demands of the task.  Exemplar-based categorization is
              used
when the cognitive demands of the task are relatively light
              while
rule-based categorization is used when the cognitive demands of
              the
task are relatively heavy. The research will allow for a
              fuller
understanding of the nature of categorization processes which will
              aid
our understanding of human decision-making and have important implications
              
for education.
