Title       : Investigation of a microscopic-based model for polymeric fluids using
               micro-macro simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0096847

Award Number: 0096847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen A. Feigl feigl@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is the analysis and further development of a class of
              microscopic-based, stochastic models for polymeric fluids previously introduced
              by the PI. In this class of models, the dynamics of the macromolecules is
              described by two independent Gaussian stochastic processes, one based in
              network theory and the other in reptation theory for concentrated polymer
              solutions and polymer melts, while the expression for the stress tensor is
              given as the expectation of a function of these dynamics. Previous work of the
              PI has established the good performance of this model in predicting some
              material functions of several polymer melts in rheometric flows. In this work,
              the ability of the model to describe quantitatively the behavior of polymeric
              liquids in engineering flow fields is evaluated. This is achieved by developing
              a micro-macro simulation program and solving a flow problem in an engineering
              geometry. In the micro-macro simulation approach, the coarse-grained molecular
              model is coupled to the conservation equations from continuum mechanics. The
              system is then solved by iterating the following two steps: (1) The polymer
              stress field is computed from a known discrete velocity field using stochastic
              simulation techniques, and (2) Updated velocity and pressure fields are found
              using the finite element method to solve the conservation equations, where the
              polymer stress from the first step enters the momentum equation as a known body
              force. The model is further developed by modifying its dynamics as represented
              by the stochastic processes. Examples of modifications are the inclusion of
              terms to account for nonaffine deformation of the configuration vectors and the
              introduction of noise into the time evolution of the stochastic processes. 
              

Polymeric fluids have a complex microstructure formed by their molecules
              which gives them both viscous and elastic properties. Among the unresolved
              challenges in viscoelastic fluid mechanics and the related fields of rheology,
              materials science and polymer physics are the development of accurate
              rheological, or stress, models for viscoelastic fluids and the development of
              good numerical simulation techniques for solving flow problems in engineering
              applications. This research project aims to advance both of these developments.
              Such developments are needed for understanding the physics of these complex
              fluids and for establishing the relevant connections between an engineering
              flow process and the material behavior and microstructure of the fluid being
              processed. It is known that the quality and efficiency of an engineering
              processing procedure and the properties of the processed material are affected
              strongly by the stresses experienced by the fluid during processing. Since the
              stress experienced by a polymeric fluid during processing is determined by the
              flow-induced microstructure within the fluid, it is desirable that stress
              models for such fluids take microstructure into account. The goal of this
              research is the analysis and further development of a class of
              microscopic-based models for polymeric fluids previously introduced by the PI.
              Toward this goal, a micro-macro simulation program is developed which combines
              the microscopic-based description of the molecules' dynamics and related stress
              with a macroscopic description of the flow field. This program is then used to
              analyze the model in an engineering flow process. The model is also further
              developed through the inclusion of additional physics by modifying its
              dynamics. 

