Title       : Symbolic Computation and Differential and Difference Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2001        
File        : a0096842

Award Number: 0096842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Singer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
Michael F. Singer proposes research to develop efficient algorithms to
              determine the algebraic structure of solutions of differential and difference
              equations. In particular the investigator proposes to find efficient algorithms
              to compute the Galois groups for large classes of differential equations and
              work towards finding a general algorithm to calculate the Galois group of any
              linear differential equation. He proposes to also find efficient algorithms to
              compute properties of the equations as reflected in these groups (e.g.,
              solvability in finite terms and solvability in terms of lower order equations)
              and apply these algorithms to integrability problems of Hamiltonian systems.
              The investigator will also use these algorithms to give efficient methods to
              determine properties of algebraic equations (e.g., absolute irreducibility,
              calculation of Galois groups). He proposes to find refined criteria that will
              allow one to construct differential equations with a specified Galois group and
              extend his solution of the inverse problem for connected linear algebraic
              groups to arbitrary linear algebraic groups. He will apply his recently
              developed Galois theory of difference equations to similar problems for these
              equations as well. In particular he proposes to refine the algorithms to
              determine if difference equations can solved in finite terms and extend this to
              q-difference equations, greatly generalizing the work of Petkovsek, Wilf and
              Zeilberger, develop algorithms to determine the Galois group of such an
              equation and give a constructive solution of the inverse problem for these
              equations.



