Title       : Spatial Firing Patterns in the Rat Subicular Cortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a0096212

Award Number: 0096212
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol Van Hartesveldt                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209817             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia E. Sharp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9601382  Sharp    The hippocampal formation is a part of the brain known to be 
              critically involved in learning and memory.  Hippocampal  damage in humans
              cause profound, nearly global amnesia for  events which occur after the lesion.
               One type of ability  affected is spatial, or navigational learning. 
              Individuals  with hippocampal damage cannot learn their way around in a  new
              environment.    Some insight into how the hippocampus may accomplish its  role
              in spatial learning has come from studies which examine  the physiological
              signals in the hippocampal formation as  individuals navigate.  One kind of
              spatial signal is the  place, or locational cell rate, while there are other 
              regions where the cell fires at lower rates, or is silent.  Thus the cells
              provide an ongoing indication of the animal's  current location.  In the
              hippocampus proper, each new  environment is coded using a different pattern of
              firing in  these cells, so that each environment has its own unique  "neural
              map".    Recently, we have discovered a novel type of locational  signal in a
              subregion of the hippocampal formation known as  the subiculum.  In the
              subiculum, each environment is  represented using the same spatial signal. 
              That is, the  spatial pattern in one environment appears to be a rubber  sheet
              transformation of the pattern in any other environment  it appears that the
              subicular cells may each have a single,  abstract, generic firing pattern which
              is transferred and  shaped to fit into each new enclosure.  Such a generic map 
              could play a critical role in abstract spatial reasoning.    Several
              manipulations are planned, in order to further  characterize the subicular
              spatial signal.  First, the  initial work (above) has only examined cells when
              recorded  in two subicular patterns can expand and/or contract when  the
              overall environmental size changes, cells will be  serially recorded in
              chambers which differ in total area.    In addition, it is not clear how one
              environment is  demarcated from another, by the s ubiculum.  That is, how do 
              the subicular cells "decide" to make a new replica of the  one environmental
              area to another?  To examine this issue,  cells will be recorded as animals
              navigate through  environments in which there are partial boundaries dividing 
              one enclosure from another, to see what kinds of boundaries  will cause the
              generation of a new replica of the map.    Finally, the spatial and behavioral
              firing patterns of cells  in brain regions which project messages onto the
              subiculum  will be examined, in order to determine what could be the 
              computational and sensory building blocks for the generic  subicular maps.   
              The results will be used, along with formal neural network  models, to try to
              understand the role played by the  hippocampal region in learning and memory
              generally.
