Title       : Ultrafast Mechanics of Molecular Liquids and Solids: Vibrational and Structural
               Relaxation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0096466

Award Number: 0096466
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dana D. Dlott dlott@scs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to understand the mechanical dynamics of molecular liquids and
              solids at a fundamental level. The largest of two distinct but related thrusts
              involves the development and use of a new technique termed three dimensional
              (3D) Infrared-Raman spectroscopy. With three dimensional Infrared-Raman
              spectroscopy it is possible to study how vibrational energy flows through
              molecules, and how liquid state structures evolve in time. Important liquids
              such as water and methanol at room temperature will be studied to improve the
              laser apparatus and advance a theoretical understanding of 3D spectroscopy. A
              low temperature apparatus is being developed to study temperature dependence of
              these liquids and cryogenic solids. The smaller thrust involves the development
              and use of a shock wave spectroscopy technique to study supercooled liquids
              such as glasses and polymers which have slow structural relaxation dynamics.
              This technique is also referred to as the nanoshock technique. It produces
              large amplitude structural distortions in materials and then uses vibrational
              spectroscopy to monitor structural evolution back toward the original
              structure.

This project involves the development of new instrumentation to
              study phenomena such as energy flow and how structures evolve in complex
              systems such as proteins and polymers. The relevance of this project to topics
              such as the accelerated aging of structural and biological materials is high,
              and students trained in these areas should be very competitive in the job
              market in areas of materials and biosciences of high interest to industry.  
              


