Title       : Self-assembly of Charged Biopolymers in Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0096492

Award Number: 0096492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea J. Liu liu@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9162,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Andrea Liu is supported jointly by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
              Program and the Materials Theory Program to carry out theoretical research
              pertaining to stiff biopolymers such as DNA and F-actin.  These biopolymer
              chains are highly negatively charged in aqueous solution, and therefore repel
              one another strongly.  However, both DNA and F-actin can form complexes when
              multivalent positively-charged ions or cationic crosslinking proteins are
              added.  This research considers how generalized linkers can form complexes with
              charged biopolymers.  The primary objective is to elucidate the structure of
              dilute aggregates and calculate the phase equilibrium between dilute
              aggregates, dense bundles, and isolated chains.  In addition, the kinetics of
              bundle formation will be examined in both quiescent and sheared solution. 
              These problems are motivated by biological phenomena such as DNA condensation
              and self-assembly of actin filament networks and bundles.  The physical
              chemistry in this project is rooted in statistical mechanics, which will allow
              the identification and exploration of the range of phenomena that can result
              from a minimal model of charged chains and linkers.  The research program is
              expected to provide a useful vehicle for training research students in
              numerical and analytical techniques, and for introducing them to biological
              systems and topics in modern condensed phase physical chemistry. 

It is
              known that crosslinked networks of charged filaments form inside cells, and
              that shearing forces on the cells cause responses that lead to metabolic
              changes.  The understanding of these and other biological applications will be
              enhanced by this research, which aims to develop simple models that are able to
              explain a wide range of observable phenomena such as DNA condensation.
