Title       : The Magnetosusceptibility Event and Cyclostratigraphy (MESC) Method Applied to
               the Problem of Intra-and Intersite Correlations and Pleistocene/Holocene
               Paleoclimate for S. Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2000      
File        : a0096262

Award Number: 0096262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92740              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brooks B. Ellwood   (Principal Investigator current)
              Francis B. Harrold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana State U Agri Ctr
	      PO Box 25055
	      Baton Rouge, LA  708945055    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Brooks Ellwood and Francis Harrold
              will apply the technique of magnetosusceptibility (MS) correlation to a series
              of archaeological sites in Southern Europe. This technique, which is still in
              the process of development, is based on the fact that climate affects the
              magnetic properties of sediments. In unconsolidated samples such as those
              excavated from archaeological sites MS works as a climatic proxy because
              temperature and moisture control the magnetic properties of deposited
              sediments, primarily as the result of pedogenesis. There is higher production
              of magnetic materials with corresponding increases in MS during periods when
              climate is relatively warm and wet. Given this fact, one can sample
              stratigraphic archaeological sections and construct magnetic curves which, when
              constrained by paleontological and oxygen isotope stage data, can be cross
              correlated. On this basis the investigators hope to establish a composite
              reference curve which will then permit fitting of smaller sequences from
              individual sites.

In collaboration with the relevant archaeologists, Drs.
              Ellwood and Harrold will visit a number of Middle and Upper Paleolithic sites
              in Spain, Portugal and France to collect and analyze sediment samples. The
              resultant curves should prove useful for dating over a large portion of Western
              and Southern Europe and will, hopefully, cover ca. 200,000 years. This is a
              particularly important period because it witnessed the replacement of
              Neanderthals by anatomically modern humans and the emergence of societies with
              cultural capabilities equal to our own. This research is also important because
              it will help to refine a tool potentially useful in many archaeological
              settings.

