Title       : Investigations of PAH-Mineral Surface Interactions Using Luminescence and NMR
               Spectroscopies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1999   
File        : a0096053

Award Number: 0096053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Schlautman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce E. Herbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth R. Carraway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1584,9187,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9630577    Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are some of the
              most widespread of  environmental pollutants.  Understanding PAH sorption
              processes in aqueous environmental is important because sorption reactions can
              greatly affect their mobility, chemical reactivity, bioavailability and
              toxicity, as well as our ability to remediate PAH-contaminated sites.  The
              proposed project is a multidisciplinary effort that will use fluorescence and
              Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopies to probe PAH-mineral surface
              sorption reactions at a molecular level.    Steady-state and time-resolved
              measurements of adsorbed PAH fluorescence intensity, fine structure, anisotropy
              and excimer/exciplex formation in addition to NMR rotational line-broadening
              will provide information on the strength of interaction and distances of
              approach between PAH molecules and mineral surfaces.  The specific objectives
              are to:  (1) develop fluorescence and NMR techniques for studying the various
              PAH-inorganic surface reaction particular to aqueous environmental systems, (2)
              compare and contrast the information obtained from the two types of
              spectroscopy for simple model systems of various organic solvents and aqueous
              solutions of  varying viscosity, (3) monitor adsorbed PAH spectroscopic PAH
              spectroscopic properties for different minerals, (4) monitor the spectroscopic
              properties of adsorbed PAHs with varying solution chemistry conditions, and
              monitor adsorbed PAH spectroscopic properties for different surface loadings.  
                Results from the proposed research project  will enhance efforts to model the
              fate and transport of PAH in low carbon environments.  The results will also
              help the design of heterogeneous photolytic systems for the destruction of 
              PAHs.  In addition to addressing the fundamental questions of PAH-mineral
              surface interactions, this project will also  motivate for the development of
              new fluorescence and NMR techniques.
