Title       : Asymptotic Problems in Representation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a0096246

Award Number: 0096246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61776              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei Okounkov okounkov@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Okounkov    The aim of this project is to investigate a number of
              interrelated asymptotic problems arising in representation theory and
              mathematical physics. The   two main parts of the project are  the study of
              admissible representations of Gelfand pairs associated to infinite-dimensional
              symmetric spaces and the   investigation of the thermodynamic limit of certain
              quantum many-body systems.   The methods to be used are the various asymptotic
              methods developed recently by   G. Olshanski and the PI. They include, in
              particular, the use of certain interpolation analogs of the multivariate Jacobi
              polynomials and binomial-type   expansions of the multivariate Jacobi
              polynomials.          In mathematics, many problems of interest are just too
              complicated to attack them directly. There are two fundamental principles which
              help gain some insight into complicated phenomena: the symmetry, which helps
              understand the structure   of the problem, and the law of large numbers, which
              forces systems of a very large size behave, in a sense, in a simplified and
              predictable fashion. The interaction of these principles plays the  key role in
              the project.   For example, we study a certain quantum mechanical system of
              particles   and use its rich symmetries to obtain information about the
              behavior of this system as the number of particles becomes very, very large.
              This sort of information is of great interest because most physical objects
              consist of a huge number of very small components.
