Title       : Tellurium Thermodynamics in Ferrous Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0096619

Award Number: 0096619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184057             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Schlesinger mes@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0096619
Schlesinger

A thermodynamic model for predicting the activity of
              tellurium in molten steels is needed to develop safer and more effective
              alloying practice.  This would improve the viability of tellurium as a
              replacement for lead in free-machining steels. However, little is known about
              the high-temperature Fe-Te system in general, and the thermodynamics of dilute
              Fe-Te melts are entirely unknown. The same is true for ternary and higher-order
              systems. Fe-C-Te and Fe-Mn-Te are of particular importance, given the presence
              of carbon in most steels and the strong interaction between dissolved manganese
              and tellurium often noticed in tellurium steels.  The research program
              investigates the thermodynamics of dilute Fe-(C, Mn)-Te molten alloys by
              measuring the solubility of tellurium vapor in these melts as a function of
              temperature and composition. The experimental program centers on the use of a
              self-sealing two-zone furnace tube with molten tellurium at the bottom and the
              ferrous alloy held in a crucible at the top. Varying the temperature of the
              tellurium changes its vapor pressure (and thus its solubility); this sets the
              activity of tellurium with respect to the liquid reference state. Analyzing the
              ferrous alloy after equilibration determines the mole fraction of tellurium,
              and thus the activity coefficient. Measurements are made in both pure iron and
              in iron-carbon (up to saturation level) and iron-manganese (<10 wt.%) melts, at
              temperatures ranging between the liquidus and 1600 degrees C. The experimental
              results will be fitted against the thermodynamic model developed by Bale and
              Pelton for non-dilute metallic solutions. This model allows the prediction of
              tellurium activity (and thus partial pressure) in ferrous melts as a function
              of composition and temperature. 
%%%
As environmental concerns over the use
              of lead in free-machining steels grow, increasing attention is being paid to
              potential alternative additions. One of these alternatives is tellurium, which,
              added in small quantities (generally less than 0.5 wt.-%), is even more
              effective than lead at promoting machinability. However, tellurium is expensive
              and difficult to alloy, given its low boiling point (989 degrees C); its high
              vapor pressure at steelmaking temperatures presents workplace hygiene concerns
              of its own in addition to potential losses to the dust.
***

