Title       : CAREER: Piezoelectric Microelectromechanical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1999  
File        : a0096092

Award Number: 0096092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149818             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eun Sok Kim eskim@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9501698  Kim  It is proposed to develop Piezoelectric Microelectromechanical
              Systems (PMS) through combining piezoelectricity,
              microelectromechanical-systems (MEMS) technology and IC-microfabrication
              technology.  Recent development of MEMS has opened up many new applications due
              to their small size, easiness of forming large number of arrays, integrability
              with circuits on a single chip, etc.  However, major activities in MEMS have
              involved electrostatic (or thermal) actuation and capacitive (or
              piezoresistive) sensing that have some inherent characteristics unsuitable in
              some applications.  PMS expand the application areas of MEMS due to their
              unique and promising features that are not offered by electrostatic, thermal,
              capacitive, or piezoresistive MEMS.    The proposed research takes full
              advantages offered by piezoelectric actuation and  sensing.  Specifically
              proposed for sensing PMS are dome-shaped piezoelectric microphones on silicon
              that can detect the direction of sound source as well.  For actuating PMS, the
              following systems are proposed: 1) dome-shaped microspeakers with beam forming
              and steering capability and 2) focused acoustic beam generators without
              acoustic lens.  Also proposed are lateral-field-excited bulk-acoustic-wave
              resonators for high-frequency (>Ghz) filters and oscillators.  Since the
              residual stresses coming from piezoelectric thin film has been the major
              performance limiting factor for PMS, it is proposed to develop (into
              manufacturable technology) our novel idea of using mechanical-vibrational
              energy to increase surface-adatom mobility during sputter-deposition of
              piezoelectric thin film for residual-stress reduction.    Various educational
              activities are proposed (1)to show the students how exciting an engineering is;
              (2)to inspire the students to develop right attitude (toward technical
              problems), proper analytical skills (to solve the problems) ingenuity and
              life-long-learning attitude; and (3)to teach the students the specific
              knowledge in the area of solid-stat e devices.  Specifically, new courses on
              sensors and actuators are proposed.  Through the proposed pre-college
              educational activities the general public and secondary-school students in the
              State at Hawaii will be drawn closer to engineering.  Through senior projects,
              design projects and research projects the students will closely interact with
              an inspiring professor and engineers in industry.  ***
