Title       : Evolution of the Attine Ant-Fungus Symbiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2000      
File        : a0096234

Award Number: 0096234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ulrich G. Mueller umueller@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ted R. Schultz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen A. Rehner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9707209  Mueller   Among the more fascinating cases of symbiosis in the American
              tropics is the interaction between leafcutter ants of the tribe Attini (Family
              Formicidae) and fungi of the mushroom family Lepiotaceae (Basidiomycetes) in
              which the ants maintain "gardens" of freshly cut leaves on which the fungi are
              tended and harvested for food. There are some 200 or so described species of
              leafcutter Attini ants, and advanced members of the group are known to maintain
              extensive gardens in which propagation of the fungi is obligately linked to
              strict vertical transmission of inocula from parent to offspring nests. This
              obligate transmission of food inocula raises the intriguing question whether
              mutational changes and evolutionary diversification in the ants is mirrored by
              change and diversification in their cultivated fungi, and leads to conjoint
              patterns of speciation and coevolution. The interaction is known to be even
              more complicated because other groups of putatively primitive Attini ants are
              opportunistic in their acquisition of fungi for their gardens, and may
              regularly harvest fresh inocula from wild sources. Which ant groups do this
              regularly, which have switched over to the obligate mode of growth and
              transmission, and which act in an intermediate fashion are all unanswered
              questions. Correspondingly, which species and genera of Lepiotaceae fungi are
              associated with the various ant cohorts in "open" or "closed" systems of
              inocula uptake and transmission are also unknown. Preliminary molecular DNA
              analyses by Dr. Ulrich Mueller at the University of Maryland and his colleagues
              Ted Schultz at the Smithsonian and Stephen Rehner at the University of Puerto
              Rico have opened a major technological door to the study of this conceptually
              challenging case of symbiosis. Molecular methods are particularly necessary in
              study of the fungi because the cultivated forms rarely if ever sporulate, and
              in the absence of spore-bearing structures, taxonomic identification is
              difficult if not impossible. Diagn ostic DNA markers, from nuclear or
              mitochondrial genes, hold hope for solving this problem, while providing data
              that can be used to infer phylogenetic or genealogical associations among the
              fungi.   This collaborative team of entomologists and mycologists continues
              field collecting in Central and South America, to augment the nearly 140 ant
              species thus far collected, and in parallel to collect fungal material from ant
              nests. Field work with Brazilian and Argentinian colleagues will facilitate
              collecting in rich areas in South America. Molecular DNA sequencing and
              morphological analyses of the ants and of those fungi that can be induced to
              sporulate in culture will provide additional taxonomic and phylogenetic
              information. Study of the phylogenetic patterns and ecological habitats of
              associated ants and fungi will create an accessible model of symbiont evolution
              in tropical terrestrial ecosystems, comparable in its richness of interactions
              with the coral reef symbioses involving corals and photosynthetic
              dinoflagellates.
