Title       : Development of An Extended-Depth-of-Focus Microscope to Enable Fast Fluorescence
               Imaging of 3D Live-Cell Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0096723

Award Number: 0096723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408354             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol J. Cogswell cogswell@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. Thomas Cathey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to further develop and evaluate a new kind of
              fluorescence microscope that will have sufficiently improved the acquisition
              rate and depth of field of images fast enough, and with enough depth
              resolution, to investigate live-cell dynamic processes that occur too rapidly
              to be imaged with existing confocal or widefield deconvolution microscopes. The
              new instrument, called an extended-depth-of-focus (EDF) microscope, is based on
              a novel approach to optical design known as wavefront coding, in which a
              specially designed optical element is inserted into a standard fluorescence
              microscope to encode the image recorded by a sensitive CCD camera. This CCD
              image is then decoded using a specially designed, very fast digital filtering
              process. If the proposed instrument is fully successful, it will provide an
              image with 15 to 20 times the normal depth of focus, with no loss in image
              quality. Existing commercial microscopes need to acquire multiple images from
              successive planes of focus and then combine them using digitally.  Because of
              the extended time required to acquire the multiple images, the sample is
              exposed to intense light for a much longer period. This accelerates the rate of
              bleaching of the fluorescent dyes used for labeling specific cell components
              and also increases potential for significant damage to living preparations.
              

Thus, users of commercial confocal, deconvolution or even two-photon
              microscopes often acquire only a few images when trying to track moving cell
              components over time. This compromise means that objects of interest within a
              cell often move out of focus too rapidly to be recorded. Preliminary results
              show that the new EDF microscope has the potential to overcome these problems
              and will be able to rapidly produce images (potentially at video rates) in
              which all regions throughout the three-dimensional cell volume are sharply
              focused. The proposed research will expand on these preliminary results and
              develop new wavefront coding optical elements to optimally convert a commercial
              fluorescence microscope into an EDF system. As part of the project, the EDF
              results will be compared to images of the same test objects and biological
              preparations obtained with deconvolution and confocal microscopes to ensure
              rigorous evaluation of the results. The microscope improvements to be developed
              should produce an instrument that can out perform existing commercial
              fluorescence systems in many biological applications.

