Title       : Subunit Specific Functional Properties of NMDA Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a0096209

Award Number: 0096209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis S. Premkumar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 98-10505  PREMKUMAR      The N-Methyl-D-Aspartate receptor (NMDAR) is a
              subtype of a  class of proteins found in the cell membranes of neurons (nerve 
              cells) termed "ionotropic excitatory amino acid receptors."  These molecules
              are involved in detecting the presence of the  amino acid  glutamate, in the
              medium bathing a nerve cell and  signaling the concentration of that amino acid
               by opening a pores  in the membrane that admit especially calcium ions to the
              inside  of the cell.  In particular,  this receptor type plays a central  role
              in development, neuroplasticity (changes in the properties of  the nervous
              system, as in learning) and excitotoxicity (cell-death  due to
              over-stimulation).  Important properties of the NMDAR, when  compared to other
              channels are that it is highly permeable to Ca2+  and is blocked by Mg2+ in a
              voltage-dependent manner.  The amount  of Ca2+ entry is critical for the
              activation of Ca2+-dependent  enzymes which produces second messengers (other
              chemicals which  serve as signals to other parts of the cell), mediates cell
              death,  and leads to an increase or decrease in synaptic strength. NMDAR  is a
              potential target for modulation by second messengers,  phosphorylation, and
              other physiological/pharmacological agents.  The long-term goal of this project
              is to determine the modulation  of Ca2+ permeability and Mg2+ block
              characteristics of NMDA  receptors.  Since the cloning of the first NMDAR
              subunit (NR1),  eight different splice variants of NR1 subunit, four different
              NR2  (A-D), and an NMDA-like (NR-L, renamed as NR3) subunits have been  cloned.
              NMDA receptors formed by different subunit combinations  exhibit unique
              functional properties and play a critical role  during development. In spite of
              these significant advances, the  reason for the regional distribution and
              developmental regulation  of receptors formed with different subunit
              combinations is not  fully understood.  The functional properties of these
              receptors  are also not clearly understood. In this st udy Dr. Premkumar will 
              determine Ca2+ permeability and Mg2+ block characteristics of  NMDAR formed
              with different subunit combinations. Identification  of subunit specific
              properties will reveal the need for these  receptors to be expressed in a
              specific time-window during  development. Results from this study will give us
              a better  understanding of subunit-specific properties and provide insight 
              into regional specificity of CNS function.  This knowledge will  also aid us to
              understand disease conditions and design novel  drugs that can target specific
              brain regions. It has been clearly  shown that stroke patients, who have been
              treated with NMDA  receptor antagonist can recover faster compared to those who
              have  not received the antagonist.  It is suggested that the excess Ca2+  entry
              through NMDA receptors causes neuronal damage leading to  slow recovery,
              sometimes the damage is irreversible.
