Title       : The Role of Research & Development Alliances in Innovation: A Study of the
               Biotechnology Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a0096605

Award Number: 0096605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharmistha Bagchi-Sen geosbs@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The biotechnology industry, which is characterized by new products/processes of
              unusually high market value, differs from other high tech industries because it
              is driven by hypercompetition, intellectual property issues that are arising
              faster than the laws to govern them, and high levels of uncertainty in the
              incubation and commercialization of new products and processes.  These
              conditions have allowed for risk-balancing organizational arrangements, such as
              alliances with universities and other firms, to promote innovation. 
              Furthermore, the completion of the human genome project has introduced endless
              possibilities of research and product/process development, which cannot be
              accomplished within the boundaries of a single firm.  This study will address
              two key questions: (1) to what extent do biotechnology firms depend on regional
              clusters of other biotechnology firms and universities to form research and
              development (R&D) alliances?  (2) Do R&D intensive biotechnology firms, which
              have forged alliances with other firms and universities, exhibit better
              innovation performance than their counterparts?  The research questions are
              based on two major limitations of recent studies of innovation in the
              biotechnology industry: (1) the effectiveness of different types of alliances
              has not been examined under one framework of analysis, that is, the role of
              formal/informal and domestic/international partnerships in promoting innovation
              has not been studied, and (2) the role of geography has been limited to the
              analysis of whether linkages are localized, that is, the role of regional
              clusters of biotechnology industry in the development, growth, and impact of
              these linkages on innovation has been largely ignored.  The research will
              conduct a postal survey of the entire population of biotechnology firms in
              human diagnostics and therapeutics and interviews of appropriate scientific and
              managerial personnel in a selected group of firms.  Both quantitative and
              qualitative analyses will be utilized to analyze the data.  The study is
              expected to show the importance of location-based advantages in the development
              of a network, both formal and informal, conducive to scientific advancements
              and technological development.  

The proposed study will offer an
              understanding of the specific processes influencing the organization of
              innovation in the biotechnology industry.  The study is expected to explain how
              regional clusters influence the organization of innovation in the biotechnology
              industry and how new technologies develop dominant centers of innovation. 
              Firm-level behavior in a highly competitive and uncertain environment, where
              barriers to innovation can stifle growth and cause premature demise of
              brilliant scientific efforts, will be understood.  Findings from the study will
              be used to determine how innovation trajectories are indicative of urban and
              regional development based on yet-to-be developed cutting-edge technologies. 
              Broader societal implications on university-industry partnerships, the
              protection of intellectual property rights, and the Federal regulation of
              innovation will be provided.


