Title       : Career: Molecular Mechanisms for Nonrandom Distribution of Mutations Resulting
               from DNA Damage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a0096197

Award Number: 0096197
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $482357             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda B. Bloom   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9722356  Bloom     The goal of this CAREER plan is to establish a
              competitive research program while at the same time creating a stimulating
              learning environment for students in both the research lab and the classroom. 
              Research is aimed at defining the role that local DNA sequence context plays in
              the efficiency of repair of damaged DNA bases and in the frequency of mutations
              resulting from unrepaired damage. The long term objective is to elucidate
              molecular mechanisms governing the formation of mutations in DNA which
              influence protein-DNA interactions. The premise is based on the nonrandom
              distribution of mutations throughout a genome, which may be explained by
              differences in local DNA structure and stability. Local DNA sequence may
              determine the distribution of mutations in a genome by affecting the efficiency
              of the DNA-repair enzymes at specific sites. The efficiency of excision of the
              damaged base, ethenoadenine, by human 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase (AAG) is
              examined by a novel fluorescence-based assay, measuring the kinetics of base
              excision of ethenoadenine by AAG in real time. Escherichia coli uracil DNA
              glycosylase (UDG) which has a narrow substrate specificity is included for
              comparison.  The influence of local DNA sequence context on mutations due to
              DNA synthesis errors at template ethenoadenine sites by DNA polymerase III (pol
              III) and by DNA polymerase delta (pol delta), replicative polymerases of E.
              coli and eukaryotes, respectively, are studied in order to test whether
              ethenoadenine may have different miscoding potentials. The educational
              activities center around integrating research, learning and effective teaching.
              The overall theme is to use research and discovery as tools to stimulate
              learning and reinforce concepts taught in the classroom.  This is done by
              including undergraduate and graduate students in accomplishing research
              objectives and by revising an advanced undergraduate biochemistry lab
              curriculum to incorporate a more "research-like" approach that facilita tes
              discovery based learning.  Additional participation is also attempted in two
              multidisciplinary graduate research training programs, which are designed to
              provide students with broad educational scopes and to encourage them to go
              beyond traditional boundaries of a given discipline in their approach to
              research problems and goals.  This type of training is essential for preparing
              students for a wide range of career opportunities and changing job markets. 
              %%%   The goal of this career plan is to establish a competitive research
              program while integrating classroom teaching and laboratory research into a
              stimulating learning environment.  Research activities are aimed at defining
              the role of DNA structure in the formation of mutations, since such events have
              been found to occur at different frequencies at different genomic sites. 
              Mutations at some sites may be beneficial by increasing genetic diversity while
              at other sites may adversely affect the survival of an organism.  Different DNA
              sequences and structures exert different masking effects for enzymes
              (glycosylases) to recognize and repair damages.  DNA replicating enzymes, the
              polymerases may also function inaccurately at certain sites. This study should
              provide fundamental information on how mutations occur in the genome. 
              Educational activities center around using this research and discovery as tools
              to stimulate learning and to reinforce concepts.  This will be accomplished by
              including both undergraduate and graduate students in research, and by P.I.'s
              participation in the revision of an undergraduate biochemistry laboratory
              curriculum that facilitates discovery based learning, and in two
              multidisciplinary research training programs.  ***
