Title       : The Role of Carbon in Solidification of Nickel-Base Single Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0096064

Award Number: 0096064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tresa M. Pollock tresap@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1504,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9807648  Pollock    Carbon additions have a beneficial effect on reducing the 
              incidence of grain defects that develop during  solidification of superalloy
              single crystals.  This research  examines the fundamental basis for this
              effect.  The program  is a collaboration between Carnegie Mellon University and
               General Electric Corporate Research and Development and  General Electric
              Power Systems, and falls under the GOALI  program funded by the DMR Metals
              Research Program and the  MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.  The
              specific  goals of this research on superalloys are twofold: (1) to  determine
              the mechanisms by which carbon additions influence  grain defect formation
              during directional solidification,  and (2) to obtain an improved understanding
              of the range of  alloy composition over which carbon serves as a beneficial 
              addition.  This research aims to develop a better overall  understanding of the
              processes which result in the breakdown  of single crystal solidification in
              nickel-base alloys.  This is accomplished with an experimental program that 
              examines a number of different aspects of alloy structure  and chemistry that
              influence the solidification process.  First since refractory-rich carbides
              precipitate in the  vicinity of the liquidus temperature, carbide structure and
               compositions are examined as a function of alloy chemistry.  Differential
              thermal analysis is employed to measure  solidus, liquidus, and carbide
              solution temperatures.  To  examine the distribution of alloying elements in
              the mushy  zone and to obtain measurements of fraction solid as a  function of
              temperature, directional solidification  experiments interrupted by quenching
              are conducted.  Electron microprobe analyses are used to characterize 
              segregation in these samples.  To examine the influence of  alloy chemistry on
              grain defect formation, single crystal  directional solidification experiments
              are conducted with a  number of compositions that have distinctly different 
              characteristics in terms of se gregation, carbide density,  and carbide
              precipitation temperatures.  %%%  This research examines defect formation in
              high temperature  superalloy castings and relates to applications in turbine 
              engines.  Educational benefits include student interaction  with General
              Electric Corporation laboratories.  ***
