Title       : Analytic Rheology of Long-Chain-Branched Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0096688

Award Number: 0096688
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald G. Larson rlarson@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The development of new catalysts, including metallocenes, has made possible a
              wide range of new commercial polymers, including polymers with controlled
              levels of long-chain branching.  Existing analytic methods are not sufficiently
              sensitive the presence of long-chain branching to detect the very low branching
              levels that are often present in commercial melts.  Yet such low branching
              levels have large effects on polymer processing, even at levels of less than 1
              long-chain branch per 100,000 backbone carbon atoms.  Rheology has already been
              developed as a highly sensitive analytic tool for determination of molecular
              weight distributions in commercial linear polymers.  The PI will use rheology
              to infer the long-chain branching (LCB) characteristics of commercial
              polyethylene polymers.  Recent theory combines the effects of reptation,
              primitive-path fluctuations, and constraint release into a unified theory of
              relaxation of polymers of arbitrary branch composition.  The theory has
              successfully predicted the linear viscoelastic properties of model
              polybutadiene successfully predicted the linear viscoelastic properties of
              model polybutadiene linear, star, and H polymers, as well as bidisperse and
              polydisperse mixtures of linears and of stars with linears.  However, the
              theory is less successful for more complex melts, in large part because of
              uncertainties about the conditions about the conditions under which constraint
              release should be thought of as a "tube reorganization" vs. "tube dilation"
              process.  The next stage, proposed here, is to extend these theoretical ideas
              and test them by obtaining experimental data on more complex mixtures of
              linear, star, and comb polybutadienes designed to mimic commercial melts. 
              Then, this approach will be carried over to hydrogenated polybutadienes, which
              are chemically identical to polyethylene, but can be made in ideal, nearly
              monodisperse form.
%%%
This work will begin the task of deducing the
              branching structure of commercial polyethylenes from their rheology.  In the
              process, we expect to acquire a much deeper and more thorough fundamental
              understanding of relaxation processes in polymers.

