Title       : Changes in the Gravitational Pull of Waterholes on Stone Age Hunter-Forager
               Settlement Patterns in a Semi-Desert Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0096096

Award Number: 0096096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 8,  1999    
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Bousman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn M. Kitchen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Garth Sampson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Britt Bousman and his collaborators
              will convert handwritten archaeological site data to an electronic format and
              make it widely available to interested researchers. For over a decade
              archaeologists have conducted survey and excavation in the Zeekoe Valley which
              is located in the upper Karoo region of South Africa's central plateau. Some
              5,000 sq. km of scrub desert have been searched on foot to produce site
              distribution maps that document, in one valley, repeated occupations from over
              a million years ago to recent times. This is the largest available body of data
              on prehistoric hunter-gatherer spatial organization in the world. Approximately
              15,000 individual sites have been recorded in pencil and paper format. At the
              time most of this work was conducted, means for electronically recording and
              sharing data were not available. Thus this valuable data base is difficult to
              analyze or share and is in danger of physical deterioration. With this award,
              the team will consolidate the entire Zeekoe Valley record and transfer it to
              electronic media. They will: 1. Render the data far more easily and rapidly
              manipulatable in a GIS format which will overlay each mapped site on an aerial
              photograph; 2. make the record fully accessible on CD-ROM in all its parts to
              all interested scholars, thus encouraging new avenues of enquiry beyond the
              collaborators own interests in the data; 3. make the record available on the
              Internet to educational institutions with upper level undergraduate or graduate
              classes in hunter-gatherer archaeology and geography, fields where there is
              already a perceived need for such data bases; 4. develop a protocol for similar
              projects in the future; 5. rescue extant documents from physical
              decay.

Archaeologists wish to understand how human societies at
              technologically simple levels adapted to harsh and changing environments, to
              determine what subsistence and locational strategies they employed and how
              these changed over time. To do this, good distributional information is
              essential and the Zeekoe material provides an unparalleled data base. The
              electronic archive will be widely used by anthropological researchers.

