Title       : US-Kenya Cooperative Research: Refining Geothermal Exploration via Geochemical
               Modelling of Young Volcanic Centers in the Kenya Rift
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2001     
File        : a0096863

Award Number: 0096863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Y. Anthony eanthony@geo.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5991,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0096863
Anthony

This award supports a two-year collaborative research
              project between Dr. Elizabeth Anthony, with the Department of Geological
              Sciences at the University of Texas in El Paso, and Dr. Peter Omenda, with the
              Olkaria Geothermal Project, Kenya Electricity Generating Co. Ltd.

In Kenya
              geothermal resources are focussed on young volcanic centers which sit in the
              axis of the Kenya Rift.  Anthony and Omenda have already established that
              although these eruptive centers share many common characteristics, such as
              location and age, each center also has its own distinct evolutionary history. 
              In addition, geophysicists have recently imaged shallow, high-density bodies
              beneath the volcanoes, which may represent the magma chambers or residues from
              magma crystallization.  The investigators will collect volcanic and geophysical
              data from four volcanoes in the Kenya Rift, and use it to develop integrated
              models on the volume and composition of the subsurface magmas.  These models
              will then be used to understand the cause for the different evolutionary
              histories, and to interpret the exact relationship between the volcanism and
              the shallow, high-density bodies.  This project combines the petrologic
              expertise of Dr. Anthony with the geothermal and field experience of Dr.
              Omenda.  Through this project the investigators expect to achieve a greater
              understanding of the history of volcanoes, and of the relationship between
              observed volcanic units and subsurface geophysics.  This knowledge will also
              aid in future geothermal exploration and exploitation activities, such as the
              assessment of long-term heat budgets for individual volcanoes.  

The
              Division of International Programs and the Division of Earth Sciences are
              jointly providing support for this project.






