Title       : CAREER: Benthic Boundary Mixing and Dissolved Oxygen Transfer at the Sediment
               Water Interface in a Stratified Lake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a0096128

Award Number: 0096128
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. F. Chen                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Miki Hondzo mhondzo@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal Number: CTS-9703451  Principal Investigator: Hondzo  This is
              a CAREER grant to study benthic boundary mixing within thermally stratified
              lakes. Field measurements will be conducted in five freshwater lakes. 
              Turbulent properties of the benthic boundary layer will be investigated using a
              self-contained microprofiler augmented with the acoustic Doppler velocimeter. 
              The internal wave characteristics within the lake basin will be measured with
              thermistor chains.  Several issues will be addressed such as: (1) The primary
              mechanism for generating  turbulence within the sloping boundary layer (2) The
              magnitude of the up slope volume flux and associated cycling time scales within
              the benthic boundary layer. (3) Determination of whether the turbulent boundary
              layer thickness is determined by the turbulent entertainment or by the internal
              wave characteristics near the sloping boundaries. and (4) Whether the  vertical
              eddy diffusivity within the benthic boundary layer can be correlated with the
              dynamic stability (Lake Number) of the entire lake?    Laboratory experiments
              will focus on the details of the interfacial gas transfer mechanism at the
              sediment-water interface.  Near-bed liquid turbulence and dissolved oxygen (DO)
              concentrations will be also be measured in a laboratory channel over a wide
              range of Reynolds number, for a variety of bottom sediments.  The determination
              of DO microprofiles in conjunction with characterization of near-bed turbulence
              will address a wide range of questions concerning the distribution of DO.   
              The research results will provide an opportunity to validate the existing
              conceptual models, as well as enhance the development of new models which can
              improve our ability to predict water quality and transport related parameters
              in lakes, reservoirs, and coastal waters.
