Title       : Second World Congress on Natural Disaster Reduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a0096810

Award Number: 0096810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter W. Hays walter_hays@msn.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Soc of Civil Eng
	      1801 Alexander Bell Drive
	      Reston, VA  201914400    703/295-6151

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This award represents partial funding for The World Congress on Disaster
              Reduction.  This workshop establishes a process for forging a global network of
              researchers and practitioners who have the knowledge, experience, technical
              capacity, and credibility to work together with community stakeholders and
              policymakers to solve local, national and regional problems related to natural
              and environmental hazards.  The two long-term goals of the process represented
              by the World Congress on Disaster Reduction are to improve sustainability and
              disaster technical assistance throughout the world.

Members of the Alliance
              of 1,000 will work together to imporve the technical and political capacity at
              local, national and regional levels for improving sustanability of the built
              environment and advancing disaster technical assistance.  The Alliance is a
              diverse group of international professionals committed to being part of a
              global network to solve a myriad ofresearch and practical problems related to
              natural and environmental hazards.  As part of the process, the Alliance will
              create a set of thirty-three Global Blueprints for Change," authoritative
              documents containing guidance for focusing research on the indicators of
              physical, social, enterprise, and environmental vulnerability and directing
              professional practice toward practical solutions that are likely to reduce
              these sources of vulnerability.

The "Global Blueprints for Change" will be
              disseminated at the Pre-Congress Summit Workshop to be convened at ASCE's World
              Headquarters in Reston, Virginia on August 19-22, 2001.  A much larger meeting
              will take place on August 26-30, 2002 by in Washington, D.C.  with
              approximately 1,000 of the nation's and world's experts on disaster reduction. 
              The larger meeting, to be convened at the US Department of State, is the first
              of what is expected to become a series of recurring global forums convened at
              regular intervals, to focus the goals and objectives of researchers and
              practitioners on achieving a sustainable built environment in communities
              throughout the world and improving disaster technical assistance.  Each meeting
              will seek to marshal and involve all scientific and technical disciplines, all
              public- and private-sectors, all communities, all nations, and all geographic
              regions in disaster reduction.
