Title       : Stereoselective Radical Reactions for Amine Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a0096803

Award Number: 0096803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory K. Friestad gregory.friestad@uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research addresses the direct asymmetric synthesis of amines.
              Rather than relying on indirect routes such as carbonyl addition or oxidative
              alkene functionalization to form chiral alpha-branched amines, stereocontrolled
              free radical addition reactions will be used, creating a new stereocenter and a
              new carbon-carbon bond in a single operation from achiral precursors. Within
              this context are addressed three specific aims - internal diastereocontrol by
              preexisting stereochemistry using temporary tethers in radical cyclization,
              external stereocontrol in intermolecular radical addition using nitrogen-linked
              removable and reusable chiral auxiliaries, and catalyst stereocontrol with
              Lewis acids bearing chiral ligands.

Nitrogen-containing groups ("amines")
              with precisely defined three-dimensional structure (stereochemistry) are found
              in many biologically active molecules and designed pharmaceuticals.
              Experimental methods for the direct synthesis of such compounds with the
              necessary stereochemical control are uncommon. With the support of the Organic
              Synthesis Program, Professor Gregory K. Friestad, of the Department of
              Chemistry at the University of Vermont and State Agricultural College, is
              studying new methods for the synthesis of amines. Professor Friestad explores
              the introduction of stereochemistry in reactions of free radicals (molecular
              groupings containing an unpaired electron) through a variety of approaches,
              including the temporary linking of reactants. These studies are leading to an
              enhanced understanding of the reaction chemistry of free radicals and to new
              and efficient methods for the synthesis of biologically active amines.
