Title       : A New Heliospheric Field Model: Implications for Energetic Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0096664

Award Number: 0096664
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J.  Bogdan                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239865             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lennard A. Fisk lafisk@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan A. Schwadron  (Principal Investigator former)
              Thomas H. Zurbuchen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a proposal to explore the structure, dynamics, and evolution of the low
              solar corona.  The main effort is theoretical analysis focused on four main
              questions: How does the heliospheric magnetic field reverse polarity from one
              solar cycle to the next? What controls the emergence of fast and slow solar
              wind? How is the dynamic evolution of the low corona tied to the structure and
              evolution of field and plasma in the heliosphere?  For many decades the
              heliospheric magnetic field has been considered, on average, to execute a
              simple Archimedes spiral, typically termed the Parker spiral. . A magnetic
              field that is convected out radially with the solar wind, yet remains attached
              to a rigidly-rotating Sun will execute such a spiral pattern.  Earlier work by
              these investigators showed how differential rotation in the photosphere and
              super-radial expansion of the solar wind not symmetric about the rotation axis
              lead to motion of heliospheric magnetic field footpoints near the solar wind
              source surface.  These footpoint motions can cause strong systematic variations
              of the heliospheric magnetic field relative to a standard Archimedes spiral. 
              The principles on which the new model was founded address a detailed connection
              between the dynamic evolution of the low corona and the heliospheric magnetic
              field.  The new model has achieved some acceptance by the community, but many
              issues still remain.  The investigators will test the correctness of the
              concepts by predicting their global consequences and comparing them to
              observations.  To carry out these tests fully, idealized models must be
              generalized for the purpose of predictive modeling.  The specific tasks to be
              carried out include: Obtain a more predictive model for footpoint motion that,
              in particular, does not rely on idealizations valid only during solar minimum;
              Use the generalized footpoint model to predict the global structure and
              evolution of the heliospheric magnetic field, and heliospheric plasma; Model
              the propagation of energetic particles and cosmic rays in the resultant
              heliospheric configurations and their evolution as the field is restructured
              during solar maximum.
