Title       : Reference Materials for Ocean Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2001   
File        : a0096792

Award Number: 0096792
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Simone Metz                             
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanne C. Bintz jbintz@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexandra R. Isern  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The need for standard reference materials in the ocean sciences has become
              recognized as a high priority issue by the scientific community.  This
              recognition stems from the fact that standards provide a means of quality
              control for analytical measurements that are made by an increasing number of
              laboratories not only in the United States but abroad.  For this reason, the PI
              will set up a committee of 12 members to: (1) compile a list of important
              oceanographic research questions that may benefit from reference standards; (2)
              create a comprehensive list of reference materials currently available for
              oceanographic studies; (3) identify and prioritize the reference materials
              needed to study the identified research questions; (4) determine for each
              priority analyte whether reference materials and/or analytical methods should
              be standardized; and (5) identify the most effective means for developing and
              producing standard reference materials for ocean sciences.  Members of the
              committee will be selected from scientists in the four major oceanographic
              disciplines (biological, chemical, physical, geological), as well as from
              individuals outside the realm of the ocean science community such as analytical
              chemists already involved in the development and production of reference
              standards.  The committee will meet four times, convene one workshop and
              solicit input from the scientific community via a World Wide Website or via
              direct communications with investigators in the ocean sciences field.   Three
              separate products will results from this study.  Initially, a suggested list of
              standard reference materials needed by the ocean research community will be
              provided.  Secondly, an assessment of responsibilities for who will produce the
              reference material and the cost associated with production of these standards
              will be documented.  Lastly, the committee will make a recommendation of which
              analytical methods need to be standardized.
