Title       : Egonomics: Self-Confidence, Motivation, and Self-Presentation in Social and
               Economic Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0096431

Award Number: 0096431
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174274             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland J. Benabou rbenabou@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The maintenance and enhancement of self-esteem has long been identified as a
              fundamental human
concern, playing a critical role in motivation, affect, and
              social interactions. This project brings the issue
of self-knowledge into the
              realm of economic analysis, and shows that this has important implications
              for
how agents process information and make decisions in areas as diverse as
              education, investment, contracts
and bargaining, or family and workplace
              relations. Conversely, the tools of economic modelling can help
understand
              that a number of puzzling facts and behaviors documented by psychologists are
              often quite
rational, and determine when these strategies are effective and
              when they backfire.
The first premise of the model is that people have
              imperfect knowledge of their own abilities and other
enduring characteristics,
              and constantly learn about them from experience and interactions with
              others.
The second premise is that these self-perceptions affect the
              individual's incentives to undertake or persevere
in a variety of tasks; in
              most activities, a higher self-confidence in one's ability or willpower
              enhances the
motivation to act. This, in turn, generates a motive for the
              manipulation of the individual's self-image,
both by himself and by others.
              First, an individual suffering from a bias towards instant gratification
              (time
inconsistency) has a vested interest in enhancing and protecting his
              self-confidence, so as to counter his own
tendency to give up too easily
              (procrastinate, succumb to short-term temptations, etc.). Alternatively,
              the
manipulator can be another person (parent, teacher, spouse, friend,
              colleague, manager) who is eager to
see the individual persevere and succeed
              in the task at hand.
The first part of the project focuses on individual
              behavior and beliefs, explaining in particular why
people value
              self-confidence, and how this concern affects their cognitive and
              decision-making processes.
It helps account for why rational individuals often
              choose to remain ignorant about their own abilities, or
"blind" to important
              signals from their environment; and why they sometimes deliberately impair
              their
own performance or choose overambitious tasks where they are doomed to
              fail (self-handicapping). Another
central focus of the research is the
              phenomenon of selective memory or awareness, that is, people's
tendency to
              remember ego-enhancing information more than ego-threatening ones (e.g.,
              successes more
than failures). In turn, this helps account for the widely
              documented fact that most people have overoptimistic assessments of themselves
              (self-serving beliefs). A formal welfare analysis then allows us to evaluate
              whether such "positive thinking" and similar forms of self-deception are really
              helpful to the individual, or whether it is ultimately better to always "be
              honest with yourself". The project also sheds light on why people sometimes
              attempt to lower their own self-confidence.

The second part of the project
              extends the analysis to imperfect knowledge of one's strength or weakness
of
              will. This allows us to understand how the personal rules that people set for
              themselves (diet, exercise
regimen, moral code etc.) can be self-enforcing,
              and help them control their impulses. It can also explain
the
              "precedent-setting" role of lapses in adherence to a rule, and how the fear of
              subsequently "losing faith
in oneself" helps the individual achieve
              self-discipline. Another issue addressed is how the self-monitoring
which
              underlies the effectiveness of rules is undermined by opportunistic distortions
              of memory and excuse-
making. Last but not least, the model helps account for
              the occurrence of excessively "legalistic" rules
which result in compulsive
              behavior, such as miserliness, workaholism, or anorexia.

The third part of
              the project turns to interpersonal settings and contractual relationships.
              First, it
provides a formal economic analysis of the conflict between
              extrinsic and intrinsic motivation emphasized
by a large literature in
              psychology and sociology. It shows in particular that rewards for
              performance
offered by a principal (manager, parent) can indeed have, through
              their impact on the self-image of the
agent (worker, child), or his perception
              of the task, "hidden costs" which make them only weak reinforcers
of the
              desired behavior in the short run, and negative reinforcers once they are
              withdrawn. The model also
sheds light on when it is actually the case that
              empowering an agent increases his motivation and effort,
while closely
              monitoring his performance has the reverse effect. Another puzzle is that while
              boosting
others' self-esteem is a pervasive phenomenon, people also often
              criticize or downplay the achievements of
their spouse, child, colleague and
              other partners on whose effort they depend. The project analyzes
              such
ego-bashing as reflecting battles for dominance (real authority) within
              the relationship. Finally, it studies
situations where the agent has private
              information and engages in variety of self-presentation strategies
such as
              pleas for leniency, self-deprecation, excuse-making, self-promotion,
              intimidation, ingratiation, and
the like.
