Title       : Micropreparative Purification of Protein Isoforms by Dynamic Focusing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0096745

Award Number: 0096745
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345447             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cornelius F. Ivory cfivory@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the continued development of a new type of electrophoresis
              instrument for isolation, concentration and recovery of microgram amounts of
              purified protein isoforms and glycoforms in their native state. The underlying
              electrofocusing principle, dynamic field-gradient focusing [DFGF], uses a
              computer-controlled array of electrodes to establish and manipulate, in real
              time, an electric field gradient.  The gradient will drive the protein against
              a constant flow of buffer in a packed column so that each protein moves to a
              position in the column where its electrophoretic velocity counterbalances its
              chromatographic velocity.  Because the separating power of DFGF is limited
              largely by the fidelity of the electronic controller, the use of high-precision
              electronics should allow this instrument to outperform conventional instruments
              based on the use of isoelectric focusing.  Moreover, the electric-field
              gradient can be adjusted during a run in response to information collected by
              an appropriate detector.  By altering the electric field profile during the
              run, it should be possible to localize specific individual proteins and capture
              them sequentially from the column outlet. The isolated proteins can then be
              analyzed by standard analytical tools to determine differences in amino acid
              sequence, carbohydrate composition, and other chemical properties.  As part of
              the project, the ability of this instrument to automatically fractionate
              purified proteins into their various isoforms and glycoforms will be tested
              using recombinant proteins from industrial and academic laboratories.

Many
              proteins, whether retained in the cell or secreted, have been shown to be
              modified at one or more sites by the addition of phosphate residues, sugar
              residues or other types of small organic or inorganic molecules.  In recent
              years, the study of the structure and function of individual proteins,
              including study of the regulation of enzyme conformation and activity, has been
              increasingly concerned with the nature, location and effect of
              post-translational modifications.  The various forms of a given protein can be
              usually characterized and purified using isoelectric focusing combined with gel
              or capillary electrophoresis; however, it is frequently difficult to separate
              and recover enough of each isoform from a gel or capillary to be able to
              further characterize the protein in its native state.  The device to be
              developed with support from this award should improve the range of options
              available to protein chemists as the study of proteins continues to expand in
              the coming years.

