Title       : Roots of Agriculture in Southern Arabia: Reconstructing Human Economic Choices
               and Landscape Management in Changing Mid-Holocene Paleonvironments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2000    
File        : a0096011

Award Number: 0096011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joy McCorriston mccorriston.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric A. Oches  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Subir K. Banerjee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Joy McCorriston and her colleagues
              will conduct two months of archaeological fieldwork to reconstruct cultural and
              paleoenvironmental sequences in Wadi Shumylya, a highland drainage in Southern
              Arabia. Building upon NSF funded exploratory research which in 1998 established
              that necessary data are present, the work will examine the transition in the
              region from hunting and gathering to food projection. Archaeological survey,
              test excavations and geophysical prospecting will be complemented with
              paleoenvironmental approaches such as hyrax midden studies and sedimentological
              profile description to recover a complete paleo-record of human activities and
              environmental dynamics in a small drainage system. By recording all
              archaeological features, recovering economic indicators such as faunal and
              floral remains, building a paleoenvironmental record and reconstructing a
              sequence of human activities through time, the investigators will develop a
              model for human-environment interaction during the early to mid Holocene.
              

Dr. McCorriston and colleagues wish to determine why prehistoric peoples
              adopted agriculture after millennia as hunters and gatherers. Some scientists
              believe that environment and climate change have a major effect on group
              decisions and major subsistence transformations can best be understood in this
              context. Others argue that history and culture contact play a more important
              role. Southern Arabia offers an excellent venue for examination of this
              question. The region lies at the crux of the Indian Ocean, a crossroads for
              traffic and trade throughout prehistory. Domesticates and technologies from
              three distinct geographic regions were available to Arabian foragers.
              Archaeologists know that Arabian peoples had access to goods and ideas from the
              Levant, Africa and the Indian subcontinent yet they have still to establish the
              earliest dates for farming and herding in Arabia. It is not known from which
              complex the earliest domesticates were chosen. The research will not only
              answer this question but also link the time of adoption with potential climatic
              change. It will be possible to determine whether the cultivated species were
              the most appropriate to the climatic regime. Because the domesticates and
              technologies from the Levant, Africa and India vary widely in
              climatic-environmental adaptations, this diversity offers a rare potential for
              understanding the choices people made to adapt farming and herding and the
              mixes and matches of crops, animals and technologies available.

This
              research will shed new light on human environmental interactions and provide
              valuable data for a poorly known region. It will be of interest to a wide range
              of archaeologists.

