Title       : On-chip Interferometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0096736

Award Number: 0096736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340454             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darryl J. Bornhop darryl.bornhop@ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the development of a device for on-chip, interferometric
              backscatter detection (OCIBD) for universal on-chip solute determinations.  The
              primary usage of the device will be for protein detection during capillary
              electrophoresis carried out in channels etched in chips made of glass, such as
              a microscope slide, or similar substrate. The PI has already shown OCIBD can be
              used for refractive index measurements of sub-nanoliter volumes of liquids. The
              liquid passes through an etched channel with the general shape of a half
              cylinder. The detection system consists of a simple, folded optical train based
              and a low power laser beam.  The laser light backscattered from the channel
              takes on the form of a high contrast interference pattern; the pattern varies
              with the bulk properties of the fluid contained within the channel. In
              preliminary efforts, positional changes in the fringes of the pattern allow the
              detection of test proteins at micromolar concentrations (0.2-1.0 mg/ml).  The
              PI has also developed a preliminary theoretical model for OCIBD that is in good
              agreement with this experimental data. The model can be used to predict general
              system performance as a function of proposed optical train modifications
              including the chip's wall thickness and channel diameter. Improvements realized
              for OCIBD, under the proposed investigations, are predicted to result in
              detection limits for proteins at concentrations in the range of 150-250
              nanomolar and in volumes of much less than a nanoliter.  
The result of this
              research is expected to be a sensitive universal detector system that will be
              broadly applicable to miniature bioanalytical devices, often referred to as
              "lab-on-a-chip" devices. These are of increasing interest in biological
              research because they minimize the amounts of material needed for separation
              and analysis, and are amenable to electronic, rather than mechanical, control. 
              Detection of individual proteins and other cellular components at these low
              levels should make analysis of individual cells possible; availability of
              detection schemes that do not require chemical modification of cellular
              components will increase the potential utility of on-chip devices for a variety
              of uses.
  

