Title       : CAREER: Fines Induced Liquefaction in Alluvial Sands and Geotechnical
               Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0096341

Award Number: 0096341
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry A. Yamamuro yamamuro@ce.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1187,9145,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9701467  Yamamuro  This action is to support an integrated research and 
              educational-enhancement project submitted under the NSF  Faculty Early Career
              Development (CAREER) Program.    Most research into liquefaction of soils has
              been performed  on clean sands, while most of the documented historic cases  of
              earthquake-induced liquefaction have occurred in alluvial  silty sands. The
              current view of the effect of fines  (particles smaller than 0.074 mm) on the
              liquefaction  behavior of soils is that it either inhibits liquefaction or 
              that it has little effect. However this is not necessarily  correct. The
              behavior of silty sands has also been observed  to be highly unconventional.   
              The four major tasks and objectives of the research program  are:    (1) To
              investigate the unconventional behavior of silty  sands by  performing drained
              and undrained testing using monotonic and  cyclic loading. The objective is to
              explore the bounds of  the observed unconventional behavior.  (2) To evaluate,
              using scanning electron microscope and thin-  sections  analysis, the soil
              fabric of silty sands formed by the  different depositional methods used to
              create test  specimens. This will be followed by a study of soil fabric 
              created by water depositional processes in a fabricated  cylindrical vertical
              sedimentation chamber. The objective is  to ensure that the fabric created by
              alluvial deposition is  incorporated accurately into test specimens. The soil
              fabric  will then be modeled using Discrete Element Methods (DEM),  the
              objective being to verify possible 'collapse' mechanisms  of 'meta-stable'
              structures created in silty sands during  alluvial deposition.  (3) To perform
              model cone penetrometer tests (CPT) in a  fabricated  double-walled calibration
              chamber on silty sands. The  objective is to evaluate existing insitu
              liquefaction  assessment methods and the effect of grain size.  (4) To modify
              an elasto-plastic, non-associated flow  constitutive soil  model to capture the
              unconventional behavior pattern.  The  objective is to enable predictions of
              liquefaction in  alluvial silty sand.    The three main educational objectives
              are:    (l) To improve students' electronic communications skills  when acting
              as  'disassociated' project team members connected only by  networking
              technology.  (2) To improve undergraduate soil mechanics education by 
              providing  undergraduate students with greater exposure to advanced  soil
              mechanics testing by developing interactive videos.  Videos will be developed
              for tests such as monotonic and  cyclic triaxial testing, torsion shear, CPT,
              and  pressuremeter. This will supplement the basic undergraduate  laboratory
              experience.  (3) To encourage minority participation into the  geotechnical
              engineering  program at Clarkson University. This will be best  accomplished by
              participation in the McNair Program which  funds qualified minority students to
              participate in  undergraduate research during summers.
