Title       : US-Tunisia Cooperative Research: Medium Modifications of the N-N Interaction
               Studied in Large-Basis Shell-Model Calculations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a0096785

Award Number: 0096785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30595              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce R. Barrett bbarrett@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5928,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0096785
Barrett

Description:  This award is for support of a joint research
              project by Dr. Bruce R. Barrett, Professor, Department of Physics, University
              of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona and Dr. Mohamed Slim Fayache, Assistant Professor,
              Physics Department, University of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia.  The research
              addresses one of the long-standing problems in nuclear-structure physics, that
              of how the free-space interaction between two nucleons (protons and /or
              neutrons) is modified inside a nucleus (i.e., inside nuclear matter).  One of
              these two scientists has previously performed calculations to study these
              medium-modification effects on the tensor and spin-orbit components of the
              nucleon-nucleon interaction, but only in a fairly limited model space for the
              interacting nucleons.  New theoretical techniques in the form of the
              large-basis, no-core shell-model approach now permit such calculations in
              significantly larger model spaces.  The two investigators will study how the
              medium-modification effects on the nucleon-nucleon interaction are changed by
              extending the calculations to model spaces beyond excitations of 2hw.  Other
              nuclear-structure problems will also be investigated using the large-basis,
              no-core shell-model method, such as the properties of nuclei far from the
              valley of stability.

Scope:  This award will allow a US scientist to
              collaborate with a Tunisian scientist in an area where each has knowledge of
              different and unique methods for solving certain theoretical physics problems. 
              The problem to be addressed, the microscopic calculations of nuclear
              structures, is one in which the PI and other US scientists are fully engaged. 
              This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting US-foreign scientific
              collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.  Funding for this project is provided
              by the Division of International Programs and the Division of Physics.
