Title       : US-Tunisia-Turkey Cooperative Research: Developing Durable Composite Systems for
               Industrial and Infrastructure Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a0096795

Award Number: 0096795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19376              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramana M. Pidaparti   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5928,5940,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0096785
Pidaparti 

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Professor Ramana M. Pidaparti, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
              Indiana University-Purdue University at Indianapolis, Indiana, Dr. Hedi Hassis,
              Civil Engineering Department, Ecole Nationale d'Ingenieures de Tunis (ENIT),
              Tunisia, and Dr. Suleyman Kocak, Civil Engineering Department, Cukurova
              University, Adana, Turkey.  They plan to study the fundamental issues in
              modeling, analysis and design of durable composite systems for use in
              infrastructure and various composite industries.  They plan to develop
              analytical and computational algorithms and methods using a hierarchical
              micromechanical approach for developing design guides for more durable thick
              composite structures.  In the first phase the scientists will develop an
              analytical model for a single ply composite with warping and coupling effects,
              and extend the formulation to multi-ply laminates.  A micromechanical finite
              element model will be developed based on the analytical formulations.  These
              models will be integrated and systematically validated using benchmark problems
              and available experimental data.  The second phase will investigate the
              integration of the above models in a unified manner for failure analysis of
              complex 3D composite structures into an analysis and design research system. 
              

Scope:  In this project the collaborators plan to combine their expertise
              in a study to improve the modeling and analysis of composite structures and the
              establishment of design protocols for these structures.  The scientists will
              collaborate in modeling, analytical formulations and computational simulations.
               The project is beneficial to the scientists involved from the United States,
              Tunisia and Turkey, and is expected to give US researchers and graduate
              students opportunities to work with scientists from foreign countries.  The
              project meets INT criteria for support of cooperative projects that are
              mutually beneficial.

