Title       : Collaborative Research: DNA "Fingerprinting" to Estimate Male and Female Fitness
               in Heliopsis helianthoides (Asteraceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1992     
File        : a9213829

Award Number: 9213829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27224              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Schaal schaal@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1174,1196,
Abstract    :
              Most flowering plants function as both male and females, through               
              the production of either pollen or seeds.  Theory suggests that                
              female reproductive success is usually limited by resources                    
              available for seed production.  The male function in plants is                 
              limited by the ability of the plant to disperse pollen.  This leads            
              to the prediction that the attractiveness of flowers to pollinators            
              has relatively limited effect on the production of seed, but a                 
              large effect on the dispersal of pollen, and hence the fitness of              
              the plant as a male.  Despite this predicted importance of male                
              fitness to the evolution of floral attraction, the distribution of             
              paternal reproductive success in natural populations has been                  
              exceedingly difficult to measure.  DNA "fingerprinting" can be used            
              to determine paternity unambiguously in plant populations, and                 
              therefore to estimate paternal reproductive success.  Methods will             
              be developed to measure paternal and maternal fitness in the                   
              prairie plant Heliopsis helianthoides in a collaborative study that            
              has both intensive field and laboratory components.  The three                 
              objectives are:  1) to document variation among H. helianthoides               
              for hypervariable loci; 2) to determine the mode of inheritance for            
              these loci; 3) to use seedlings of known percentage to determine if            
              the hypervariable loci can be used to assign paternity in a wild               
              population of H. helianthoides.  This work will contribute the                 
              basic data necessary to apply the technique of DNA "fingerprinting"            
              to the evaluation of current hypotheses on the evolution of floral             
              structures.
