Title       : Insulin Receptor Homolog
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1995       
File        : a9213992

Award Number: 9213992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Koenig                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61316              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Garofalo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Brooklyn HSC
	      450 Clarkson Avenue
	      Brooklyn, NY  112032012    212/270-1000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9111,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Insulin is a protein hormone important in the regulation of blood              
              sugar or glucose.  This hormone exerts its effects on cells by                 
              binding to a cell surface receptor.  This binding causes the                   
              receptor to transmit signals into the interior of the cell which               
              result in the uptake of glucose.  While we know a great deal                   
              about the insulin receptor structure, it is not clear how its                  
              signals are transmitted within the cell or the components of its               
              signalling pathway.  Dr. Garofalo is using Drosophila as a model               
              to define the mechanisms of action of the insulin receptor.                    
              Drosophila contain both an insulin-like hormone and an insulin                 
              receptor which are strikingly similar to their human                           
              counterparts.  Since it is likely that the biochemical pathway                 
              involving this receptor has been conserved, research in this                   
              species which offers an unique advantage over other experimental               
              systems will undoubtedly lead to a better understanding of the                 
              components in the insulin receptor signalling pathway.  To                     
              address this important question, Dr. Garofalo is generating and                
              characterizing mutations in the insulin receptor.  By examining                
              the consequences of these mutations, he will begin to unravel the              
              function of the receptor.  This will provide a better                          
              understanding of the roles of the insulin receptor in                          
              development, and should also lead to the identification of other               
              genes encoding proteins important in signal transduction cascades              
              initiated by insulin or insulin-like growth factors.  Basic                    
              research on this fundamental mechanism is important for our                    
              understanding of the pathogenesis and treatment of diabetes, a                 
              consequence of insulin deficiency and may eventually lead to                   
              identity of possible targets for therapeutic intervention.
