Title       : Marine Biotech. Fellowship: Regulation of Seaweed Photosynthesis by Temperature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1993       
File        : a9213284

Award Number: 9213284
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62789              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Davison davison@maine.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1650,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Marine macroalgae exhibit phenotypic responses of their                        
              photosynthetic metabolism when grown at different temperatures.                
              This thermal acclimation involves changes in cellular contents of              
              photosynthetic enzymes and pigments that enable seaweeds to                    
              maintain similar rates of light-limited and light-saturated                    
              photosynthesis over a range of growth temperatures.  Although these            
              responses are undoubtedly a major reason for the biological success            
              of seaweeds in low temperature environments, little is known about             
              either the effect of temperature on the organization of the                    
              photochemical apparatus (e.g., number and size of chlorophyll-                 
              pigment complexes), or the processes that regulate thermal                     
              acclimation.  This project will permit Dr. Davison to spend a                  
              year's sabbatical in 1993 working in the laboratories of Dr. P. G.             
              Falkowski (Brookhaven National Laboratory) and Dr. E. Gantt                    
              (university of Maryland) to learn modern molecular, biochemical and            
              biophysical techniques.  These techniques will then be used to                 
              address the following questions about thermal acclimation of                   
              photosynthesis. 1.  How is thermal acclimation regulated at the                
              molecular level (i.e., transcription or translation)?  2.  How                 
              rapidly does the acclimation response occur.  3.  How does thermal             
              acclimation affect the organization and function of the                        
              photochemical apparatus?  For example, how does temperature affect             
              the stoichiometry of the various components of the photosystems and            
              the size and efficiency of energy transfer within the light-                   
              harvesting chlorophyll protein complexes? 4.  Does the apparent                
              similarity between thermal acclimation and photoacclimation                    
              indicate that they are regulated by the same mechanism?  In                    
              particular, this project will test the hypothesis that thermal                 
              acclimation and photoacclimation are both regulated by the cellular            
              energy budget.  The techniques used will include:  (i) antibodies              
              and cDNA probes for measuring the cellular content and rates of                
              synthesis (transcription) of mRNA that codes for the key proteins              
              of the photosynthetic apparatus and contents and synthesis                     
              (translation) of these proteins, (ii) a pump-probe fluorometer and             
              other biophysical techniques to measure the functional size of the             
              light-harvesting antennae associated with photosystems I and II and            
              to study energy transfer within and between chlorophyll-protein                
              complexes, and (iii) immunocytochemistry to study the localization             
              of components of the photochemical apparatus on the thylakoid                  
              membranes.  The information obtained through this research should              
              substantially increase our understanding of the physiological                  
              processes that enable seaweeds to achieve high rates of                        
              productivity in low temperature environments.
