Title       : Mapping the Human Genome: Archival and Historical Questions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1992      
File        : a9213292

Award Number: 9213292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41855              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Sokal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : History of Science Soc
	      University of Washington
	      Seattle, WA  981951330    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 1353,9237,
Abstract    :
              The Human Genome Project has been called the "Manhattan Project" of            
              biology.  Unlike the earlier project which aimed at creating an                
              atomic bomb, the Human Genome Project aims at mapping the                      
              "elements" that control human heredity.  The hope is not to destroy            
              life, but to unlock the key to genetic approaches to disease and               
              biology.  But like the Manhattan Project, the Human Genome Project             
              promises to transform the science that created it.  Already it has             
              created new informational tools and new methods which are being                
              used by hundreds if not thousands of researchers and technicians               
              across the country.  Like the Manhattan Project as well, this                  
              project is politically sensitive and raises deep ethical questions.            
              But, unlike that wartime project of the 1940's, the Human Genome               
              Project has developed in the full glare of public scrutiny and                 
              debate.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              It is the goal of this study to examine ways to insure that the                
              record of the Human Genome Project is preserved.  All present and              
              future understanding of the genome project--not only as science and            
              technology, but also as a political endeavor, a social phenomenon,             
              an economic venture and an ethical quandary--will require an                   
              "appeal to the record." During the course of this project,                     
              researchers and archivists will assess documentation needs and                 
              opportunities in several of the major laboratories across the                  
              country. Their report will be vetted by a committee of archivists,             
              historians, philosophers, social scientists, and ethicists.  It                
              will then be issued to researchers at large and policy makers in               
              the federal government.  This report will provide not only a                   
              guideline for preservation of documents, but a demonstration of the            
              value of this documentation for immediate and long-term legal,                 
              social and ethical issues surrounding the genome project.
