Title       : Comprehensive Investigations of Piezocone Penetration Tests in a Clay
               Calibration Chamber and Comparison with Field Test Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1992  
File        : a9213807

Award Number: 9213807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: MEHMET T. TUMAY                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Z. Voyiadjis voyiadjis@eng.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1448,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The use of the electronic piezocone penetrometer (PCPT) as a                   
              potential insitu testing device to evaluate engineering soil                   
              parameters is gaining wide acceptance.  Improvements in the                    
              design of this device have made it possible to measure                         
              simultaneously pore water pressure, cone resistance and sleeve                 
              friction.  However, interpretation of piezocone (PCPT) data is                 
              often complex as it is influenced by a number of variables                     
              related to the design of the cone, testing procedures and soil                 
              characteristics.  No standards have been accepted regarding                    
              the pore pressure element size and location, which has a                       
              significant effect on the magnitude of the measured pore                       
              pressures.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              This research program is a comprehensive experimental                          
              investigation using homogeneous and reproducible soil                          
              specimens instrumented to monitor the spatial distribution                     
              of pore water pressure.  Piezocone penetration tests are                       
              performed under strictly controlled boundary conditions                        
              in a clay calibration chamber system.  The objectives                          
              are: 1) To conduct very comprehensive and detailed parametric                  
              studies to expand the currently available limited data base of                 
              piezocone penetration tests in clay, 2) compare existing theories              
              and interpretation procedures to assess their relative merits and              
              demerits, and 3) to compare the results with available field                   
              data.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The aim is to resolve the complexities currently met during the                
              interpretation of piezocone test data and to assist in the                     
              verification of future proposed theories.
