Title       : U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Determination of Gas Phase Structures of
               Molecular Precursors to Solid State Materials by Electron Diffraction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1993   
File        : a9213876

Award Number: 9213876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Hampden-Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5946,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This two-year award will support U.S.-U.K. cooperative research                
              between Mark J. Hampden-Smith of the University of New Mexico                  
              and David Rankin of the University of Edinburgh.  This                         
              interdisciplinary project involves solid state materials preparation           
              and chemical synthesis and characterization.  The objectives are to            
              determine the gas phase structures of a variety of volatile and new            
              organocopper precursors, perform thermal decomposition studies                 
              and surface studies of deposited copper films.  The research is                
              focused on deriving fundamental insight into the formation of high-            
              quality, patterned copper thin films.   In studying the gas phase              
              aspects of the organocopper precursors, the investigators will                 
              provide important new information about the gas phase and gas                  
              surface reactions.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Dr. Hampden-Smith brings to this collaboration his expertise in the            
              synthesis and characterization of organocopper precursors in solid             
              state and in solution.  His group will synthesize the necessary                
              compounds at the University of Mexico for the gas phase studies.               
              This is complemented by the unique instrumentation at the                      
              University of Edinburgh and Dr. Rankin's expertise in gas phase                
              structural characterization using electron diffraction techniques.             
              Together, their research may allow the deposit of purer, low                   
              temperature, better quality copper films on surfaces than is                   
              currently possible.                                                            
               //
