Title       : Origins of An American Science of Occuptional Chemical Hazards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1992      
File        : a9213227

Award Number: 9213227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34915              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Sellers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Sellers is exploring the growing concern about occupational                
              chemical hazards in the United States.  His study concentrates on              
              the origins of this concern in the period from 1900-1930 when a new            
              community of experts arose to address this problem.  Dr. Sellers is            
              examining the technological, economic and social changes                       
              influencing the rise of this new community of experts and role they            
              came to play.  He is focusing on:  the changing rates of                       
              occupational poisonings in this period and their roots in                      
              technological change; the evolving attitude of corporate                       
              representatives toward this problem and their responsibility for               
              fostering the new expertise; and the new experts' shifting                     
              relations with workers, the emerging compensation system for                   
              occupational disease, and the more established profession of                   
              engineering.  As part of his professional development fellowship,              
              Dr. Sellers is working at Johns Hopkins University with the                    
              economic historian, Professor Louis Galambos, and the historian of             
              technology, Dr. Stuart Leslie who are providing training in their              
              specialties and are helping to guide his research.  Dr. Sellers                
              goal is to analyze the origins of the new science in workplace                 
              change and in scientific professionals' efforts to establish an                
              autonomous role for themselves with a corporate and technology-                
              driven economy.  This work will elucidate the importance of this               
              science in environmental history and in the emergence of modern                
              "organizational society."
