Title       : Beyond Form and Content: The Philosophy of Moritz Schlick
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1992     
File        : a9213659

Award Number: 9213659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Oberdan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A major purpose for the philosophy of science is to explain, and               
              hence to justify, what science is and why its theories should be               
              accepted as true.  Another aim of philosophy of science was to                 
              prescribe what "good" science is.  Contemporary philosophy of                  
              science, however, has largely abandoned this prescriptive task and             
              has instead concentrated on a descriptive mode of operation.  This             
              role is not an unimportant one.  In an age of skepticism about                 
              science and acceptance of mystical and occult sources of knowledge             
              it is important that the basis of scientific truth be fully                    
              understood.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Dr. Oberdan is examining one of the founders of modern philosophy              
              of science, Moritz Schlick, the leader of the Vienna Circle of                 
              Logical Positivists.  Dr. Oberdan aims to provide a biographical as            
              well as intellectual background to Schlick's work.  Under this                 
              grant, he is examining Schlick's early life and career, especially             
              the development of his philosophical views of relativity theory and            
              the initial stage of his Positivist thought.  The importance of                
              this study is directly related to two central issues in the                    
              philosophy of science:  the nature of causality and the positivism-            
              realism dispute.  Given the rise of quantum theory with its                    
              probabilistic foundations, uncertainty principle, and wave/particle            
              duality, the questions of causality and the "real" existence of                
              theoretical entities have become even more contentious in                      
              contemporary physics.  The positions that Schlick offered are                  
              important for our understanding of how philosophy and science have             
              addressed these questions.  Dr. Oberdan's study promises to make               
              significant contributions to our understanding of the foundations              
              of these debates.
