Title       : CO2 GASPEC: Design, Construction and Field-Testing of a GasCorrelation
               Spectrometer for Remote Measurement of CO2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1994     
File        : a9213536

Award Number: 9213536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel F. Weill                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley N. Williams atsnw@asuvm.inre.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award provides support to develop and field-test a new               
              remote-sensing device which will be capable of quantifying the rate            
              of emission of carbon dioxide gas during volcanic eruptions. The               
              prototype instrument, a portable infrared absorption spectrometer,             
              will be designed to measure the carbon dioxide content in a line-              
              of-sight through a volcanic eruption plume and to sort out the                 
              signal (the carbon dioxide in the plume) from noise (the normal                
              background carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere). The                      
              instrument package will be designed for use either in airplanes or             
              ground locations.                                                              
                   Although carbon dioxide is the second most abundant volcanic              
              gas (after water), little is known about either the total amounts              
              emitted by active volcanos during eruption or the variation in                 
              emission level during the evolution of an eruption. The ability to             
              remotely measure the flux of carbon dioxide is of importance for               
              a variety of reasons. The origin of the Earth's atmosphere is                  
              ultimately related to volcanic degassing, and we cannot understand             
              the significance of anthropogenic contributions unless we have a               
              handle on the natural sources and their variation over time. Major             
              volcanic eruptions, well quantified, could be used as natural                  
              experiments to evaluate the impact of greenhouse gases on climate.             
                                                                                             
              In addition, monitoring of carbon dioxide emissions can be used to             
              predict the course of volcanic eruptions and their local, regional,            
              and global consequences.
