Title       : Direct Numerical Simulation of Homogenous Turbulence for Planktonic Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1992       
File        : a9213856

Award Number: 9213856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83703              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. R. Strickler jrs@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hidekatsu Yamazaki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This investigation is part of GLOBEC - Global Ocean Ecosystems                 
              Dynamics - of the U.S. Global Chenage Research Program.  It is                 
              aimed at quantification of the interrelation between plankton                  
              trophodynamics and turbulence.  This project stems form the fact               
              that the literature assumes that trophodynamics and consequent                 
              population dynamics depend only on the relative density of                     
              predator and prey organisms, yet growing theoretical and                       
              empirical evidence indicates that turbulence can be alter the                  
              contact rate.  Using a supercomputer, turbulence can be simulated              
              directly from the Navier-Stokes equation (DNS) so the simulated                
              field is a "real" flow.  Flow visualization at the scale of an                 
              individual planktonic organism is the best way to educate our                  
              scientific mind.  Accumulated oceanic turbulence measurements                  
              provide enough information to interpret the numerically simulated              
              turbulence as oceanic turbulent flow.  A lognormal probability                 
              density function will be used to model the statistics of                       
              turbulent flow around a planktonic organism.                                   
                                                                                             
              A computer program will be developed to reduce the amount of                   
              computation required for DNS.  This program will create a                      
              kinematically correct random flow field at a high Reynolds                     
              number, which is unavailable from DNS.  A data base will be                    
              established for the simulated flow field for later uses.  A                    
              potential use of this data base will be to test the notion of                  
              food/ingestion signals.                                                        
                                                                                             
              A stochastic model will be employed to model the behavior of a                 
              planktonic organism.  Currently random walk is the only model                  
              used in Lagrangian simulations, however, the organism shows much               
              more complex swimming behavior.  A modified Auto-Regressive model              
              will be adapted for this purpose.
