Title       : A Conjugate Study of ULF Waves at the Cusp: A GEM Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1994  
File        : a9213361

Award Number: 9213361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131477             (Estimated)
Investigator: John V. Olson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This is a proposal to study the ULF wave spectrum at cusp                      
              stations in conjugate hemispheres.  An auroral observatory                     
              located at Longyearbyen, Svalbard in the northern hemisphere has               
              been in operation for nearly a decade and is equipped with                     
              induction coil and fluxgate magnetometers to measure the ULF wave              
              spectrum.  The station is also instrumented with all-sky and                   
              meridian scanning photometers which provide an optical context                 
              for the magnetic measurements.  In the southern hemisphere, the                
              Australian station at Davis, Antarctica is also equipped with                  
              induction coil and fluxgate magnetometers and has made                         
              observations of the ULF wave spectrum associated with the cusp                 
              for several year.  We have begun an echange of data and the                    
              analysis shows promising correlations.                                         
                                                                                             
              It is well known that the cusp region is a rich source of ULF                  
              waves spanning the frequency spectrum from near dc to above Hz.                
              The spectrum consists of an ensemble of waves and variations with              
              causes ranging from boundary motions and macroscopic boundary                  
              instabilities at the low frequency end, through impulsive and                  
              coherent signals with correlation to the solar wind at                         
              intermediate frequencies, up to an beyond ion-cyclotron waves                  
              generated in the unstable plasma near the magnetospheric boundary              
              layers and shocked cusp plasma.  Our work in this analysis is                  
              aided by through collaboration with the plasma simulation group                
              at the Geophysical Institute.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Our goal is to collect ULF data at the two sites on a campaign                 
              basis in order to:                                                             
              o    investigate the conjugacy of the cusp at these sites;                     
              o    identify wave generation mechanisms associated with the                   
                   cusp;                                                                     
              o    inspect the ULF spectrum at the two sites for correlations;               
              o    identify signatures of flux transfer and particle injection               
                   at the magnetopause;                                                      
              o    use the waves as a diagnostic for location of the                         
                   boundaries.
