Title       : Kinetics and Mechanisms of Organometallic Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9213531

Award Number: 9213531
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore L. Brown tlbrown@uicu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic                  
              Program will provide continued support to Dr. Theodore L. Brown                
              of the Chemistry Department, University of Illinois at                         
              Urbana-Champaign, for the study of reaction mechanisms of                      
              transition metal organometallic compounds in solution.  Three                  
              main lines of investigation will be pursued.  First, the loss                  
              of carbonyl ligands from selected compounds will be promoted                   
              photochemically, and the reaction intermediates studied using                  
              low temperature infrared spectroscopy.  Dinuclear metal                        
              carbonyls, chromium carbene complexes, hydrostannation and                     
              hydrosilation will be studied using this method.  Secondly,                    
              linear free energy reationships for organometallic reactions                   
              will be developed, based on the assumptions of Marcus theory.                  
              The purpose of this portion of the reseach is to enhance the                   
              ability to predict changes in reaction rates that result from                  
              modification of reaction conditions.  In particular, the                       
              consequences of changes in electronic or steric factors as                     
              ligands are varied will be investigated, especially in atom                    
              transfer and associative substitution reactions.  Thirdly,                     
              molecular mechanics will be used to evaluate ligand steric                     
              effects.  Early results indicate that the influence of ligand                  
              cone angles can be successfully interpreted using this approach.               
              %%%                                                                            
              Investigation of reaction mechanisms of organometallic                         
              compounds is reaching a stage in which the results can begin to                
              be systematized and generalized.  This work will provide                       
              guidelines for predicting reactivity in some reactions                         
              involving loss of a carbonyl ligand, atom transfer, and ligand                 
              exchange.  Particular attention will be paid to assessing the                  
              effect of ligands on reactivity.  These studies are important                  
              for the fundamental understanding of organometallic chemistry                  
              and catalytic processes involving organometallic compounds, and                
              could be helpful for catalyst design.
