Title       : Determination of Non-Exchangable Deuterium/Hydrogen of Chemical Compounds of
               Geo-biologic Interest.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1995      
File        : a9213639

Award Number: 9213639
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herman Zimmerman                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187214             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. V. Krishnamurthy r.v.krishnamurthy@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The D/H ratio of non-exchangeable Hydrogen atoms, primarily               
              bound as Carbon-Hydrogen, in plant materials, has been shown to                
              reflect the D/H ratio of the environmental water used by the                   
              plants.  The D/H ratio of the environmental water, which is                    
              invariably that of the local precipitation, is directly related to             
              the temperature at the site of precipitation.  Therefore the D/H               
              ratio of non-exchangeable hydrogen in plant material can provide               
              information about past climate conditions.                                     
                                                                                             
                   A simple equilibration technique that eliminates the lengthy              
              steps involved in the isolation of carbon bound hydrogen in                    
              cellulose and at the same time permits the evaluation of the                   
              isotope fractionation factors of exchangeable hydrogen in cellulose            
              at any chosen temperature has been developed.  This award will                 
              allow the extension of this technique to the determination of the              
              fractionation factors of several organic compounds of biogeologic              
              interest.  Knowledge of the fractionation factors will enable                  
              easier and speedier analysis of the D/H ratio of the non-                      
              exchangeable hydrogen in the compounds that can be isolated from               
              biologic and geologic systems.  In the geologic context, knowledge             
              of the D/H ratio of specific compounds will provide information on             
              the environmental conditions under which a certain compound  was               
              generated as well as the post-depositional chemistry that might                
              have affected it.
