Title       : The Unity and Diversity of Probability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1992      
File        : a9213674

Award Number: 9213674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn R. Shafer gshafer@andromeda.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Professor Shafer is developing a foundation for probability that               
              accommodates the diversity of its uses in the normative and                    
              descriptive sciences.  This foundation goes against the grain of               
              established interpretations of probability, but it revives many                
              older insights.  It incorporates insights from pure mathematics,               
              where the fundamental role of martingales and filtrations in the               
              theory of stochastic processes is well recognized, as well as                  
              insights from applied statistics, where the appeal of conditional              
              methods has conflicted with the established interpretations.                   
                                                                                             
              The basic idea of Professor Shafer's study is that probability                 
              should be founded not on measure theory but on the classical                   
              picture of a fair game of chance, where probabilities are                      
              simultaneously fair prices, reasonable degrees of belief, and, in              
              some cases, long-run frequencies.  The applications of probability             
              are diverse because there are many ways of relating practical                  
              problems to this classical picture.                                            
                                                                                             
              Professor Shafer's approach to probability implies a new                       
              understanding of statistical models.  These models no longer                   
              represent merely frequencies or merely beliefs.  Instead, they                 
              represent a relation between certain facts about the long-run and              
              the knowledge of the observer.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The project involves several different kinds of research.                      
              Alternate axiomatizations of the classical picture need to be                  
              explored and a variety of theoretical issues in statistics need to             
              be related to the proposed new foundation.  The ideas need to be               
              related to the historical development of probability and to                    
              established debates about the meaning of probability in statistics             
              and science.  This project promises contributions to the                       
              foundations of probability important both for philosophy of science            
              and for mathematicians interested in probability and statistics.
