Title       : ENGINEERING RESEARCH EQUIPMENT: Equipment Dedicated to Research in the
               Engineering of Hybrid Optoelectronic Devices and Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1992 
File        : a9213038

Award Number: 9213038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristina M. Johnson kris@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The purchase of this equipment will be                                         
              dedicated to the research in the                                               
              engineering of hybrid optoelectronic                                           
              components for insertion into 3D optical                                       
              image processing architectures.  Three                                         
              integrated research projects will utilize the                                  
              research equipment to realize a compact,                                       
              high throughput optical image processing                                       
              module, based on the Hughes 3D                                                 
              computer architecture.  This electronic                                        
              processor consists of stacks of silicon                                        
              wafers interconnected through ohmic                                            
              contacts.  Power dissipation limits the                                        
              processing speed.  The PI proposes to                                          
              replace the electronic contacts with power                                     
              efficient VLSI-based optical interconnects.                                    
              Fabrication of VLSI optical interconnect                                       
              devices and their alignment into multi-chip                                    
              modules are crucial technologies for                                           
              increasing the computational power of 3D                                       
              computers.  Equipment to be purchased                                          
              under this research project includes                                           
              computer workstations, a source generator                                      
              and spectrum analyzer for the design,                                          
              layout and testing of VLSI devices.  Optical                                   
              interconnections are realized by filling the                                   
              VLSI chips with electro-optic materials.                                       
              Equipment required to accomplish this task                                     
              includes vacuum ovens, hotplates,                                              
              temperature controllers, vacuum spinner                                        
              and water purification system.  Aligning the                                   
              optical interconnect devices into multi-chip                                   
              modules requires vacuum evaporators and                                        
              a fluxless solder reflow unit.  Testing the                                    
              multi-chip modules for insertion into the                                      
              Hughes 3D computer architecture requires                                       
              a visible laser, associated optical hardware,                                  
              floatation table and legs.
