Title       : Dissertation Research: Craft Production and Political Centralization: Iron
               Working in Central Madagascar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1994        
File        : a9213165

Award Number: 9213165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7075               (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry T. Wright hwright@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sigrid C. Gabler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Henry Wright, MS Sigrid Gabler, a                   
              graduate student at the Univeristy of Michigan, will collect data              
              for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological                 
              research in the eastern region of Madagascar and focus on the                  
              emergence and development of iron working technology. Both                     
              historical records and archaeological evidence indicate that iron              
              smelting was once widespread. Ms. Gabler will examine three sites              
              in the Ankay region. She will map surface finds in terms of                    
              artifact densities, locate potential slag heaps and collect a                  
              sample of surface artifacts. In a second phase she will undertake              
              subsurface testing for features, especially iron working locales.              
              In the final field phase careful horizontal exposures will be                  
              made to uncover iron working locales. Size of slag heaps will be               
              measured to determine production output. Carbon samples for                    
              dating and samples of plant remains will also be collected.                    
              Ceramic analysis will be conducted to establish both relative age              
              of sites and to determine activities which occurred. Subsequent                
              metallurgical analysis will serve to reconstruct the smelting                  
              process.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Madagascar was originally settled by Southeast Asian peoples and               
              not from the mainland continent of Africa. In prehistoric times                
              chiefdoms developed and the earliest European observers found                  
              highly centralized societies.  The means by which chiefdoms                    
              emerged on this isolated and circumscribed island however are not              
              understood.  Archaeologists have focussed much attention in                    
              recent years on how complex societies arise since this process is              
              seen in many parts of the world. They believe that specialization              
              and control over labor together with social stratification plays               
              a major role but whether it serves as a cause per se or is a                   
              secondary manifestation is not known.  Ms.Gabler's research will               
              address this issue.  Because the byproducts of iron smelting are               
              so archaeologically visible and because they preserve well in the              
              archaeological record, the Madagascar data provide an excellent                
              entree to this issue.  Extensive historical records give a                     
              context to interpret the prehistoric data.                                     
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will add                    
              significantly to our knowledge of a poorly understood region of                
              the world. It will shed new light on the origins of complex                    
              society and will assist in the training of a promising student.
