Title       : A Proposal to Create an Academic/Research Network for the State of Louisiana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1994     
File        : a9213865

Award Number: 9213865
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Luker                           
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $588400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sammie W. Cosper   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Ohme  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walt Phythian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana Brd of Regents
	      150 Third Street, Suite 129
	      Baton Rouge, LA  708011302    504/342-4253

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 4091,9217,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Louisiana Board of Regents on behalf of its member                         
              institutions, proposes to establish an academic data network. The              
              proposal requests partial funding for participation in NSFNET                  
              through a connection with SURAnet, the regional network attaching              
              to NSFNET in the Louisiana Area as well as partial start-up funds              
              for the necessary routers, circuits, and operating support to                  
              facilitate the fullest possible participation.  The educational                
              institutions that will participate include: LSU-Alexandria, LSU-               
              Eunice, LSU-Shreveport, Southern Univ.-New Orleans, Southern                   
              Univ.-Shreveport, Delgado Community College, Grambling State                   
              Univ., McNeese State University, Nicholls State University,                    
              Northwestern State University, Centenary College, Dillard                      
              University, Central Offices of the Board of Regents, Louisiana                 
              Universities Marine Consortium, and Loyola University.                         
                                                                                             
              The network will provide a consistent statewide architecture for               
              NSFNET access for a broad variety of entities engaged in                       
              education and research.  This cooperative network will provide                 
              gateways to regional, national, and international networks and                 
              will be consistent with their standards.  It will further the                  
              institutions' work in enhancing the state's economic development               
              through a well-educated workforce, accessible training                         
              opportunities, and research and development partnerships.                      
              Another goal of the network is to facilitate collaborative                     
              projects and sharing of resources between institutions, including              
              those outside the state.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The universities need greater functionality and network speed to               
              be able to access supercomputers, libraries, and make file                     
              transfers along with being able to implement a more reliable mail              
              system. Students and faculty research will benefit from the link.              
              This is also a unique opportunity for the schools to explore                   
              innovative educational resources.***//
