Title       : Statistical Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1994   
File        : a9213424

Award Number: 9213424
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel L. Lebowitz lebowitz@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 0000,9162,9256,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A broad research program in statistical mechanics will be continued            
              with the goal of obtaining a better understanding of the properties            
              of macroscopic matter.  The methods used range from rigorous                   
              mathematical analysis to computer simulations.  The research is                
              supported jointly by the Divisions of Materials Research, Physics              
              and Mathematical Sciences.                                                     
                                                                                             
              The research will focus on the derivation of deterministic                     
              macroscopic hydrodynamical equations from microscopic dynamics, by             
              suitable scalings of space and time, in order to obtain an                     
              understanding of fluctuatiions and sometimes large deviations from             
              these continuum equations - where the atomic nature of matter                  
              manifests itself.  This should enhance our understanding of shock              
              structure, phase segregation and related phenomena.  The nature of             
              stationary nonequilibrium states, including phase transitions in               
              nonequilibrium systems, will be another major focus of our                     
              research.  We also plan to investigate the statistical mechanics of            
              probablistic cellular automata with possible applications to                   
              parallel computations and neural networks.  The behavior of                    
              diffusion dominated reactions will be explored with particular                 
              attention to the spatial patterns formed at long times.                        
              %%%                                                                            
              A broad program of theoretical research will be conducted in                   
              nonequilibrium statistical mechanics.  Emphasis will be placed on              
              deriving equations which model fluid flow from their microscopic               
              constituents.  This is a very complex and difficult task which will            
              involve state-of-the-art techniques in analysis and computer                   
              science.  Reflecting the range of the research, funding is provided            
              by the Divisions of Materials Research, Physics and Mathematical               
              Sciences.
