Title       : The Formation and Significance of New Industrial Districts: A Study of Four
               Countries' Experience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1995    
File        : a9213611

Award Number: 9213611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124788             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann R. Markusen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Accompanying the increasing integration of global production              
              and trade connections has been the rise of new industrial                      
              districts.  These are spatially distinct areas of economic                     
              activity dominated by a specialized set of trade-oriented                      
              industries which induce in turn population and employment growth.              
              The literature on new industrial districts focuses on                          
              agglomeration forces and externalities, the networks and                       
              relationships among firms, and the functioning of local labor                  
              markets.   Because of the wide variety of forms such industrial                
              districts take on, and because disagreement exists over which                  
              districts to designate as new and specialized, this research will              
              amplify and generalize the theory of their formation and                       
              location.  The theoretical portion of the study will concentrate               
              on non-place embeddedness, non-local externalities, interdistrict              
              labor mobility, and the role of the State in new industrial                    
              district formation.  The empirical portion will examine districts              
              in four countries:  the United States, Japan, Korea, and Brazil.               
              A typology of industrial districts will be developed, and                      
              specific hypotheses will be tested which reflect the                           
              theoretically expected attributes attributed to each district                  
              type.  Data for the analysis will come from published statistics               
              available in each country.  An international team of researchers               
              will work on case study districts in each country, and they will               
              compare and contrast their findings across national contexts.                  
                   This research will produce a fuller basic theory of new                   
              industrial district formation based on a broader analysis of                   
              embeddedness, externalities, and developmental agents.  It will                
              result in a typology of new industrial districts which is more                 
              comprehensive and adaptable to various national situations.  The               
              four nation comparison of new industrial districts will permit an              
              interpretation of how national differences in political                        
              structure, stage of development, economic strategy, and corporate              
              structure, condition their growth and formation.
