Title       : Elementary Coordination Dynamics of Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1992    
File        : a9213995

Award Number: 9213995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112846             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. A. Scott Kelso kelso@walt.ccs.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pier-Giorgio Zanone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research aims to answer the following questions concerning the            
              processes that underlie the ability of human beings to learn new               
              skills:  What changes with learning?  What is the nature of change?            
              What factors determine the form taken by changes due to learning?              
              What governs the rate of learning?  Aside from the obvious                     
              practical advantages that will accrue to areas such as education               
              and training, answers to these questions will yield a deeper                   
              understanding of learning which is a fundamental feature of                    
              complex, living things.  While it is generally agreed that                     
              individuals are not tabulae rasae but instead bring different                  
              backgrounds and capacities into the learning environment,                      
              satisfactory concepts and methods to treat such individual                     
              differences in learning do not exist.  This research will introduce            
              new methods to evaluate spontaneous coordination tendencies on an              
              individual basis and will study how such tendencies are modified by            
              the learning process itself.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The research will use perceptual-motor coordination tasks (visually            
              specified relative timing patterns between the limbs) as the window            
              into learning.  In a typical experiment, individual coordination               
              tendencies will be probed prior to the introduction of a specific              
              learning requirement.  The probe will require people to match a                
              phase relationship (given by a computer generated visual metronome)            
              between rhythmically moving limbs, which will be changed in 15                 
              degree steps every 15 seconds over the interval from 0 to 360                  
              degrees.  These subjects will then be trained with a specific                  
              phasing pattern (e.g., 90 degrees) that does not correspond to                 
              those coordination patterns that are well-performed in the probe               
              (e.g., 0 degrees and 180 degrees).  Knowledge of results will be               
              provided only during the learning phase, which typically proceeds              
              over a period of several days.  Further probes will allow learning             
              to be interpreted in terms of the cooperative or competitive                   
              interplay between the task to be learned and each individual's                 
              preferred coordination tendencies.  Kelso's specific theoretical               
              model captures the entire coordination dynamics as an equation of              
              motion and leads to a number of testable predictions about                     
              learning.  This research will examine empirically predictions                  
              concerning mechanisms of transfer and generalization to other tasks            
              involving other components, the form (abrupt vs. smooth) that the              
              learning process exhibits, the various routes or pathways adopted              
              in learning a new skill, and the factors determining learning rate.            
              This approach, by identifying dynamic constraints before, during,              
              and after learning, includes a level of description currently                  
              missing in learning theory and often completely ignored in                     
              practical applications.
