Title       : Optimal Catalyst Distribution for Inorganic Membrane Reactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1994   
File        : a9213683

Award Number: 9213683
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224058             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arvind Varma avarma@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9146,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Heterogeneous catalysis is used in the chemical and petroleum                  
              industries for the manufacture of a variety of valuable                        
              products.  Inorganic membrane reactors combine the catalytic                   
              reaction and separation functions into one unit.  The                          
              attractiveness of these reactors arises from their                             
              substantially improved performance for reversible reaction                     
              systems; as the products are continuously removed the                          
              reactions can shift to higher conversions, not limited by                      
              equilibrium considerations.  For a fixed total amount of                       
              catalyst, the question arises as to how it should be                           
              distributed within the membrane so that the membrane reactor                   
              performance (for example reaction rate, product purity, etc.)                  
              is optimized.  This is the motivation for this research                        
              project.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The PI plans to conduct a combined theoretical-experimental                    
              study, to investigate the performance of catalytic membrane                    
              reactors with controlled catalyst distribution.  Theoretical                   
              work will identify the optimal catalyst distribution required                  
              to maximize specific performance indices (for example,                         
              reactant conversion, product purity, etc.).  This will include                 
              analysis of membrane reactors where the catalyst is                            
              distributed in a controlled manner along the membrane                          
              thickness as well as along the reactor length.  Experimental                   
              work will be directed towards preparing and testing such                       
              membranes, and will permit a quantitative comparison with                      
              theoretical predictions.***//
