Title       : Sediment Transport by Overland Flow on Irregular Hillslope Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1992    
File        : a9213378

Award Number: 9213378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103063             (Estimated)
Investigator: Athol D. Abrahams abrahams@geog.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph F. Atkinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Soil erosion models have become an essential tool for soil                
              conservation planning and design and for a variety of other land               
              management and assessment tasks.  Modern soil erosion models are               
              process based, and virtually all of them contain a formula for                 
              predicting sediment transport capacity, as transport capacity                  
              controls both rate of erosion and rate of deposition.  Although                
              all hillslopes have irregular surfaces, no existing formula is                 
              capable of accurately predicting the transport capacity of                     
              overland flow on such surfaces.  There is an urgent need for                   
              development of such a formula.  This project will develop                      
              sediment transport formulas for stone covered and grass covered                
              surfaces as a first step toward development of a more general                  
              formula for all irregular surfaces.  The research will be based                
              on two sets of flume experiments in the laboratory.  Cylinders                 
              will be used to simulate stones and nails will simulate grass.                 
              Experiments will be performed in a six meter long flume using a                
              variety of water discharges, gradients, grain sizes, and cylinder              
              and nail concentrations.  The analysis will establish empirical                
              relations between transport capacity and appropriate hydraulic                 
              variables that reflect the energy dissipated near the bed and                  
              available to transport sediment.                                               
                   The ability of process-based soil erosion models to provide               
              accurate predictions of soil erosion is dependent on the accuracy              
              of the transport capacity equation they employ.  This research                 
              should produce formulas for stone and grass covered surfaces                   
              which can be incorporated immediately into existing soil erosion               
              models.  Use of these formulas should lead to more accurate                    
              estimates of sediment transport capacity and thus better                       
              predictions of soil erosion rates on irregular surfaces.
