Title       : Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Ultrasonic Scanning System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1994      
File        : a9213132

Award Number: 9213132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. (Cheena) Srinivasan                  
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69055              (Estimated)
Investigator: Danny D. Edie dan.edie@ces.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amod A. Ogale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Amit Bagchi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles C. Fain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Kennedy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9146,
Abstract    :
                   This Research Equipment Grant (REG) is to purchase an                     
              Ultrasonic Scanning System for the non-destructive evaluation (NDE)            
              of materials.  Several research efforts are currently underway at              
              the school in the area of processing of composite materials.  A new            
              process, where carbon fibers are coated with resin material before             
              weaving, is being developed.  Resin materials that exhibit poor                
              melt flow characteristics that inhibit consolidation can be used               
              by this process.  Also being researched is a process to fabricate              
              three dimensional composite parts using stereolithography.  By                 
              preferential placement of fiber reinforcements, as the resin is                
              cured in layers by Ultra-Violet light, it will be possible to                  
              engineer the mechanical properties of the component as required by             
              its functional specifications.  The ultrasonic scanning system is              
              needed to assist in all these efforts.  The structural integrity               
              of the produced material can be verified easily by this equipment              
              and will be beneficial in the development of these projects.                   
                   These research efforts are all aimed at developing new                    
              techniques to make components out of composite materials in a rapid            
              and cost-effective manner.  The successful implementation of these             
              projects, which will be benefited by this equipment, will benefit              
              the industrial manufacturing sector.
