Title       : Managing Science: Administration and Activity at Ames National Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1992 
File        : a9213224

Award Number: 9213224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19864              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanne A. Goldman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-2311

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              This professional development fellowship will enable the                       
              recipient to immerse herself in the research activities at the                 
              Ames National Laboratory in three major areas:  materials                      
              chemistry, condensed matter physics and metallurgy and ceramics.               
              Over the course of two summers, by participating in lab group                  
              meetings, discussing research and research results and                         
              publications with group members, and attending symposia at                     
              scientific meetings, this historian of science and technology                  
              will gain scientific and technical literacy to help her in her                 
              research.  The research involves an exploration of the                         
              relationships between the process of scientific research and its               
              organization, management, and funding.  To explore this                        
              relationship the investigator will examine the history of                      
              scientific activity at Ames Laboratory.  In its forty-five year                
              tenure the facility has expanded and become more complex.                      
              However, small-scale, single-investigator laboratory-based                     
              research continues to define its msision.  The investigator will               
              also be able to conduct oral interviews with present and former                
              laboratory personnel, to chronicle their recollections of the                  
              history of Ames.  During the academic year, the investigator will              
              research other aspects of the project, including Frank Spedding's              
              papers and the archivals resources at the laboratory, Iowa State               
              University, the Department of Energy and its Chicago field                     
              office.  The internship will help to put those sources in                      
              context, while research during the academic year will raise new                
              issues for discussion with the laboratory scientists during the                
              second summer.  Results from this research will be of benefit to               
              policy makers and scientists as institutional bureaucracies and                
              mechanisms of management and funding for science are                           
              restructured.
