Title       : Marine Biotech Fellowship: The Population Genetic Consequences of
               Histocompatibility in a Colonial Ascidian
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1992 
File        : a9213064

Award Number: 9213064
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas S. Stoner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Irving L. Weissman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The genes governing allorecognition in both vertebrates and                    
              invertebrates can be highly polymorphic.  This project will examine            
              some of the selective forces that may have initiated and maintained            
              this polymorphism in a model system, the colonial ascidian,                    
              Botryllus schlosseri.  In this ascidian, a single and highly                   
              polymorphic allorecognition locus appears to govern the processes              
              of colony fusion and gamete incompatibility.  It is argued that a              
              precise allorecognition system may have evolved in B. Schlosseri to            
              reduce the costs of somatic cell parasitism associated with colony             
              fusion and/or to decrease the level of inbreeding over that                    
              expected if male fertilities were a simple function of sperm                   
              concentration.  This project will test these ideas by asking the               
              following specific questions:  1) What are the genetic costs of                
              colony fusion?  2) What is the frequency of genetic chimeras in                
              natural populations? and 3) To what extent does gametic                        
              incompatibility lower male fertilities in matings among kin?                   
                                                                                             
              To answer these questions the research will: first,  determine the             
              best combination of probes and restriction enzymes for the genetic             
              typing of individuals by DNA fingerprinting; second, genetically               
              characterize what happens to the tissues and germ lines of fused               
              colonies over time; third, genetically type the tissues and progeny            
              of a random sample of colonies to determine what percentage of a               
              local population consists of genetic chimeras; and fourth, the                 
              project will use sperm competition experiments and paternity                   
              fertilization success in matings among kin.                                    
                                                                                             
              This project will provide two products.  The first product will be             
              a description of the genetic consequences of histocompatibility.               
              Such information will be critical to our understanding of the                  
              adaptive significance of colony fusion and gamete incompatibility              
              in communities of clonal marine invertebrates as well as for                   
              identifying the selective forces that initiated and maintained the             
              high levels of allotypic polymorphism that are necessary for a                 
              precise allorecognition system.  The second product will be the                
              development of molecular techniques for the estimation of                      
              paternity.  In the future, this capability will allow for more                 
              detailed genetic studies that attempt to reconstruct the genealogy             
              of populations and assess the evolutionary fitness of different                
              genotypes.
