Title       : A Synoptic Climatology of Warm Season Convection in the Southern Great Lakes
               Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9213072

Award Number: 9213072
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149657             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie A. Winkler winkler@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The frequency, character, seasonality, and diurnal phasing                
              of convection are important components of the climatology of a                 
              place or region.  The southern Great Lakes region of the United                
              States has been understudied in this regard.  It lies within a                 
              transition zone separating western regions where nocturnal                     
              thunderstorms predominate during the warm season and eastern                   
              regions where thunderstorms occur mostly during the daytime.                   
              This makes the southern Great Lakes unique in that nocturnal and               
              daytime convection are equally frequent during the warm months of              
              the year.  The nature and extent of the influence of lake breezes              
              and land-water temperature differences and their relationship to               
              the occurrence, timing, and intensity of convection is unknown                 
              for this region.  This research will document, using lightning                 
              and radar observations, the convective climatology of the                      
              southern Great Lakes region at a fine temporal and spatial scale.              
              The project will identify the differences in the statistical                   
              properties of nocturnal versus daytime convective systems, and                 
              examine the nature and extent of variations in convective                      
              frequency and timing.  Differences in the meso-alpha scale and                 
              synoptic scale atmospheric environment in which nocturnal and                  
              daytime convective events form will be evaluated.  This will                   
              assist in an assessment of the relative hazard to human life and               
              property posed by convective storms in terms of potential                      
              lightning damage and the probability of heavy precipitation.                   
                   The improved convective climatology resulting from this                   
              research will allow for a re-evaluation of currently proposed                  
              explanations for differences in the diurnal phasing of convective              
              storms.  The linkages identified between the statistical                       
              properties of convective storms and the large-scale environments               
              in which they form can be employed in the short-range forecasting              
              of convection.
