Title       : Marine Biotech Fellowship: A Test of Alternative Speciation Hypotheses Using
               Molecular Systematic Analysis of Lagenorhynchus Dolphins.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1994      
File        : a9213281

Award Number: 9213281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Cipriano   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9213281  Cipriano    A variety of related plant and animal taxa, both marine and
               terrestrial, are found to the north and south of an apparent  tropical
              barrier.  The variety of these "antitropical" taxa  includes many supposed
              populations or species pairs of whales,  dolphins and porpoises.  This project
              will study the relationships  and divergence between dolphin species of the
              genus Lagenorhynchus  found in northern and southern temperate oceans and will
              test  alternative hypotheses of Pleistocene glaciation or mid-Miocene  warming
              as explanations for the currently observed anti-tropical  species
              distributions.    Sequence analysis of portions of dolphin mitochondrial DNA,
              with  supplemental use of nuclear DNA markers, will be used to establish 
              relationships within the genus, and for comparison to related  outgroup genera
              also within the the Family Delphinidae. In order to  place amounts of genetic
              divergence found between Lagenorhynchus  species into perspective, it will be
              necessary to sequence  specimens from populations within Lagenorhynchus species
              to provide  a yardstick for interpreting interspecific divergence.  This 
              project will also investigate the population structure of white-  sided
              dolphins (L. obliquidens) found continuously distributed in  the North Pacific,
              and of widely separated populations of dusky  dolphins (L. obscurus) from the
              southern oceans.  This would be the  first attempt to establish genetic
              criteria for distinction of  stocks of these species, or to recognize potential
              specific status  of L. obscurus from different areas. This information may be
              useful  to determine whether particular stocks are at risk form fishing 
              activities in certain regions.    In order to assess the approximate timing of
              the divergence between  Lagenorhynchus species, genetic distances will be
              interpreted using  the perspective provided by population structure analysis, 
              comparison to published sequences for outgroups, and comparison to  genetic
              distances of other taxa known to have div erged in Miocene  and Pleistocene
              times. Because of the large difference between the  time scale of the two
              alternatives, identification of the  congruence of Lagenorhynchus divergence
              timing with one should thus  be possible even without a rate calibration.  ***
