Title       : Rights Advocacy in the Legal Profession
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1994     
File        : a9213147

Award Number: 9213147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60224              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart A. Scheingold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Most research on the relationship between social forces and the                
              evolution of the legal profession focuses on the practice of law               
              in corporate law firms.  This study departs from this traditional              
              focus to investigate the changing nature of the legal profession               
              from the perspective of advocacy lawyering.  Focusing on legal                 
              rights lawyers and left activist lawyers, it investigates how                  
              lawyers operating at the margins of the legal profession respond               
              to the norms and ideology of the legal profession.  In addition,               
              the research discerns whether there are differences in the                     
              political ideology and professional norms of legal rights lawyers              
              in comparison to activist lawyers who practice law with the                    
              explicit goal of advancing the interests of the political left.                
              Also, it explores how shifts in the larger society influence both              
              types of advocacy lawyering.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Focusing on a sample of lawyers affiliated with the Seattle                    
              membership of the National Lawyers Guild and a sample of attorneys             
              working with local legal rights organizations in the Seattle area,             
              the researchers employ an interview protocol to explore                        
              relationships among social change, different forms of advocacy                 
              lawyering, and the norms of the legal profession.  In addition to              
              broadening research on the transformation of the legal profession,             
              the study offers new insights into the ongoing public and                      
              professional debates about the efficacy of rights as a means of                
              promoting social change in the United States.
