Title       : An Ethnographic Analysis of the Impact of Globally Significant Ideologies on
               Legal Consciousness and Gender Relations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1992      
File        : a9213362

Award Number: 9213362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60278              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Hirsch shirsch@mail.wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Hierarchical relations between men and women are maintained,                   
              resisted, and transformed in large part through legal processes.               
              Legal consciousness plays a critically important role in the                   
              dynamics of gender domination and its resistance by women.  This               
              project aims to increase understanding of how legal consciousness              
              is shaped in historically and culturally specific contexts and to              
              assess its complex role in the transformation of gender relations              
              in the late twentieth century.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The project uses ethnographic methods combined with techniques of              
              discourse analysis developed in the law and language literature to             
              examine the impact of globally significant ideologies on legal                 
              consciousness and gender relations in two East African communities.            
              The project is centrally concerned with examining how two                      
              ideologies, feminism and Islamic fundamentalism, shape the legal               
              consciousness of Swahili Muslims in coastal Kenya and Tanzania.                
              The project explores (l) how globally significant ideologies are               
              instantiated at state and local levels, through institutions                   
              associated with law, Islam, and women, and events such as                      
              conferences, speeches, and media portrayals; (2) how legal                     
              consciousness is shaped through encounters with global ideologies              
              mediated through Islamic and secular courts as well as through                 
              community organizations; and (3) how gender relations in Swahili               
              society reflect shifts in legal consciousness and the struggle over            
              ideology more generally in the post-colonial period.  Of particular            
              concern is the hypothesized contrast between the two communities               
              with respect to the impact of these ideologies and the                         
              transformation of gender relations.  This contrast should be useful            
              in developing a theoretical model--attentive to local and global               
              phenomena--of the complex interaction among globally significant               
              ideologies, legal consciousness, and gender relations.
