Title       : Japan Long-Term Research Visit: Melt Coupling of ImmisciblePolymers by Chain End
               Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1992    
File        : a9213528

Award Number: 9213528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154804             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris W. Macosko macosko@maroon.tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve month long-term visit by                      
              Professor Chris Macosko, Department of Chemical Engineering and                
              Materials Science, University of Minnesota, to Japan for a                     
              cooperative research project with Professor Takashi Inoue,                     
              Department of Organic and Polymeric Materials and Professor                    
              Seiichi Nakahama, Department of Polymer Chemistry, Tokyo                       
              Institute of Technology.  The researchers plan to undertake a                  
              study of melt coupling of immiscible polymers by chain end                     
              reactions.  Polymer blends are the fastest growing area of the                 
              plastics market.  The researchers will form diblock coploymers by              
              reactively coupling chains during melt blending.  Polystyrene and              
              poly(e-vinyl-pyridine) will be synthesized anionically and then                
              terminated with functional groups.  Two reactive pairs will be                 
              studied: cyclic anhydride with amine and epoxy with carboxylic                 
              acid.  They will then directly add an amine to the end of a                    
              living anionic chain and then extend this approach to the other                
              groups.  This process will be followed by size exclusion                       
              chromatography as a function of mixing intensity, time and                     
              temperature, as well as the type of functional group and size of               
              the attached polymer chain.  The interfacial thickness will be                 
              measured by an automated ellipsometer.  Morphology development                 
              during melt mixing will be followed by time resolved light                     
              scattering.  Electron microscopy will be used on quenched                      
              samples.  Samples prepared with and without coupling reaction and              
              with premade diblocks will then be compared.                                   
                                                                                             
              Results of the research should contribute to development of new                
              strategies for creating and controlling the morphology of                      
              immiscible polymer blends.  Professor Inoue's strengths are in                 
              the area of polymer physics particularly light scattering,                     
              morphology and thermodynamics.  He has also done excellent work                
              on mechanical properties of immiscible polymer blends.  Professor              
              Macosko's expertise lies in the areas of rheology, process flows               
              and neutron scattering methods.  It is expected that this                      
              research project should provide a fruitful collaboration.  It is               
              also expected that there will be industry participation in this                
              project since each of the researchers have strong industrial                   
              contacts.
