Title       : Strategic Information Manipulation as a Model of Assets and Aggregate
               Fluctuations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1992   
File        : a9213145

Award Number: 9213145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52883              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bart Taub b-taub@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Economy-wide fluctuations of employment investment and output can              
              occur because of the way information flows in the economy, and                 
              the incentives individuals have to restrict those flows.  This                 
              phenomenon is studied by bringing together mathematical building               
              blocks developed separately in the investigator's earlier work.                
              The first building block uses contract theory to show how                      
              information flows in asset markets.  The second building block                 
              uses contract theory to show how feedback of information about                 
              economy-wide fluctuations of output flows to individuals.                      
                                                                                             
              The novel element in this research is that a theory of assets is               
              embedded in a rational expectations based model of aggregate                   
              fluctuations.  This permits the investigator to study long                     
              standing questions about the relationship between asset behavior               
              and business cycle fluctuations.  Joining the two building blocks              
              causes spillover effects in the form of economy-wide                           
              fluctuations-the business cycle-that cause asset markets to                    
              function less efficiently than they would in the absence of the                
              fluctuations.  Despite their adverse effect on asset markets, the              
              fluctuations might nevertheless be desirable, and it might also                
              be desirable that the fluctuations be long lasting, because they               
              improve the flow of information.
