Title       : New Materials for Optical Wave Guides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1992   
File        : a9160537

Award Number: 9160537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jim D. Meador   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brewer Science Inc
	      2401 High Tech Drive, Box GG
	      Rolla, MO  65401    573/364-0300

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1493,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Light signals pass through optical processors via an                           
              interconnecting system of wave guide structures.  Fluorinated                  
              polymers, because of their outstanding properties, are logical                 
              materials for use in fabricating these structures.                             
              Fluoropolymers can be paired with other plastics of ceramics of                
              higher refractive index and "potentially" fabricated into wave                 
              guide structures using an innovative micromachining technique                  
              known as LIGA Microforming.  The ultimate goal of this program                 
              (Phase I and II) is the direct fabrication of wave guide                       
              structures by X-ray or deep UV lithography.                                    
                                                                                             
              New resist materials with outstanding sensitivity, contrast,                   
              resolution, and adhesion are required for the "Thick film"                     
              coatings necessary for micromachining.  These resists will be                  
              designed in the Phase I program.  For the Phase I effort, we will              
              synthesize two promising candidates poly (trifluoroethyl                       
              methacrylate) and poly (hexafluoroisopropyl methacrylate) and                  
              evaluate resist performance for both X-ray and deep UV exposure.               
              Each fluorinated monomer will be copolymerized with 3-oximino-2                
              butanone methacrylate to give improved sensitivity for deep-UV                 
              exposure.  The two copolymers will be evaluated for deep-UV                    
              properties neat and also sensitized with p-t-butylbenzoic acid.                
              The four polymers will be chemically characterized and tested for              
              application properties, sensitivity to deep-U and X-ray                        
              (homopolymers only), contrast, resolution, and refractive index                
              versus wavelength.  The developer and rinse cycle will be                      
              optimized for each polymer.  Resist materials and developers from              
              Phase I will be further optimized in Phase II and used for                     
              micromachining a wave guide.
