Title       : Supercritical Fluid Purification of Alane:Trimethylamine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1991  
File        : a9160536

Award Number: 9160536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter P. Kosar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Tech Matls, Inc.
	      7 Commerce Drive
	      Danbury, CT  06810    203/794-1100

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1414,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The ability to produce high performance electronic devices by                  
              metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) is critically                   
              dependent on reagent purity and deposition chemistry.  MOCVD                   
              based metallization processes are also strongly affected by                    
              reagent cost.  The ideal aluminum MOCVD reagent would meet the                 
              demands of high purity and chemical compatibility required for                 
              electronic film growth yet be economically attractive for                      
              metallization applications.  Alane:trimethylamine                              
              (AlH3:N(CH3)3) is a promising aluminum reagent both for MOCVD                  
              of aluminum gallium arsenide films and metallization.                          
              Widespread adoption of this reagent has been hindered by                       
              concerns about purity and cost.  Alane:trimethylamine is                       
              currently purified by sublimation, a time-consuming process                    
              difficult to scale up.  In Phase I, alane:trimethylamine will                  
              be purified using supercritical fluid (SCF)                                    
              extraction/recrystallization.  A high pressure synthesis of                    
              alane:trimethylamine in the same SCF medium used for                           
              extraction will also be performed to demonstrate feasibility                   
              of combining high pressure synthesis with SCF extraction.  In                  
              Phase II, production scale methodology will be developed and                   
              this novel combination of techniques will be profilerated to a                 
              broad range of semiconductor grade reagents.                                   
                                                                                             
              Supercritical fluid technology may provide a means of coupling                 
              the synthesis and purification of alane:trimethylamine in one                  
              process.  This process could supply higher purity, lower cost,                 
              alane:trimethylamine for the electronics industry.
