Title       : Combustion Synthesis of Fullerenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1991  
File        : a9160461

Award Number: 9160461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Wright   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TDA Research, Inc
	      12345 West 52nd Avenue
	      Wheat Ridge, CO  800331917    303/940-2301

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1407,
Abstract    :
              Fullerenes, a new form of carbon with structures similar to                    
              those of a soccer ball, were first produced in late 1990.                      
              Because of their unique properties, many promising                             
              applications have been suggested; however, no matter how                       
              interesting their properties, development of the potential of                  
              fullerenes requires that large quantities be available at a                    
              relatively low price.  Although the currently conventional                     
              carbon-arc production method is simple to build and run at the                 
              laboratory scale, it is an inherently small-scale batch                        
              process, difficult to scale up, energy intensive, and very                     
              expensive.  TDA is therefore pursuing a combustion synthesis                   
              process as an approach to produce large quantities of low-cost                 
              fullerenes.  Combustion processes are continuous, easy to                      
              scale up, allow fine control of time-temperature history                       
              (important for optimization of product yield), have low                        
              capital costs, and use inexpensive hyrocarbon fuels as raw                     
              materials.  TDA has successfully isolated fullerenes from                      
              combustion soot and has developed thermodynamic models to                      
              predict the dependence of product yield on operating                           
              conditions which will be utilized in the experimental program                  
              to be carried out.  In the first phase of this program, TDA                    
              will investigate the effects of temperature, pressure,                         
              equivalence ratio, and input fuel composition in order to                      
              optimize the yield of fullerenes, and will use these data to                   
              analyze design and economics for the combustion route to                       
              fullerenes.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Although fullerenes have been available for less than a year,                  
              many applications of this unique class of materials have been                  
              suggested.  For these applications, a low-cost source of large                 
              quantities of product are required.  Combustion processes are                  
              a preferred route due to relatively low energy requirements                    
              and their amenability to scaleup.  Major interest in this                      
              program has been expressed by chemical manufacturers.
