Title       : Photobleachable Host-Guest Thin Films for Optical Waveguides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1992   
File        : a9160294

Award Number: 9160294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bret L. Halpern bret@jetprocess.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jet Process Corporation
	      24 Science Park
	      New Haven, CT  065111968    203/786-5130

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1503,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Optical integrated circuits will be at the heart of future high                
              speed fiber optic communications.  These circuits require thin                 
              film optical components such as waveguides, couplers, and                      
              multiplexers.  However, at present there exists no technique for               
              fabrication of thin film components that is simple, fast,                      
              versatile, reliable and inexpensive.  The most basic optical                   
              component is the thin film passive waveguide, in which channels                
              of different index of refraction, patterned in a thin film, serve              
              to conduct lightwaves.  A straightforward low - cost technique                 
              for making waveguides would have wide applicability to hybrid                  
              optical integrated circuits, since other optical components could              
              be generated with the same technology.                                         
                                                                                             
              In Phase I we demonstrate a novel waveguide fabrication method.                
              We will use thin films of SiNx, Si0x, and SiCx that have been                  
              photosensitized by incorporation of bleachable organic dyes.                   
              These films will be masked and exposed to radiation; the                       
              resulting waveguide structures will be tested and evaluated.                   
              Bleaching of embedded dyes has been used to pattern polymer                    
              films.  The innovative element in our process is the use of hard               
              "glass" host-guest films, made by Jet Vapor Deposition.  JVD                   
              allows room temperature deposition of dye-doped glass films on                 
              existing silicon based microelectronic circuits.  JVD also has                 
              advantages in speed, flexibility and cost over sol-gel, CVD and                
              high vacuum sputtering approaches.  Successful completion of this              
              project will advance the development of hybrid integrated optical              
              circuits for fiber optic communications.
