Title       : Biochemistry of Fatty Acid Uptake in Escherichia Coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1994      
File        : a9405803

Award Number: 9405803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul N. Black   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      800 Madison Avenue
	      Memphis, TN  381033400    901/528-5000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9405803  Black     Fatty acids are essential components of cellular  membranes
              and are important sources of metabolic energy.  This project focuses on the
              transport of long-chain fatty  acids into cells followed by their enzymatic
              conversion to  coenzyme A thioesters prior to metabolic utilization.  In 
              Escherichia coli, these two processes are postulated to be  linked such that
              the esterification of long-chain fatty  acids provides the driving force for
              transport.  These  compounds traverse the bacterial cell envelope by a high 
              affinity, saturable, energy-dependent process that requires  the outer
              membrane-bound fatty acid binding and transport  protein FadL (product of the
              fadL gene) and the inner  membrane associated acyl CoA synthetase (product of
              the fadD  gene).  Acyl CoA synthetase activates fatty acids  concomitant with
              transport, thereby resulting in their net  accumulation within the cell against
              a concentration  gradient.  The fadL and fadD genes have been cloned and 
              sequenced and their respective gene products purified and  characterized.  In
              this work, the topology of FadL will be  defined using partial proteolysis in
              isolated outer  membranes and peptide purification and sequencing.  Specific 
              amino acid residues within FadL involved in fatty acid  binding will be
              determined using chemical modification and  site-directed mutagenesis.  Amino
              acid residues within the  fatty acid binding pocket within FadL will be
              modified using  affinity labeling followed by proteolysis, peptide 
              purification, and identification of the labeled amino acids.  This will
              specifically define amino acids within FadL that  comprise the fatty acid
              binding pocket and thus lay the  groundwork for more detailed studies employing
              mutagenesis  of the fadL gene.  Collectively, these studies will define  how
              FadL spans the outer membrane, and which specific amino  acid residues sit
              within the fatty acid binding pocket.  The  role of acyl CoA synthetase in the
              transport of exogenous  long-chain fatty acids will al so be further evaluated.
               Acyl  CoA synthetase from E. coli has considerable similarity with  its
              eukaryotic counterparts, particularly in a region of the  enzyme postulated to
              bind ATP.  Site-directed mutageneis of  the acyl CoA synthetase structural gene
              will be used to  define whether this region of the enzyme represents the ATP 
              binding domain.  %%%  Fatty acids are the molecular building blocks of lipids. 
              As  such, they are essential components of cellular membranes,  as well as
              important sources of metabolic energy.  Depending  on the cell type, the fatty
              acids needed by a cell may be  either syntehsized by the cell itself, and/or
              taken up from  the surrounding milieu.  This project seeks to understand  the
              biochemical mechanism whereby cells specifically take up  fatty acids from
              their surroundings, using the  common model  bacterium, Escherichia coli, as a
              model system.  A  combination of genetic and biochemical approaches will be 
              used.  The results of these experiments are expected to  expand our
              understanding of how fatty acids, and large  molecules in general, are
              specifically transported across  cell membranes.  This kind of information is
              of fundamental  importance to understanding how cells function.  It is not 
              difficult to see how this kind of information may have  downstream application
              to a number of diverse areas of  special interest; examples might include 
              microbial  physiological ecology, pharmacology, and animal or human  nutrition.
               ***
