Title       : Molecular Dynamics at Biological Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1996        
File        : a9405928

Award Number: 9405928
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Axelrod daxelrod@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Geneva M. Omann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9405928  Axelrod  When a biological cell undergoes a change of shape in either a
               submicroscopic region or over the whole cell, the intricate  connections
              between cytoskeletal proteins and the plasma membrane  undergo a
              reorganization.  As a step toward elucidating the  details of these processes,
              this project studies the rates of  some of the rapid and reversible chemical
              events that occur in  the submembrane region.  Three subprojects focus on
              different but  related aspects of this reversible chemistry.  The first 
              subproject measures the rates of reversible binding and unbinding  among
              certain key cytoskeletal proteins and between these  proteins and the membrane
              lipids.  Surface diffusion rates of  these proteins while they are
              nonspecifically adsorbed at the  membrane is also measured and evaluated for
              its possible role in  enhancing the reaction rate to specific sites.  The
              particular  proteins whose interactions are to be examined are all actin- 
              binding ones; myosin I, the spectrin/calmodulin system, protein  4.1, and actin
              itself.  The second subproject examines the rapid  time course changes in local
              calcium ion in the immediate  submembrane region, in contrast to the transient
              changes farther  into the cell, that act as a trigger for actin polymerization
              in  some cases and exocytosis of secretory vesicles in other cases.   The third
              project examines the rate of cholesterol transmembrane  translocation
              (flip-flop) which is believed to affect the cell  surface's plasticity during
              membrane shape changes and may even  play a role in regulating those changes. 
              %%%   This project examines the speed of reactions that occur just  beneath the
              membrane of biological cells. These reactions are  very likely to be important
              in determining the cells' mechanical  properties, its ability to move around,
              and its response to  external natural chemicals. Because these reactions are
              localized  in a very thin region, this project also develops or extends  novel
              optical techniques particularly useful for s tudying  biochemistry at surfaces,
              techniques that should find  applications beyond the particular experiments
              here. The novel  optical techniques are based around modifications of
              fluorescence  microscopes, so that binding and unbinding of molecules to 
              membrane surfaces, random diffusion of molecules for small  distances along
              these surfaces, rapid changes of salt  concentrations right near surfaces, and
              flipping of molecules  from one side of a membrane to the other, can be
              detected and the  corresponding rates can be measured.    There are three main
              subprojects. The first looks at the dynamics  of formation and dissolution of
              protein filaments that form a  biological cell's "skeleton" at the points where
              it connects with  the cell surface from the inside. In order to interpret the 
              results and draw some general conclusions, a variety of living  and model
              biological systems will be studied. The second  subproject examines whether the
              calcium ion concentration just  beneath the membrane changes in a different
              manner than the  calcium ion concentration farther inside the cell upon
              chemical  stimulation of the cell. Calcium is believed to play a central  role
              in the triggering of several membrane reactions, and this  project offers a
              fluorescence method to examine the calcium  chemistry in a highly localized
              region. The third subproject  examines the rates at which lipid molecules flip
              from one side of  the membrane to the other. This flipping can have important 
              effects on the cells mechanical properties and the reactions that  occur in the
              membrane.  ***
