Title       : Primary Electron Transfer Processes in Photosynthetic Bacterial Reaction Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9405248

Award Number: 9405248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414714             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dewey Holten holten@wuchem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine R. Kirmaier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9405248  Holten      The reaction center (RC) of photosynthetic organisms is the
               membrane bound pigment-protein complex within which light energy  is converted
              into chemical energy via a series of fast and highly  specific electron
              transfer reactions. The overall process  separates charge across the RC (and
              hence across the membrane)  with an essentially unity quantum yield. The
              ultimate goal of  this research is to arrive at a comprehensive understanding
              of  this process at a molecular level. To this end, transient  absorption
              spectroscopic measurements spanning the femtosecond to  millisecond timescales
              as well as other spectroscopic techniques  will be used to directly identify
              and study the intermediate  states of charge separation and the rates of their
              formation and  decay. These studies will be carried out on both wild-type RCs 
              and a wide variety of mutant RCs in which one or more amino acids  are changed
              using the techniques of molecular biology.  %%%      This research has broad
              implications that transcend  photosynthesis reasch. The investigations will
              impact on the  general understanding of electron transfer. The RC is in many 
              respects a mini-laboratory for the investigation of this  fundamental process
              in view of knowledge of the structure of the  RC and the ability to manipulate
              and investigate the charge  separation events in detail. The studies will also
              address the  role of the protein in the energy conversion process, and thus 
              will impact on the important area of how the interactions between  amino acids
              and the imbedded cofactors influence biological  events. This work additionally
              forms the foundation for  understanding and developing efficient mechanisms for
              the capture  and storage of solar energy.  Hence, this research is important 
              not only for understanding a natural process essential for life  on earth, but
              also for gaining further knowledge in areas of  broad importance in biologyand
              chemistry.  ***
