Title       : Frameshift Mutations in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1994      
File        : a9405953

Award Number: 9405953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277863             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sue Jinks-Robertson jinks@biology.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9197,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9405953  Jinks-Robertson  Mutations can be generally classified as either
              spontaneous or mutagen-induced.  While spontaneous mutations are considered to
              occur in a  random manner without regard to function, recent work has indicated
              that adaptive, selectively advantageous mutations can occur as well.  The focus
              of this project is on the origin and nature of a particular type of spontaneous
              mutation:  the frameshift mutation.  The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae will be
              used as a model system to study the generation of frameshift mutations in
              eukaryotes.  Frameshift mutations will be identified by selecting for the
              reversion of a defined frameshift allele, the lys2deltaBgl allele.  Preliminary
              analyses have demonstrated that >95% of reversion events correspond to
              intragenic, second site compensatory mutations that restore the correct reading
              frame of the gene.  The lys2deltaBgl allele will be used in three interrelated
              sets of experiments.  First, the spectrum of random versus adaptive intragenic
              frameshift reversion events will be determined by DNA sequence analysis. 
              Molecular data derived from this analysis may yield information concerning the
              mechanism of adaptive mutation in yeast.  Second, the role of  the yeast
              mismatch repair system(s) in the removal of replication errors will be examined
              by comparing the frequency and spectrum of frameshift events in wild type
              versus mismatch repair defective yeast strains.  Third, the role of  DNA
              polymerase in generating frameshift mutations will be assessed using
              polymerase-impaired yeast mutants.  For the first set of experiments the
              lys2deltaBgl strain used in previous adaptive mutation studies will be used. 
              For the latter two sets of experiments, a portion of the lys2deltaBgl allele
              will be placed in a context where functionality constraints on the encoded gene
              product are removed.  The only constraint is that a compensatory frameshift
              mutation occur that allows translation through the entire lys2 region,
              resulting in the production of a full-lengt h, assayable gene product.  This
              approach should allow saturation of a defined region of DNA with frameshift
              mutations only, thus mimicking the spectrum of mutations that would be seen if
              a frameshift-specific forward mutation system were available.  %%%  The process
              of gene mutation influences virtually every area of  biological science. 
              Mutation is the raw material upon which evolutionary forces act and the
              existence of mutant variants made possible the development of genetics as a
              discipline.  Mutational analysis is an essential tool in the repertoire of the
              modern biologist since it affords a way to dissect complex biological
              processes.  In this project the PI will continue her investigation into the
              processes involved in the formation of mutations.  ***
