Title       : Characterization of the Human Phospholipase D Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1994    
File        : a9405572

Award Number: 9405572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Agwu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest U Sch of Med
	      Medical Center Blvd
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27157    336/716-4549

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,9135,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9405572  Agwu    The phosphatidylcholine (PC)-hydrolyzing phospholipase D
              (PC-PLD)  generates a bioactive intermediate, phosphatidic acid (PA), in 
              stimulated cells.  PA is subsequently dephosphorylated to 1,2- 
              diradylglycerols (DG), the endogenous activator of protein kinase  C (PKC), by
              PA phosphohydrolase (PAP).  Despite extensive research  which indicates that
              PC-PLD plays a critical role in cellular  signal transmission and responses,
              the biochemical mechanisms  involved are not clearly understood.  A central
              problem is the fact  that the human PC-PLD enzyme has not been purified despite
              on-going  efforts by many researchers.  This laboratory has developed PC-PLD 
              polyclonal antibodies (PC_PLD Abs) based on the hypothesis that  cognate
              antigenic determinants in mammalian PC-PLD protein may  exist in conserved
              domains of the enzyme and, therefore, will  cross-react with antibodies
              developed against purified plant and  bacterial PC-PLD protein used as
              immunogens.  PC-PLD Abs have been  used to screen a mammalian, human
              polymorphonuclear leucocyte (PMN)  library and PC-PLD cDNAs have been cloned. 
              The first goal of this  project is to characterize the PC-PLD cDNAs by
              determining their  nucleotide sequence and deducing the amino acid sequence of
              the PC-  PLD enzyme.  These data will make possible the development of 
              antipeptide antibodies and oligonucleotide probes for studying the  PC-PLD in
              many cell types.  In addition, the PC-PLD gene will be  overexpressed in E.
              coli and mammalian cells, and the expressed PC-  Pld enzyme will be purified
              and characterized biochemically.  By  expressing the PC-PLD enzyme in
              appropriate hosts, it should be  possible to study  the regulatory and
              modulatory mechanisms  involved in PC-PLD activation and investigate its role
              in cellular  responses.  If successful, these studies should generate seminal 
              results on PC-PLD cDNA nucleotide sequence and make available  antibodies to
              the purified PC-PLD enzyme.    %%%  Extensive research indicates that an enzyme
              know n as  phosphatidylcholine (PC)-hydrolyzing phospholipase D plays a 
              critical role in cellular signal transmission and responses to a  variety of
              physiological stimuli, but the biochemical mechanisms  involved are not clearly
              understood.  A central problem is the fact  that this enzyme has not been
              purified despite on-going efforts by  many researchers.  The goal of this
              research is to clone the gene  for this enzyme and express the gene in cultured
              cells to obtain  sufficient quantities of the enzyme to characterize it 
              biochemically.  If successful, this project will provide a basic  understanding
              of the enzyme at the molecular level and provide the  basis for further
              research to clarify its role in cellular signal  transduction.  ***
