Title       : Cross regulation and central metabolism in bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1997     
File        : a9405929

Award Number: 9405929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry L. Wanner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9183,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9405929  Wanner  This proposal is to continue studies on "cross regulation" in 
              central metabolic pathways of Escherichia coli.  Cross regulation  refers to
              the control of a response regulator of one two-component  regulatory system by
              a different regulatory system.  Two such  controls act on the phosphate (PHO)
              regulon.  One involves the CreC  sensor kinase (which is encoded together with
              its partner response  regulator CreB by catabolite regulatory creABCD operon);
              the other  involves acetyl phosphate.  Both of these controls appear to be 
              important, for each provides a way to couple control of the PHO  regulon (by
              the level of extracellular Pi) to pathways of central  metabolism for the
              incorporation of intracellular Pi into ATP (the  primary phosphoryl donor in
              metabolism).  Specific aims of this  proposal are: (i) to identify genes
              regulated by the CreB-CreC two-  component regulatory system; (ii) to examine
              acetyl phosphate  synthesis in normal and mutant cells; and (iii) to conduct
              gene  regulation studies to assess the importance of cross regulation in  cell
              physiology.  %%%  Cells undergo numerous adjustments of central pathways of 
              metabolism in response to the carbon and energy sources.  These  adjustments
              require a high degree of regulatory interactions  between and among different
              cellular functions in order to permit  the cell to grow.  Cross regulation
              provides a means for the  coordinate regulation among these different pathways.
               This study  will focus on cross regulation in the control of genes closely 
              related to phosphorus metabolism (an essential nutrient whose  assimilation is
              closely connected to central metabolic pathways.)   Although these studies will
              be carried out entirely in the model  bacterium Escherichia coli, the results
              are likely to pertain to  all types of cells.  This is because of the unity
              among central  pathways.  Two mechanisms of cross regulation will be explored. 
               One involves protein phosphorylation, an important process for the  control of
              regulatory  proteins (in all cells).  The other involves  a small molecule
              (acetyl phosphate) which appears to act as an  effector molecule in the control
              of (certain) regulatory proteins  known to be affected by protein
              phosphorylation.  ***
