Title       : mRNA 3' Processing and Transcription Termination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1996      
File        : a9405449

Award Number: 9405449
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory M. Gilmartin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9405449  Abstract  This project focuses on the nature of RNA polymerase II 
              transcription termination in higher eukaryotes.  In contrast to  prokaryotes,
              the 3' ends of mature eukaryotic mRNAs are generated  by processing rather than
              by transcription termination.  The  processing of the nascent RNA transcripts,
              combined with the  inherent instability of the primary RNA products generated
              by  termination, has thus restricted the in vivo analysis of  transcription
              termination.  It is clear, however, that RAN  polymerase II transcription
              termination is seldom, if ever,  localized to single discreet site, but rather,
              occurs over a region  that may extend for several kilobases.  both the sequence
              and  location of the termination region with respect to the end of the  mature
              mRNA are specific to each transcription unit.  Although the  sequences
              encompassing the termination region appear to play a  significant role, the key
              termination signal appears to be  generated by the 3' processing of the nascent
              RNA transcript.  3'  processing is an obligatory step in the  biosynthesis of a
               functional mRNA.  Therefore the coupling of pre-mRNA 3' processing  and RNA
              polymerase II transcription termination offers an elegant  mechanism for
              assuring that mRNA synthesis is complete prior to  transcription termination. 
              ***  The central goal of this project is to elucidate the biochemical  basis
              for the coupling of RNA polymerase II transcription  termination and mRNA 3'
              processing.  The recent development of a  well characterized and highly
              purified mRNA 3' processing system  will form the basis of this work.  The
              specific objectives of this  proposal are to: 1) Develop an in vitro system for
              the  investigation of the coupling of RNA polymerase II transcription 
              termination to the 3' processing of the nascent RNA, 2) Delineate  the role of
              a 5' to 3' processing machinery and the RNA polymerase  II transcription
              complex.  A basic knowledge of the mechansims that  serve to direct the
              termination of RNA polymerase II t ranscription  may lead to an understanding
              of the manner in which this process  contributes to the regulation of gene
              expression.  %%%
