Title       : Connections to netILLINOIS - Phase IV
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1995       
File        : a9405926

Award Number: 9405926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Luker                           
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $423681             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Patrick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel L. Hartman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Bradley University
	      1501 West Bradley Avenue
	      Peoria, IL  616250001    309/676-7611

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9405926   Hartman  Bradley University with participation and support from major 
              educational institutions and industry, and a strong working  partnership with
              CICNet, the state of Illinois Central Management  Services (CMS), and with
              considerable networking experience  within its member shop, has developed a
              communications network  known as netIllinois.    NetIllinois request support to
              provide Internet connection to  thirteen (19) Illinois colleges and
              universities (Blackburn  College, Carl Sandburg, College, Danville Area Com.
              College,  Illinois College, Joliet Jr College, Kendall College, Kishwaukee 
              College, Knowledge Systems Institute, Lewis and Clark Com.  College, MacMurray
              College, McKendree College, North Park  College, Rand Lake College, Rock Valley
              College, Sauk Valley  College, Shawnee College, Southeastern Illinois College,
              Trinity  College, and Triton College)    The requested connections will support
              connectivity to  netIllinois, CICNET, NSFNET, and the greater Internet.  It
              will  also provide access to state, regional, and national computing  resources
              and databases; and foster communication and  collaboration among teachers,
              students, scholars, and researchers  at these institutions and their peers
              within the worldwide  education and research community.    The network will
              provide a consistent statewide architecture for  NSFNET access for a broad
              variety of entities engaged in  education and research.  This cooperative
              network will provide  gateways to regional, national, and international
              networks and  will be consistent with their standards.  It will further the 
              institutions' work in enhancing the state's economic development  through a
              well-educated workforce, accessible training  opportunities, and research and
              development partnerships.   Another goal of the network is to facilitate
              collaborative  projects and sharing of resources between institutions,
              including  those outside the state.
