Title       : Function and Organization of Photosystem I
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1996      
File        : a9405325

Award Number: 9405325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Parag R. Chitnis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1305,9109,9198,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Chitnis  9405325  Photosystem I, the light-dependent plastocyanin-ferredoxin 
              oxidoreductase, is a multisubunit pigment-protein complex in the 
              photosynthetic membranes of chloroplasts and cyanobacteria.  Photosystem I
              contains at least twelve proteins, 100 chlorophylls,   -carotenes and a series
              of electron transfer centers. To identify  roles of individual polypeptides in
              the function and assembly of  the complex, we initiated a program to clone and
              mutate genes that  encode protein subunits of photosystem I of the naturally 
              transformable cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. Our  NSF-supported
              research has provided insights concerning the  functions of several subunits of
              photosystem I. This proposal  describes our plans to continue the
              investigations by focusing on  (1) role of the accessory subunits, PsaL, PsaJ
              and PsaI in  particular, in mediating and stabilizing assembly of photosystem
              I,  and (2) mutational dissection and biochemical analysis of the  reducing
              side of photosystem I. Recently we showed that PsaL is  required for the
              formation of trimeric quaternary structure of  photosystem I. PsaL binds
              calcium ions which stimulate  trimerization. Site-specific mutations and
              biochemical  characterization will be used to dissect the structural and 
              regulatory basis for the role of PsaL. We postulate that the small  (<4 kDa)
              hydrophobic subunits of photosystem I (PsaJ, PsaM, PsaI)  function as 'nuts and
              bolts' in the structure of the complex by  anchoring and stabilizing other
              proteins. Characterization of our  PsaJ-less mutant shows that PsaJ is
              necessary for the stable  assembly of PsaF, a lumen-exposed subunit, and
              possibly PsaE, a  peripheral subunit on the n-side. We will examine the
              interactions  of PsaJ by biochemical and mutational analysis. We will also 
              generate mutants lacking PsaI and further test our hypothesis. The  terminal
              reduction reaction of photosystem I involves electron  transfer from the
              reducing site on the complex to ferredoxin. The  reducing site on photosyst em
              I consists of surface-exposed domains  of PsaD, PsaE, and PsaC subunits. PsaD
              and PsaE are required for  reduction of ferredoxin and therefore form essential
              topological  components of the docking site where ferredoxin interacts and 
              accepts electrons from PsaC. We have identified the solvent-exposed  regions of
              PsaD on the basis of protease accessibility and labeling  with NHS-biotin.
              Site-specific mutations in these domains will be  used to identify residues
              that interact with ferredoxin.  Physiological, biochemical and spectroscopic
              analyses will be  conducted to investigate roles of mutations in specific
              subunits  onthe assembly and function of photosystem I.  %%%Photosynthesis is
              the major source of biological energy and  oxygen on the earth.
              Betterunderstanding of this process is  essential for facing the food and
              environmental challenges of the  future. Photosynthesis requires coordinated
              and efficient  functioning of membrane-embedded andsoluble enzymes in 
              cyanobacteria and plants. Photosystem I is one of two  pigment-proteincomplexes
              in the photosynthetic membranes, that can  utilize light energy to produce
              high-energybiochemicals.  Photosystem I contains at least eleven proteins, 100
              chlorophylls,   -carotenes and series of electron transfer centers. The
              long-term  research objective of our research is to determine the roles of 
              different proteins of photosystem I in its function and  organization. We
              initiated a program to genetically manipulate  photosystem I of a naturally
              transformable cyanobacterium that is  easily amenable to genetic engineering.
              Our NSF-supported research  has provided insights concerning the functions of
              several  photosystem I proteins. We plan to continue these investigations by 
              focusing on how these proteins mediate and stabilize the assembly  of
              photosystem I. We will also study the role of photosystem I  proteins in the
              transfer of electrons from photosystem I to soluble  proteins. An
              interdisciplinary approach that uses molecular  genetics, physiology ,
              biochemistry and biophysics will lead to a  better understanding of how light
              energy is utilized by plants to  generate chemical energy.  ***
