Title       : K/Ar Calibration of MMhb - 2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1994    
File        : a9405620

Award Number: 9405620
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Daniel F. Weill                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61561              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Kunk   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence W. Snee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              G. Brent Dalrymple  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geological Survey
	      Mail Stop 970
	      Reston, VA  22092    /   -

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9405620  Kunk       One of the most widely used techniques for measuring 
              radiometric ages of rocks and minerals is the so-called  40Ar/39Ar or
              argon-argon method, a variation of the  potassium-argon or K/Ar method. Both
              methods make use of the  known decay rate of  natural 40K to 40Ar and the
              retention  of  the daughter product argon inside the mineral grain. The 
              argon-argon method is further dependent on irradiation of  the unknown sample
              in a nuclear reactor in order to convert  some 39K to  39Ar by an n, p nuclear
              reaction. A calibration  standard of known age is irradiated at the same time
              as the  sample. The precision of all ages reported by this method  are
              determined by the precision with which the standard is  known. This award will
              provide partial funding to allow  personnel of the National Institute of
              Standards and  Technology (NIST) and the U.S. Geological Survey to bring 
              state-of-the-art methods to bear on producing the most  reliable mineral
              standard possible for interlaboratory  calibrations of argon-argon dating. The
              standard will be  made available to the geochronology research community 
              through distribution by the Standard Reference Materials  Program of NIST.  ***
               9406684  Johnson       This award provides partial funding for the support of 
              a technician assigned to the Radiogenic Isotope Laboratory  in the Department
              of Geology and Geophysics at the  University of Wisconsin, Madison. The
              technician will assist  in the operation and maintenance of the laboratory's 
              equipment that includes a multicollector thermal ionization  mass spectrometer
              and associated instrumentation for sample  preparation and data analysis. The
              laboratory is a resource  for mass spectrometric analysis needed in research
              and  teaching projects in the earth sciences by a large number of  researchers
              on-campus and off-campus. Research applications  include work on Arctic Ocean
              sediments, mantle geochemistry,  volcanism, geochronology of carbonates in the
              Michigan Basin  and Wisconsin Arch provinces,  and Archean and Proterozoic 
              granites. The technician will also participate in the  technical developmental
              work of the laboratory, including  the development of new methods for the
              quantitative  measurement of the isotopes of hafnium.  ***
