Title       : Investigation of Geomorphic Processes Active on the Inundated Altamaha River
               Floodplain.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1998    
File        : a9405757

Award Number: 9405757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281039             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leal A. Mertes leal@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1325,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9405757     Mertes    The research will test working hypotheses on relationships
              among  the geomorphology of an alluvial of floodplain/wetland, geomorphic 
              processes active on the inundated floodplain surface, and the  hysteresis
              between water discharge and sediment concentration  during floods.  Data for
              the Central Amazon River  show that the  conceptual model adequately describes 
               the characteristic patterns  of water  and sediment transport and the related
              patterns of  erosion and disposition during flood on the largest river in the 
              world.  The proposed work is to test the conceptual model at a  smaller spatial
              scale by collecting hydrologic, hydraulic, and  sediment transport data for the
              Altamaha River, Georgia.  The work  is a step in a larger study to develop a
              physically based model of  the construction of landforms on inundated
              floodplains for rivers  across all scales.  It is anticipated that the results
              from the  Altamaha River, with a drainage basin area of 35,200 Km2 will 
              significantly advance understanding of the hydrologic and  geomorphic processes
              controlling the development and maintenance of  its floodplain and wetland.    
               Limited water discharge sediment concentration data for the  Altamaha River
              indicate that it is similar to the Amazon River, in  that the peak sediment
              concentration precedes the peak water  discharge.  One hypothesis to be tested
              is that the rates of  deposition on a non-channelized floodplain surface are a
              monotonic  function of the rate of water and sediment discharge supplied from 
              the main channel.  The  second hypothesis is that the rate of  deposition
              increases at the crest of the flood as the pressure  distribution across the
              channel-floodplain boundary equalizes.  The  third is that the rates and loci
              of deposition and erosion in  drainage channels shift from the upstream end
              during initial stages  of inundated to the downstream end during the falling
              -water  period.    Data from field studies, remote sensing, and numerical
              simulations  of hydr odynamics will be used numerical simulations of the 
              hydrodynamics of the field sites for floods with different  magnitudes and
              durations the hypotheses.  The data from each source   will constrain the
              interpretation of the results from the other  techniques.
