Title       : Regulation of RNA Stability in Yeast Mitochondria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1996     
File        : a9405434

Award Number: 9405434
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Peter Zassenhaus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9405434  A thorough understanding of eukaryotic gene expression
              requires  knowledge not only of transcription rates but also of messenger RNA 
              (mRNA) stability.  In eukaryotes, regulation of RNA stability is  mediated by a
              novel class of proteins which bind to mRNAs at  specific sites.  Yet, how these
              proteins work is poorly understood  because few have been isolated or
              genetically studied.  From  mitochondria of the yeast, Saccharomyces
              cerevisiae, we have  purified a site-specific RNA binding protein which
              specifically  interacts with a dodecamer sequence found only at the 3' ends of 
              all mitochondrial mRNAs.  In vitro, this protein protects mRNAs  from digestion
              by a unique, nucleoside triphosphate (NTP) dependent  3' exoribonuclease that
              was purified from yeast mitochondria.   Since the pathway of mitochondrial RNA
              decay in yeast apparently  initiates with an attack on an mRNA by that
              exoribonuclease, it  appears that the binding protein is instrumental for the
              regulation  of mRNA stability in the organelle.  The objective of the proposed 
              studies is to test the hypothesis that the mRNA binding protein  regulates the
              activity of the 3' exoribonuclease towards mRNAs and  thereby regulates the
              stability of mRNAs.  The gene encoding the  binding protein will be cloned and
              mutants of the binding protein  will be isolated.  RNA stability and processing
              in these mutants  will be analyzed to investigate the function of the binding
              protein  in vivo.  The interaction of the purified protein with  mitochondrial
              mRNAs and synthetic RNA oligonucleotides will be  investigated in vitro in
              order to correlate its biochemical  features with its functions in vivo.  RNA
              processing and stability  will be characterized in mutants of the NTP-dependent
              3'  exoribonuclease in order to further delineate the pathway of RNA  decay in
              mitochondria and the role of the mRNA binding protein in  that process.  *** 
              Most genes function by first being transcribed into messenger RNAs  (mRNA)
              which exit the nucleus t o be translated into proteins in the  cytoplasm.  The
              activity of a gene is therefore determined mainly  by three regulated
              processes: (i) the transcription rate of the  gene, (ii) the translation rate
              of its mRNA, and (iii) the  stability of that mRNA.  Although much has been
              learned about the  first two processes, little is known about the last.  We
              will  investigate the molecular mechanisms that regulate the life-time of 
              mRNAs in the cell.  Our model system is the mitochondria of yeast.   The
              advantages of this model are (i) that mitochondrial RNA  metabolism is
              considerable less complex than that for cytoplasmic  mRNAs, and (ii) that yeast
              offer very powerful genetic methods for  identifying and studying the genes and
              their products which are  important for regulating mRNA stability.  As for
              cytoplasmic mRNA  stability, we have evidence that the life-time of
              mitochondrial  mRNAs is regulated by their interaction with a member of a
              special  class of proteins which bind to RNAs at specific locations.  These 
              site-specific RNA binding proteins are proving to be novel gene  regulators
              whose mode of action is still unclear.  We will identify  the gene for the
              mitochondrial site-specific RNA binding protein.   We will study its function
              genetically in the cell by examining  gene mutants.  We will study its function
              biochemically by  characterizing its binding properties to chemically
              synthesized  RNAs.  We think that investigating the properties of this
              regulator  of mitochondrial mRNA stability will provide important new 
              information about this newly discovered class of gene regulators.  %%%
