Title       : Resonance Raman Studies of Electron-Nuclear Coupling, Time Resolved Dynamics,
               and Magnetic Perturbations of Biomolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9405979

Award Number: 9405979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $627103             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Champion champ@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J T. Sage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9198,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9405979  Champion  The proposed research will utilize resonance Raman scattering
              and  its time domain analog, coherent impulsive scattering, to probe  the
              electronic and nuclear structure/function relationships of  biological
              molecules such as heme proteins (myoglobin, hemoglobin  and cytochrome c) and
              photosynthetic systems (light harvesting  antennae and reaction centers). 
              Related techniques, such as  electronic absorption and infrared spectroscopy,
              will also be  utilized, and theoretical models that link a variety of 
              experimental measurements will be developed.  Absolute cross-  section
              measurements will be used to directly extract the  electron-nuclear coupling
              strengths while the temperature  dependence of the optical absorption lineshape
              yields the  coupling of low frequency motion and its role in damping.  The 
              studies of low frequency protein motion will be complemented with  ultrafast
              impulsive scattering techniques, which allow real time  measurement of such
              motion.  Further experimental and theoretical  studies involving the
              spectroscopic and kinetic effects of  protein distributions are also proposed. 
              Dynamic studies will  include the measurement and analysis of ligand binding
              and  electron transfer under a wide variety of sample conditions, as  well as
              pump/probe experiments designed to monitor protein  folding and conformational
              relaxations.  Laser mediated thermal  perturbations will be followed using
              Stokes/anti-Stokes Raman  scattering.  Studies of dynamic processes induced by 
              photoreduction and kinetic studies of biological single crystals  will also be
              extended.  %%%  The general scientific objectives are to achieve a better 
              understanding of the dynamics of motion of large biologically  important
              molecules and their absorption and resonant light  scattering properties.  The
              aim is to apply this knowledge to  elucidate their mechanism of action.  These
              studies are  significant not only in their relationship to the biological 
              sciences, but also in their connection to our u nderstanding of  the
              interaction of light with complex material systems in the  condensed phase. 
              ***
