Title       : Low-Frequency Variability of Troposphere-stratosphere Coupling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1996      
File        : a9405448

Award Number: 9405448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223792             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark P. Baldwin mark@nwra.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xinhau Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Dunkerton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NorthWest Res Assoc Inc
	      14508 NE, 20th Street
	      Bellevue, WA  980093027    425/644-9660

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1324,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9405448  Baldwin    On timescales from a week through interannual there is
              considerable  variability of tropospheric flow patterns.  This study will focus
               on understanding how much of the low-frequency variability of the 
              stratosphere can be accounted for by stationary wave patterns in  the
              troposphere.  The general approach will be to identify patterns  in the
              mid-troposphere that are linked with stratosphere flow.   Particular attention
              will be paid to the possible influences of El  Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
              on the stratosphere that may be   communicated through modulation of the
              extratropical tropospheric  flow.    The PI will use empirical orthogonal
              function (EOF) analysis and  singular value decomposition (SVD) analysis of the
              tropospheric  height field together with correlations, composites and spectral 
              analysis to identify modes which, on interannual and interseasonal  timescales,
              seem to have a significant stratospheric influence.   The complementary
              nonlinear technique of cluster analysis will also  be used.    A series of
              experiments using a GCM with simplified physics will be  used to study the
              response of the middle atmosphere to tropospheric  circulation anomalies.  The
              experiments will be designed to  determine the model's stratospheric response
              to tropospheric  anomaly patterns.  Comparing the response of the model's
              winter  stratosphere with the resultq of the data analysis should provide  a
              valuable method of identifying the contribution to winter  stratospheric
              interannual variability from tropospheric anomalies.    As part of this study
              the PI will use gridded ECMWF data analyses  in conjunction with rawinsonde
              data, to determine tropical  tropospheric horizontal wave structure to better
              elucidate the  different types of synoptic-scale disturbances that exist in the
               tropical troposphere and their vertical coupling, if any, to the 
              stratosphere.  The focus is specifically on organized, westward-  traveling,
              synoptic-scale waves in the tropical lower atmosphere  that  may be involved in
              the excitation of Rossby-gravity waves.   Disturbances in both lower and upper
              troposphere will ne  investigated, as will any vertical coupling between the
              two layers.    This research is important because it should enhance our 
              understanding of important climate processes related to 
              stratospheric-tropospheric dynamics.
