Title       : Enhanced Simulation Methods for Biomolecular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1996        
File        : a9405405

Award Number: 9405405
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry P. Lybrand lybrand@bioeng.u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9162,9181,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9405405  Lybrand  Two research projects related to bimolecular simulation method
               development and application will be performed.  The first project  focuses on
              development, implementation, and evaluation of  simulation methods for enhanced
              configurational sampling in  molecular dynamics and free energy perturbation
              calculations of  biomacromolecules.  This project is closely related to goals 
              outlined in the High Performance Computing and Communications  (HPCC)
              initiative, and involves modification of the popular  bimolecular simulation
              program AMBER for parallel executive on  clusters of high performance Unix
              workstations as well as massively  parallel supercomputers.  We are using the
              PVM tool kit from Oak  Ridge National Laboratory for distributed parallel
              processor  coordination and support.  Since PVM has now been optimized for a 
              number of massively parallel machines including Cray T3D, Kendall  Square
              KSR-2, and IBM SP1, this approach permits us to develop a  highly portable, yet
              computationally efficient parallel version of  AMBER that will run on both
              workstation clusters AND massively  parallel supercomputers with little or no
              modification.  As we  develop the parallel version of AMBER, we are also
              implementing and  testing new algorithms for free energy perturbation
              calculation.   These algorithms utilize variational path optimization methods
              and  other "scaling" techniques to improve configurational sampling, and  thus,
              convergence and reliability, for free energy perturbation     calculations. 
              These enhanced molecular simulation programs will be  applied to studies of
              lipid bilayer assemblies and bilayer/peptide  complexes.  These bimolecular
              systems are large and quite  complicated, and detailed molecular simulations
              are extremely  computationally demanding.  Results from these simulations will
              be  useful in analysis of companion experimental studies for lipid 
              bilayer/peptide complexes currently under way, and may provide  useful
              information for design of novel bioseparation and  small  molecule delivery
              systems.   %%%  Computer simulation has become a powerful tool for study of
              complex  biological molecules such as proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids.  
              Computer simulation studies can aid in the analysis and  interpretation of
              experimental results, and can be used to predict  properties that cannot be
              measured directly.  While computer  simulation studies often yield quite
              accurate results for simple  molecular systems, the enormous size and
              complexing of biological  molecules poses much greater challenges.  Biological
              molecule  simulation studies are usually classified as Grand Challenge 
              computation problems, and require new methods and strategies as  outlined in
              the High Performance Computing and Communications  (HPCC) initiative for
              successful resolution.  We will develop and  evaluate a number of enhanced
              simulation techniques that should  improve the efficiency and reliability of
              computer simulation  methods for the study of biological molecules.  Included
              in this  project is the modification of a current state-of-the-art molecular 
              simulation program (AMBER) to run efficiently on a wide variety of  different
              of different massively parallel supercomputers and  clusters of high
              performance computer workstations.  This modified  version of AMBER will enable
              more efficient and effective use of  currently exiting computational resources
              for molecular  simulations.  These molecular simulation tools are of general 
              utility in computer-aided design for catalysts, drugs, and  polymers.  We will
              employ these enhanced molecular simulation tools  to study lipid bilayers and
              bilayer/peptide complexes of importance  in basic biochemistry and
              biotechnology applications such as  biosensors and bioseparations applications.
                ***
