Title       : RUI: Specification of Meristem Identity in Pea Inflorescences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1997   
File        : a9405799

Award Number: 9405799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan R. Singer ssinger@carleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Diverse angiosperm inflorescence patterns can be attributed  to modifications of
              a few basic plans.  Some of these  modifications affect genes specifying
              inflorescence (I) and  floral (F) meristem identity.  Mutations of the LEAFY
              gene  in Arabidopsis and the FLORICAULA gene in Antirrhinum block  or delay the
              I to F transition so that the terminal (I-1)  meristem initiates second order
              (I-2) meristems rather than  floral meristems.  These mutants have
              developmental  parallels to Pisum sativum inflorescences where I-1 to I-2  to F
              transitions reflect the wild type phenotype.  A  comparison of meristem
              identity gene function in Pisum,  Arabidopsis, and Antirrhinum will address how
              evolutionary  modifications can alter inflorescence architecture.  The  long
              term goal of these experiments is to establish the  genetic hierarchy
              regulating inflorescence development in  Pisum.  This proposal focuses on three
              meristem identity  genes:  (1) DET (DETERMINATE), which is hypothesized to be 
              an I-1 identity gene; (2) VEG (VEGETATIVE), which is thought  to specify I-2
              and/or F meristem identity; and (3) PIM  (PROLIFERATING INFLORESCENCE
              MERISTEM), which appears to  assign F identity.  Using mutants of these genes,
              the PI  will explore how interactions between meristem identity  genes regulate
              inflorescence deelopment.  Interactions with  other putative meristem identity
              genes will be investigated.  Image analysis of mutant meristems will be used to
              ascertain  if expression of meristem identity genes and meristem  geometry
              correlate.  Finally, cloned Arabidopsis and  Antirrhinum meristem identity
              genes will be used to identify  homologous RFLP (restriction fragment length
              polymorphisms)  sequences in Pisum.  These RFLPs will be mapped and tested  for
              linkage with genetically identified Pisum meristem  identity genes.  Homology
              will be further tested by  transformation of Pisum meristem identity mutants
              with  Antirrhinum and Agrobacterium meristem identity genes.  Together the
              proposed genetic, morphological, a nd molecular  experiments will ascertain if
              (and how) similar genes can  give rise to both I to F and I-1 to I-2 to F
              inflorescence  patterns.
