Title       : Regulation of expression of the nitrogen fixation (nif) genes of K. pneumoniae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1998  
File        : a9405733

Award Number: 9405733
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sydney G. Kustu kustu@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1312,9109,9198,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9405733  Kustu  The NIFA protein (nifA gene product) is required to activate
              transcription of the nitrogen fixation (nif)  operons in a wide variety of
              free-living and symbiotic bacteria belonging to the large gram-negative 
              division proteobacteria. To activate, NIFA binds to enhancer-like sites
              approximately 100 bp upstream  of nif promoters and allows RNA polymerase
              (alpha54-holoenzyme form) to denature the DNA strands  around a transcriptional
              startsite -- that is, to isomerize from closed to open complexes. We succeeded 
              in purifying the insoluble NIFA protein from Klebsiella pneumoniae as a fusion
              to the soluble  maltose-binding protein (MBP) and in demonstrating its binding
              to enhancer-like sites in vitro for  the first time. MBP-NIFA activated
              transcription by alpha54- holoenzyme in a purified system and  could be shown
              to catalyze the isomerization of closed complexes between this polymerase and
              the  nifH promoter to open complexes. Activation and open complex formation
              required a nucleoside  triphosphate with a hydrolyzable, beta-gamma bond but we
              were unable to demonstrate hydrolysis  directly because we could not remove
              contaminating hydrolytic activities from the preparation. We  also purified an
              MBP fusion to just the central catalytic domain of NIFA, in the absence of its 
              DNA-binding domain, and released the central domain in a soluble, active form
              by proteolytic  cleavage of the fusion protein . The released central domain
              could activate transcription from solution,  a property so far unique among
              enhancer-binding proteins, and had the expected ability to hydrolyze 
              nucleotides.  A purified renatured form of the NIFL protein, which is known to
              inhibit NIFA activity in vivo in  response to the presence of molecular oxygen
              or combined nitrogen, inhibited transcriptional  activation by both MBP-NIFA
              and the central domain of NIFA. Since NIFL did not inhibit nucleotide 
              hydrolysis by the central domain, we postulate that it interferes with
              protein-protein contact  between this domain  of NIFA and alpha54-holoenzyme.
              Our major goals for the next grant period are:  1) to obtain NIFL preparations
              with better activity; 2) to determine whether NIFL inhibits NIFA  activity by
              interacting with NIFA stoichiometrically or covalently modifying it; 3) to
              study  protein-protein interactions between NIFL and NIFA and between NIFA and
              polymerase; and 4) to  determine the mechanism by which NIFL senses molecular
              oxygen. The studies are of interest with  respect to understanding the
              interaction of enhancerbinding proteins with the* target RNA polymerases  and
              with regard to understanding the various forms of regulation that occur in
              response to molecular  oxygen. We hope that they will eventually be of use to
              others in increasing the efficiency of biological  nitrogen fixation.  %%% 
              Crop productivity is often limited by the availability of nitrogen in a fornm
              suitable for synthesis of  proteins and other large molecules characteristie of
              living organisms. (certain bacteria, eithel alone  or in partnership with
              plants, have the ability lo convert nitrogen gas from the atmosphere to 
              ammonia, a nitrogen fertilizer, in a process called biological nitrogen
              fixation.  We are studying the NIFA protein, a major regulator of biological
              nitrogen fixation. Characterizing  NlFA will contnbute to understanding, how
              organisms decode palticu ar portions of their DNA  under appropriate conditions
              and may help to improve the biological productivn of nitrogen  felti1izer. A
              major goal for the next grant period is to understand how the function of the
              NIFA  protein is poisoned by oxygen gas in the air.  ***
