Title       : Accumulation of Meter-Scale Carbonate Parasequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1996       
File        : a9405551

Award Number: 9405551
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136207             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce H. Wilkinson eustasy@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Rothman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9405551  Wilkinson       The nature and genesis of shallow marine cyclic
              carbonate  units has been a subject of alluring interest for over several 
              decades, with origins variably attributed to the central importance  of
              high-frequency sealevel change, to periodic but intrabasinal  variation in
              subtidal carbonate production, and even to stochastic  episodes of random
              carbonate deposition.  Numerical simulations  incorporating a wide variety of
              allocyclic, autocyclic, and  aperiodic scenarios can all be tuned to yield
              reasonable scenarios  of repeated upward-shoaling peritidal carbonate
              accumulation.   Moreover, no single paradigm of intrabasinal versus
              extrabasinal or  haphazard versus periodic accumulation has proven to be a
              superior  predictor of the composition and distribution of cyclic limestone 
              deposits in epicratonic settings.       Recent analysis of stratigraphic data
              on cyclic peritidal  carbonates over a wide geographic and geologic range
              indicates that  measured thickness frequencies are strongly skewed and that the
               actual distribution of cycle thickness is perhaps exponential.  We  wish to
              explore the nature of thickness structures among peritidal  lithofacies and
              lithofacies associations in order to evaluate this  postulate, and believe that
              important progress in developing an  understanding of cycle generation will be
              gained from careful  investigation of facies arrangements and thicknesses. 
              Funds are  therefore requested to:  1) determine differences between minimum 
              carbonate production rates and maximum carbonate accumulation rates  in several
              subtidal coquinoid parasequences; 2) carry out detailed  examination of several
              shallow-water carbonate sequences to  quantitatively determine if
              statistically-important asymmetrically-  stacked lithofacies associations are
              present, and 3) analyze  measured and synthetic facies associations in order to
              determine if  frequency distributions of cycle thicknesses delineate patterns 
              anticipated from periodic or random deposition.       In  the first instance,
              comparison of data on carbonate  generation versus accumulation will not only
              allow for assessment  of early Phanerozoic stratigraphic completeness at a
              kiloyear scale  of resolution, but will also provide the first tangible basis
              for  evaluating the usefulness of Holocene rate data in ancient platform 
              settings.  In the second case, presence or absence of numerically  significant
              facies associations will provide a quantitative  assessment of the importance
              of upward-shoaling motifs in several  classic examples of carbonate cyclicity. 
              This will be one of the  first extensive attempts to quantitatively discern and
              document the  presence (or absence) of repetitive upward-shoaling facies 
              associations among shallow marine carbonates, and plainly is (and  should be) a
              requisite step in investigations of any supposedly  cyclic sequence.  In the
              third case, the nature of cycle thickness  distributions bears directly on
              questions of depositional  periodicity.  Should data on natural cycles result
              in  differentiation of some modal thickness class, such a distribution  would
              largely be in agreement with presumed repetitive and periodic  carbonate
              accumulation.  Presence of exponential thickness  distributions, on the other
              hand, is not as yet easily rationalized  when assuming periodic accumulation,
              but is in agreement with  anticipated trends if cycle formation reflects a
              random probability  of deposition during uniform subsidence.
