Title       : Upgrade Request for the Triangle Universities Electron Microprobe Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1994    
File        : a9405215

Award Number: 9405215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel F. Weill                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65485              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan E. Boudreau boudreau@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9405215  Boudreau       This award provides 42% of the funds for the 
              acquisition and upgrade of a used electron microprobe that  will be installed
              and operated in the Geology Department at  Duke University. The instrument will
              be added to the  microanalytical equipment pool covered by a Cooperative 
              Agreement of the Triangle Earth Science Micro-analytical  Consortium, assuring
              that it will be freely available for  shared use by staff and students of Duke
              University, The  University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and The North 
              Carolina State University at Raleigh.       The upgraded electron microprobe
              system will be capable  of accurate elemental chemical analysis of major and
              minor  elements in solid samples with a spatial resolution on the  order of
              micrometers. The electron microprobe is a basic  tool of geological research
              dealing with the chemistry of  earth materials and will be used in a variety of
              research  and teaching projects in the earth sciences.  ***  9406684  Johnson  
                  This award provides partial funding for the support of  a technician
              assigned to the Radiogenic Isotope Laboratory  in the Department of Geology and
              Geophysics at the  University of Wisconsin, Madison. The technician will assist
               in the operation and maintenance of the laboratory's  equipment that includes
              a multicollector thermal ionization  mass spectrometer and associated
              instrumentation for sample  preparation and data analysis. The laboratory is a
              resource  for mass spectrometric analysis needed in research and  teaching
              projects in the earth sciences by a large number of  researchers on-campus and
              off-campus. Research applications  include work on Arctic Ocean sediments,
              mantle geochemistry,  volcanism, geochronology of carbonates in the Michigan
              Basin  and Wisconsin Arch provinces, and Archean and Proterozoic  granites. The
              technician will also participate in the  technical developmental work of the
              laboratory, including  the development of new methods for the quantitative 
              measurement of the isotope s of hafnium.  ***
