Title       : Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Cellular Interactions in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1994    
File        : a9405391

Award Number: 9405391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Pruitt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of the work described in this proposal is  to understand how
              plant cells communicate with one another.  To study this, this investigator
              analyzes the interactions  that must take place between the male and female 
              reproductive systems in order for fertilization to take  place successfully. 
              These encompass many different  interactions which are required to control such
              diverse  processes as the transfer of water from the stigma to the  pollen
              grain, the acquisition of polarity by the pollen  grain and the guidance of the
              growing pollen tube to an  individual ovule.  This investigator has undertaken
              a  genetic approach to this problem, identifying mutations  which result in
              sterility but are not due to the altered  morphology of the reproductive
              system.  He has identified  one major class of male sterile mutants which fail
              to be  recognized by the stigma and appear to be deficient in the  production
              of long chain lipid species.  He has also  identified numerous mutations which
              alter the development of  the ovules and has used these to determine that the
              haploid  embryo sac contained within the ovule is essential for the  proper
              guidance of the pollen tubes within the ovary.  Experiments are proposed to
              extend the characterization of  these mutations as well as to identify new
              mutations,  including those which are active in the haploid phase of the  plant
              life cycle.  Specific objectives for this granting  period are:  (1) to
              identify as many genes as possible which  are specifically involved in the
              control of the growth and  development; and (2) to characterize the functions
              of the  genes already identified genetically in the reproductive  process by an
              analysis of their phenotypes.
