Title       : Periodic Gene Expression in The Mitotic Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1994      
File        : a9405605

Award Number: 9405605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy G. Burland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9405605  The naturally synchronous plasmodium of physarium will be
              utilized  to isolate genes whose transcript levels peak during the last hour 
              of the mitotic cycle.  The cDNAs will be prioritized for further  analysis. 
              For practical simplicity, initial priority will go to  genes present in single
              copy.  Among these, top priority will go to  novel genes, as estimated by
              partial DNA sequencing.  The complete  coding sequence will be obtained for one
              single-copy plasmodium-  specific gene and for one single-copy gene expressed
              in both amoeba  and plasmodial stages.  A genomic clone will be obtained for
              each  fully-sequenced gene, and used to disrupt the gene in order to  determine
              whether its function is essential for viability.  %%%  The major periodic
              events of the mitotic cycle are DNA replication  and mitosis. They must be
              regulated so that they occur alternately  and only once per cycle. Many gene
              products involved in this  regulation have been identified, notably protein
              kinases,  phosphatases and cyclins. Regulation is achieved by periodic  changes
              in the activities of these molecules, which can be achieved  at the level of
              transcription, mRNA stability, protein stability,  association with other
              proteins, and covalent modifications. This  proposal focusses on periodic
              transcription, which for some genes  is crucial for proper regulation of the
              mitotic cycle Many of the  genes involved in mitotic cycle regulation may not
              be identifiable  by classical genetic methods. This proposal uses an
              alternative  method to identify novel genes that may be involved in mitotic 
              cycle regulation. cDNAs for genes whose transcript levels peak  during late G2
              phase will be isolated, using the plasmodium of the  protist Physarum
              polyacephalum as a source of transcripts to  template the cDNAs. The plasmodium
              has a naturally synchronous  mitotic cycle, so that changes in transcript
              levels are readily  detectable. Moreover, the plasmodium can be grown to extra-
               ordinarily large mass, providing a sou rce of transcripts at 
              precisely-defined mitotic cycle stages that will be used to  template cDNA
              synthesis. mRNA from alternative mitotic cycle stages  will be used for hybrid
              subtractions to enrich the cDNA library for  clones representing periodic
              transcripts. Once periodic cDNAs are  identified, their copy number will be
              determined, and further  analysis restricted to single-copy genes. Next, gene
              expression  will be studied both in the Physarum plasmodium and in the Physarum
               amoeba a haploid uninucleate cell similar to an animal cell. The  cDNAs will
              be partially sequenced to determine which are likely to  represent novel genes.
              Then, one novel, gene that is expressed only  in the plasmodium and another
              novel gene that is expressed in both  amoebal and plasmodial stages will be
              fully sequenced to  investigate their coding potential.  The requirement of
              each of  these two genes will be tested by gene disruption.  Success in this 
              endeavor would create a foundation for identifying other periodic  genes that
              may be involved in mitotic cycle control. For such  genes, the special
              characteristics of the Physarum cell types would  provide a powerful system for
              analyzing their role in the mitotic  cycle and the timing and mechanism of
              their action.  ***
