Title       : Regulation and Structure-Function Relationships of Heme- Regulated eIF-2 Kinase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1996  
File        : a9405781

Award Number: 9405781
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane-Jane Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Chen  9405781  The objective of this proposal is to elucidate the mechanisms of 
              regulation of heme-regulated eIF-2a kinase (HRI) at the molecular  structural
              level.  HRI is a potent inhibitor of protein synthesis.   It is activated in
              heme-deficiency of reticulocytes.  HRI is  expressed in erythroid cells and the
              physiological role of HRI is  to maintain the balanced synthesis of heme and
              globin chains.  The  specific aims are (1) Regulation of HRI by
              phosphorylation; (2)  Molecular mechanisms in the regulation of HRI by heme;
              (3)  Determination of HRI structure by X-ray crystallography.  The methods to
              be employed are recombinant DNA techniques,  polymerase chain reaction,
              synthesis of oligodeoxynucleodtides,  high pressure liquid chromatography,
              amino acid microsequencing, in  vitro transcription and translation, protein
              kinase assays, gel  electrophoresis, deoxynucleotide sequencing, expression of
              HRI and  other proteins using recombinant baculovirus, immunoprecipitation, 
              Western Blot analysis, and x-ray crstallography.  HRI is a key regulator of
              protein synthesis, a process which is  essential for the regulation of cellular
              processes.  %%%  Protein synthesis is vital for cell growth, differentiation,
              viral  infection, and stress responses.  Regulation of protein synthesis  by
              the phosphorylation of the a-subunit of eukaryotic initiation  factor 2
              (eIF-2a) is employed by a variety of cells under these  conditions. 
              Phosphorylation of eIF-2a results in the inhibition of  protein synthesis
              globally.  Two distinct eIF-2a kinases, which  phosphorylate specifically the
              eIF-2a in mammalian cells, have been  identified and molecularly cloned.  The
              double-stranded RNA  dependent eIF-2a kinase is induced by interferon and its
              activity  is regulated by double-stranded RNA which is often introduced by 
              viral infections.  The heme-regulated eIF-2a kinase (HRI) is  activated in
              heme-deficiency of immature erythroid cells and its  activity is inhibited by
              heme.  Our recent studies indicate that  HRI is p resent in erythroid cells
              only.  Since heme is the  prothetic group of hemoglobin which is the principal
              protein in  erythroid cells, the major physiological role of HRI is in the 
              regulation of balanced synthesis of heme and hemoglobin which  carries oxygens
              in our blood stream.  This research project is focused on the structure and
              function  study of HRI.  We will study the molecular mechanism of regulation 
              of HRI by heme and identify the heme-binding domain of HRI.  Since  activation
              of HRI is accompanied by the phosphorylation of HRI,  regulation of HRI by
              phosphorylation will also be studied.  For a  more detailed understanding of
              the regulation of HRI, it is  essential to obtain the overall structure of this
              kinase by X-ray  crystallography.  The crystal structure of HRI is not only 
              important for our understanding of protein kinases, but also  important for the
              understanding of heme-binding to enzymes.  Since  regulation of protein
              synthesis is closely related to oncogenic  transformation, further
              structure-function study of HRI should  advance our understanding of protein
              phosphorylation in the  regulation of cellular processes, in particular cell
              growth and  differentiation.
