Title       : Characterization of Components Interacting with the Cdc42p GTPase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1996        
File        : a9405972

Award Number: 9405972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas I. Johnson dijohnso@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9405972  Johnson       The specific goal of this project is to decipher the 
              molecular mechanisms that control the cell polarity process  in the yeast
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  Polarized growth in  response to different signals
              during the yeast cell cycle  can result in the generation of several different 
              morphological structures, such as buds, mating projections  and pseudohyphae. 
              Three protein components of the cell  polarity apparatus in yeast were
              previously characterized;  the Ras -related GTPase Cdc42p, Cdc24p, which
              activates  Cdc42p function by nucleotide exchange, and Cdc43p, the beta 
              subunit of the geranylgeranyltransferase that regulates  Cdc42p subcellular
              localization.  These components have  conserved counterparts in other
              eukaryots, suggesting that  common mechanisms may exist.  This project will use
              genetic  and biochemical techniques to identify new or pre-existing  proteins
              that interact with Cdc42p to control either its  function as a
              guanine-nucleotide exchange factor for Cdc42p  or its localization and
              interactions with the actin  cytoskeleton.  %%%  The long term objective of
              this project is to understand the  mechanism that control cellular
              morphogenesis during the  eukaryotic cell cycle.  Cellular morphogenesis, the
              process  by which the complex, three dimensional organization of the  cell is
              developed and maintained, is crucial for the control  of many cellular and
              developmental processes such as the  generation of cell polarity and cell
              shape, the  intracellular movements of organelles, and the polarized  secretion
              and deposition of new cell surface constituents.  Microtubules and actin based
              cytoskeletal networks play a  critical role in cellular morphogenesis.  In the
              yeast  Saccharomyces cerevisiae, microtubules are required for  proper
              chromosome segregation and nuclear migration while  actin microfilaments are
              necessary for polarized growth  patterns.  Polarized growth in yeast occurs in
              response to  both internal and external signals, resulting in different  m
              orphological structures.  One of the goals of the proposal  is to understand
              the molecular machinery that controls these  changes in polarized growth
              patterns.  In addition, it will  also be determined how the growth of cell
              polarity is  integrated with other cellular processes, such as cell cycle 
              control.  ***
