Title       : Making Network Protocols Simpler and More Robust Using Self-Stabilization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9405444

Award Number: 9405444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165545             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Varghese   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              94054444  Varghesee       As networks become part of the nation's
              infrastructure, it is  important that they become as reliable as other
              utilities such as  the telephone and power services.  This project is concerned
              with  the design, evaluation, and implementation of reliable network  protocols
              through the use of self-stabilization.       A protocol is self-stabilizing if
              it begins to behave  correctly no matter what state it starts in.  The
              principal  investigator believes that self-stabilizing network protocols are 
              simpler (i.e., a small number of uniform mechanisms instead of  multiple
              mechanisms to deal with a catalog of anticipated faults)  and more robust
              (e.g., can recover from transient faults such as  memory corruption as well as
              common faults such as link and node  crashes).       While there are
              self-stabilizing protocols in existing  networks, such protocols typically rely
              on timers that are  proportional to worst-case network delays and result in
              slow  recovery times. Further, there are only a handful of such  protocols. 
              This project will investigate stabilizing protocols  that have much faster
              recovery times and for a larger class of  problems.       This project will
              apply techniques from the theory of  distributed algorithms (that the principal
              investigator and others  have developed) to the systematic design of
              self-stabilizing  protocols.  The work in the distributed algorithm literature
              has  introduced some useful paradigms and techniques but has not fully  applied
              these ideas to real networks.  It is this gap that this  project will address. 
               ***
