Title       : Fatty Acid Synthase from Arabidopsis thaliana and Related Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1996       
File        : a9405588

Award Number: 9405588
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan G. Jaworski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1305,9109,9197,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9405588  Jaworski  Fatty acid biosynthesis in plants is a primary metabolic
              pathway  that is necessary to provide the fatty acyl components found in the 
              lipids of membranes and in vegetable oils.  In our laboratory, the  discovery
              of 3-ketoacyl-acyl carrier protein (ACP) synthase III  (KAS III) activity has
              led to new questions about regulation of  fatty acid formation.  We have shown
              that KAS III is the  predominant mechanism at the start of fatty acid
              synthesis, but is  it a required step?  To answer this question, we will: (1)
              analyze  the effect of altered KAS III activity in Arabidopsis thaliana and 
              other plants.  KAS III expression will be both increased and  decreased in
              Arabidopsis with antisence and sense constructs of its  cDNA; (2) attempt to
              identify other KASs and analyze their roles in  synthesis of medium chain fatty
              acids; and (3) we will determine if  KAS III is capable of interacting with
              other enzymes of fatty acid  synthase function under in vivo conditions, using
              a 'two-hybrid'  system to detect protein-protein interaction.  %%%  Fatty acid
              biosynthesis in plants is a primary metabolic pathway  that is necessary to
              provide the fatty acyl components found in the  lipids of membranes and in
              vegetable oils.  Areas under study are  intended to answer basic questions
              concerning the regulation and  contribution of individual reactions to this
              essential pathway.  In  addition, a study will be initiated to probe questions
              concerning  the molecular organization of this pathway.  What are the basic 
              reactions of fatty acid biosynthesis in plants and how are they  controlled? 
              It has been demonstrated by this laboratory that a  reaction caused by the
              enzyme 3-ketoacyl-acyl carrier protein  synthase, or KAS III, is the
              predominant route for beginning the  process of fatty acid synthesis.  But
              whether this in a required  reaction has not been proved. One approach to find
              an answer is to  study how KAS III operates inside the cell during fatty acid 
              formation.  It appears that many of t he enzymes that are involved  in fatty
              acid formation group together and form large, operational  complexes.  As a
              result, it is believed that the essential role for  KAS III, or other KAS-type
              enzymes, in fatty acid formation will  become clearer if these enzymes also
              associate themselves in the  same fatty acid producing enzyme aggregations. 
              ***
