Title       : Circular Dichroism of fd and Pf3 Single-Strand DNA-Binding Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1996     
File        : a9405683

Award Number: 9405683
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald M. Gray dongray@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9405683  Gray  The main goal of this project is to elucidate the tyrosyl 
              contributions to the CD spectrum of the fd g5p, a model single-  strand
              DNA-binding protein of 87 residues whose crystal structure  has recently been
              redetermined.  The protein is a  -sheet protein,  and the five tyrosines of the
              protein dominate its CD spectrum.   The tyrosyl 229 nm CD band changes when the
              protein binds to  polynucleotides.  Two of the tyrosines are known to have
              important  functions, one being involved in DNA-binding and at least one other 
              being involved in cooperative dimer-dimer contacts that are formed  as the
              protein binds to DNA.  Since all five tyrosines tend to be  conserved among the
              ssDNA-binding proteins, they all may be  functionally important, although the
              functions are not all known.   Our objective will be to study mutant proteins
              in which the  tyrosines have been conservatively replaced.  Differences between
               the spectra of the mutant proteins, and changes in the protein  spectra upon
              forming complexes with DNA, will be used to determine  the location of each
              tyrosine CD contribution.  The results of the  study should provide a benchmark
              for calculating and understanding  the contributions of tyrosines to the CD
              spectra of other proteins.  A second goal is to study the ssDNA-binding protein
              from Pf3 phage,  which belongs to a different structural class of filamentous 
              viruses.  The Pf3 is a smaller protein of 78 residues, of which  only three are
              tyrosines.  A study of this protein should add to a  more general understanding
              of the spectral and binding properties  of the filamentous phage ssDNA-binding
              proteins.  Finally, the  complexes formed by the fd and Pf3 proteins with ssDNA
              will be  investigated in solution by small-angle X-ray scattering  techniques. 
              %%%  Some bacterial viruses, called filamentous viruses, mature by first 
              forming a long, thin helical structure.  This intermediate helical  structure
              contains the newly-made viral DNA genome encased in a  protein shell made of a
              s ingle type of protein.  This special virus  protein (DNA-binding protein)
              from one virus (fd virus) has been  very well-studied by many techniques, and
              it is considered to be a   model protein in its class.  Many mutant variants of
              this protein  are available from collaborator Dr. T. Terwilliger at Los Alamos 
              National Laboratory.  The mutant proteins and the structures they  form with
              DNA exhibit interesting interactions with ultraviolet  light beams they are
              polarized in a certain way (circularly  polarized).  The interactions of many
              mutant proteins with this  type of polarized light can now be studied, which
              will allow an  exceptionally complete interpretation of which protein
              components  have the optical phenomenon.  A similar study will be undertaken on
               the analogous protein from a different virus (Pf3 virus).  Finally,  the
              helical structures of the protein-encased DNA genomes will be  defined by the
              manner in which they scatter X-rays.  The latter  work will be done with
              another collaborator at Los Alamos National          Laboratory, Dr. J.
              Trewhella.  In total, the study of these  proteins and mutant proteins should
              help explain the properties of  other DNA-binding proteins and how they act
              during the replication  of the filamentous viruses.  ***
