Title       : Biochemistry of Adaptive Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1996       
File        : a9405433

Award Number: 9405433
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Koshland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9183,9198,9216,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Koshland  9405433  The new proposal builds on the previous experience of the 
              laboratory on the structures and functions of protein.  The major  part of the
              work will attack the mechanism of isocitric  dehydrogenase.  The structure of
              the enzyme has been determined and  it has been shown to be covalently
              regulated by phosphorylation at  the active site.  Mutations will be made in
              both the protein and  the substrate.  Measurements will be made of the binding
              constants  and catalytic turnover numbers of the enzyme containing these 
              mutations.  The x-ray structures of the mutant proteins and the  wild type with
              isocitrate and "mutated" substrates will be  determined using x-ray
              crystallography.  The binding constants  calculated from docking programs and
              the position of the catalytic  groups will then be correlated with the observed
              properties of  catalysis and binding.  Through these studies it is hoped that
              an algorithm can be  developed to predict the effect of binding and catalysis
              on enzymes  and receptors in general and this will be applied to a general 
              procedure for altering the specificity of enzymes.  The immediate  application
              will be first to convert isocitric dehydrogenase to an  isopropylmalate
              dehydrogenase by modifications of a few residues at  the active site and
              possibly also to convert the isopropyl malate  dehydrogenase to an isocitrate
              dehydrogenase by similar mutations.   Since both the structure of the
              isocitrate and isopropylmalate  dehydrogenase are known this should be a
              moderately straightforward  task.  If the calculations turn out to be
              predictive and accurate,  it is then proposed to expand the range and apply the
              techniques to  other enzymes.  %%%  Enzymes, natures catalysts, have
              specificity and catalytic power  capabilities far beyond any man-made catalysts
              that have been  created so far.  To understand the mechanisms used by these
              natural  enzymes could therefore be of enormous value in designing new 
              catalysts which could, for example, be applied to creating new   materials,
              cleaning up oil spills, and avoiding toxic side products  in chemical
              synthesis.  Two tools, genetic engineering and computer  design, have recently
              been added to the repertoire of tools which  could be applied to this problem. 
              In this proposal these new tools  are applied to a powerful and vital enzyme in
              metabolism with the  hopes that it can be genetically engineered into a
              different  enzyme.  In addition it is hoped that the strategy developed for 
              this example can be generalized for use in a wide variety of other  catalysts. 
              ***
