Title       : Mixing Rules at Pore and Fracture Junctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1995      
File        : a9405837

Award Number: 9405837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153700             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Wilson jwilson@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      P O Box Q, Campus Station
	      Socorro, NM  878010389    505/835-5700

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1043,1325,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9405837  Wilson    We propose to use a mathematical model and laboratory
              experiments  to elucidate the mixing rule at the pore body or fracture junction
               scale.  Traditional models have assumed that tracers or  contaminants entering
              one of these junctions are either well mixed,  or follow flowlines through the
              junction.  A cellular automata  numerical model and a machined Lucite
              experimental micromodel are  proposed to investigate the hypothesis that there
              is a range of  mixing rules between these limits.  The Peclet number would be
              used  to position in flow between diffusion control leading to the well  mixed
              rule, and advection control, with contaminants never leaving  a flowline.  A
              pore or fracture junction Peclet Number is defined  as the mean advective
              velocity times pore/fracture size, divided by  the diffusion coefficient.  At
              high velocities and high Peclet  Numbers there is little mixing across the
              dividing stream line,  yielding advective control.  At small velocities and
              Peclet numbers  diffusion dominates, resulting in complete mixing.  We
              hypothesize  that the transition between these limits spans about an order of 
              magnitude of Peclet numbers, and occurs near a Peclet number of 1.     Lattice
              gas automata (LGA) and /or lattice Boltzman methods will be  used to
              numerically simulate flow and transport  simultaneously.   These methods work
              well for Peclet numbers near one, but a new  algorithm has been developed to
              efficiently model dilute solutions  of non-homogeneous fluids in order to
              economically vary Peclet  number  over a large range, while holding Reynolds
              number constant.   The experimental approach employs a Lucite physical 
              micromodels of  a junctions, consisting of four intersecting channels.  In
              order to  accommodate the expected range of Peclet numbers the low Reynolds 
              number, and reasonable experimental time constants, the channels  and flow
              rates must be quite small.  At low flow rates and Peclet  numbers the
              experiment is very sensitive to leaks, temperature  fluctua tions, and other
              problems.  We built a preliminary version  of the experiment to elucidate and
              solve each of these problems.    The cellular automata simulations and the
              physical micromodel will  be used to explore mixing with different combinations
              of entering  and exiting flow rates, and with different junction geometries.   
              We will then work with other investigators to apply the rules to  percolation
              network models of porous systems, and various fracture  network systems, to
              determine the spatial distribution of mixing  rules, and their effect on
              mechanical and macro-dispersion  calculations.  Through collaborations we will
              simulate miscible  displacement experiments in the networks, with mixing,
              no-mixing  and adaptive mixing rules, to further investigate the range of 
              mixing conditions.
