Title       : The Folding Mechanism of the Intracellular Lipocalins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9405282

Award Number: 9405282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ira J. Ropson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9405282  Ropson  The purpose of this study is to examine the kinetic folding 
              mechanism of several members of the intracellular lipocalin  family of
              proteins.  These proteins share remarkable structural  similarity by x-ray
              crystallography despite as little as 20%  sequence identity.  The experiments
              proposed here will determine  if proteins that share the same structure also
              share the same  folding mechanism, even when there are low levels of homology
              in  their sequence.  A multifaceted approach will be used to address  this
              problem on all levels of structural organization.  Stopped-  flow circular
              dichroism will be used to examine global changes in  secondary structure during
              folding and unfolding.  In addition,  for proteins in this family that have
              proton NMR assignments,  backbone amide-hydrogen exchange labeling will be used
              to  determine when the specific hydrogen bonds that form the  secondary
              structure and stabilized during the folding process.   Formation of tertiary
              structure during folding will be examined  by monitoring tryptophan
              fluorescence and by site-specific  labeling of the protein with fluorine and
              fluorine NMR.  This  unique method allows the changes in tertiary contacts at
              specific  sites during folding to be monitored, both at equilibrium and 
              kinetically by stopped-flow NMR.  Fluorine NMR has already  identified an
              unusual intermediate that has little if any  secondary structure for one member
              of the family, intestinal  fatty-acid binding protein.  This intermediate is
              highly  populated at equilibrium at levels of denaturant sufficient to 
              completely unfold the protein by other spectroscopic methods.   These studies
              will be extended to other members of the lipocalin  family to determine if the
              same types of intermediates are  present on their folding pathways as well. 
              %%%  The mechanism of protein folding continues to be a elusive  problem in
              biochemistry.  It is not currently known how the amino  acid sequence of a
              protein determines the final structure of the  protein  and the structures of
              the intermediates that might be  present during the formation of that
              structure.  This proposal  uses a variety of physical methods to determine the
              mechanism of  folding for the intracellular lipocalin family of proteins.  The 
              study of this family of proteins will improve our understanding  of protein
              folding in general, and of  -sheet proteins in  particular, which will have
              benefits for the production of  improved protein products by the biotechnology
              industry.  ***
