Title       : Dissertation Enhancement Research: Habitat Fragmentation and the Responses of
               Hantavirus Host Communities in Panama: A Test of the Dilution Effect Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0241169

Award Number: 0241169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26614              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Yates tyates@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5926,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0241169
Yates

This Americas Program thesis enhancement project will support
              thesis dissertation research by Mr. Gerardo Suzan under the supervision of Dr.
              Terry L. Yates of the University of New Mexico.  The research, in collaboration
              with the Dr. Armiens Blas of the Instituto Conmemorativo GORGAS in Panama, aims
              to study the way that changes in natural environments resulting from human
              activity affect the distribution of the reservoir for Hantavirus Pulmonary
              Syndrome and the risk of outbreaks in humans.

In its simplest form, the
              dilution effect hypothesis suggests that high biodiversity reduces the
              frequency of some rodent-borne diseases. If so, several emerging zoonotic
              diseases may be related to the loss of biodiversity. Small mammal species
              richness and distribution in six Panamanian national parks with varying degrees
              of anthropogenic disturbance and size will be used to test this hypothesis.
              Preliminary surveys indicate that the lowest species richness was found in
              human dominated habitats where the hantavirus reservoir in Panama was
              exclusively collected and point to the conclusion that anthropogenic
              disturbance favors the hantavirus reservoir distribution, and possibly explains
              recent outbreaks.

This study will establish a database for species
              distribution among different biomes, identify potential areas of highest
              disease risk based on the degree of habitat fragmentation, and, ultimately,
              increase our understanding of rodent reservoir ecology as it relates to
              anthropogenic activities. The basic conclusions of this project may apply to
              other vector-borne diseases in different regions of the world. If biodiversity
              and disease risks are strongly correlated, conservation of natural resources
              becomes even more important.

