Title       : Efficient Simulation of Protein-Membrane Interactions by Implicit Solvent
               Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0241236

Award Number: 0241236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520479             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dexuan Xie dxie@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Butko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to develop a new computational model for studying protein
              conformation changes upon membrane interactions. Its objectives are to (1)
              develop a robust and efficient parallel iterative algorithm for solving the
              Poisson-Boltzmann equation; (2) define a new biomolecular potential-energy
              function through a large reduction of the number of conformation-freedom
              variables for a family of particular proteins; (3) develop a new sparse matrix
              compress scheme for programming an efficient application-tailored
              preconditioner in an optimal order of memory locations; (4) develop a parallel
              iterative algorithm for constrained molecular dynamics simulations; and (5)
              train undergraduate and graduate researchers for the post-genomic era.
              Specifically, the new algorithms and the new model will be applied to studying
              the molecular mechanism of membrane damage induced by the protein toxin Cyt1A
              upon membrane interactions. The theoretical results will also be compared to
              laboratory data produced by biochemical and biophysical methods such as
              fluorescence spectroscopy, surface tensiometry, and electron microscopy.
              Synthesis of the computational and experimental data may bring new insights to
              the manner of membrane permeabilization and damage by proteins that do not
              transverse the lipid bilayer.
	Efficient algorithms and modeling of
              protein-membrane interactions can save considerable amounts of time, money, and
              laboratory effort in biotechnology, medicine, agriculture, and the food,
              pharmaceutical, or defense industries. The new algorithms and the new model
              developed in this project can significantly simplify computing complexity in
              simulations of large protein-water-membrane systems. They can also be applied
              to various biomolecular simulations. In fact, numerical solution of the
              Poisson-Boltzmann equation plays a central role in implicit solvent models. The
              molecular potential energy function is a cornerstone of molecular modeling, and
              the minimization of the molecular potential energy function and the molecular
              dynamics simulation are two fundamental tasks in computational biology.
              Furthermore, the chosen model protein, the toxin Cyt1A, has been used as an
              environmentally-safe insecticide specific against mosquitoes and blackflies.
              Elucidating its mode of action may help the industry increase the toxin's
              efficacy by targeting specificity and synergism with other insecticides.
              Additionally, through the collaboration between a mathematician/computer
              scientist and a biochemist/biophysicist, students involved in this project will
              be trained in a virtual hub of mathematics, computer science, and the life
              sciences. This grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support
              Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology. This is a joint
              competition sponsored by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the
              National Science Foundation and the National Institute of General Medical
              Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of Health.

