Title       : Federal Cyber Service: Scholarship for Service
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2002  
File        : a0241106

Award Number: 0241106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2344791            (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Vanecek vanecek@norwich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michel Kabay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip T. Susmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Aldrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Clemments  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Norwich University
	      
	      Northfield, VT  05663    802/485-5011

NSF Program : 1668      FED CYBER SERV: SCHLAR FOR SER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Norwich University, a National Security Agency Center of Academic Excellence, is
              awarded a National Science Foundation Federal Cyber Service: Scholarship for
              Service grant to establish scholarship monies that will encourage students to
              obtain a degree in Information Assurance studies. The scholarship will allow
              rising juniors to obtain their degree in Information Assurance competencies to
              help defend our federal cyber systems and protect the private sector
              infrastructure. Because of the breadth and scope of this program, it is
              strongly believed that students will graduate from Norwich University's
              Information Assurance program with the skills, background, and motivation to
              meet the growing national need for specialists in this critical area. At the
              end of their junior year, the students will be available for summer internships
              in IA with deployment to appropriate federal agencies. The students will return
              for their senior year and complete their major and minor areas of study. At the
              end of their senior year, students will participate in a one-week information
              security update program that will be run by the programs industry partners, who
              are national leaders in information security. They will then be available to
              enter the workforce for the selected federal agencies.
