Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Citizenship and Social
               Influence: A Comparative Study of the Public Sphere in Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0241400

Award Number: 0241400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14475              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer Widner jwidner@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project is a comparative study of
              the public sphere in West and North Africa and of the contextual forces shaping
              the public and political domains.  In particular, the research investigates
              tensions between the overlapping spheres of state and religious authority, and
              what 
this means for democratic politics and reform.  To these ends, the
              project asks how individuals in Senegal and Morocco form political attitudes
              toward the state and how individuals conceptualize their own roles as citizens
              of a national state.    
 
Analysis is undertaken to take  account of the
              processes of political communication during which individuals come to
              understand their relationship with the state.  The research tests hypotheses
              regarding the effects of social influence herein defined as contextual
              influences 
such as religion and the neighborhood on political actions,
              attitudes and identities. 
  
This research investigates contextual effects
              in non-Western settings and looks at local social interactions in two
              predominately Muslim countries with histories of French colonial occupation. 
              The selection of cases allows for cross-cultural and cross-regional comparisons
              and embeds variations in political systems, racial and ethnic differences, and
              Islamic religious practices.  Senegal provides a case in which, though
              democratic, power was transferred to the opposition through electoral means for
              the first time in 2000.  Though democratic reforms have 
been implemented in
              Morocco's constitutional monarchy, no transition has yet taken place. 

              
Insights from the research in Senegal and Morocco will enhance understanding
              of citizenship and political attitude formation in developing and democratizing
              countries more generally, and specifically in those with Muslim majorities.
              


