Title       : The Role of Apologies in the Settlement of Civil Disputes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0241355

Award Number: 0241355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45520              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer K. Robbennolt robbennoltj@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Even though it may be appropriate to offer an apology to a person who one has
              injured, it is often said that U.S. legal culture discourages apologies due to
              fears of legal liability. In recent years, however, several legal commentators
              have suggested that defendants in civil lawsuits should be encouraged to
              apologize to opposing parties. Proponents of apologies in civil litigation
              believe that apologies will, among other things, avert lawsuits and promote
              settlement, while providing greater satisfaction to injured parties. Despite
              this speculation, there has been very little empirical exploration of the ways
              in which apologies might affect legal decision-making in civil cases, the
              boundary conditions on any such effects, or the mechanisms through which such
              effects might occur. This project consists of three studies designed to explore
              the responses of legal actors to apologies in the context of a civil case. The
              research examines the role of apologies in settlement negotiation, examining
              whether and under what conditions apologies increase the willingness of injured
              parties to engage in settlement talks or the likelihood a settlement offer will
              be accepted, and the ways in which apologies influence the underlying
              attributions that may facilitate settlement. The first two studies focus on
              "safe" apologies, apologies that merely express sympathy for the injured party
              but do not admit fault, or apologies that are protected by an evidentiary rule.
              By asking individual participants to take the role of injured parties (Study 1)
              and attorneys to take the role of their attorneys (Study 2) in hypothetical
              situations, these studies investigate the influence of "safe" apologies on the
              settlement decisions of these potential litigants and their attorneys. The
              moderating effects of the severity of the injury and the evidence of the
              defendant's fault are also examined. The third study focuses on "compelled" and
              "delegated" apologies and how civil litigants' interpretations and settlement
              decisions are influenced by apologies offered under pressure from the injured
              party or a third-party (such as a mediator or a judge) or offered by proxy
              (i.e., via an attorney). A secondary goal of this project is to acquire a
              picture of attorneys' current practices and attitudes with respect to
              apologies. While it is the intuition and experience of legal commentators that
              apologies are rarely considered by attorneys, let alone offered, no systematic
              data has been collected about 1) whether they have or would advise a client to
              apologize and under what circumstances, 2) their reactions to the new statutes
              protecting apologies, or 3) the barriers they see to apologies in civil
              litigation.  Therefore, attorney participants are also surveyed about their
              current practices and approaches. The project informs psychological theories of
              apology by improving understanding of the effects of apology on judgment and
              decision-making, the factors that moderate these effects and the mechanisms by
              which such effects are mediated. The project also enhances the practice of law
              by helping to educate practitioners and practitioners-to-be about the uses of
              apology in civil litigation, and informs legal reform by examining the
              potential effects of the emerging statutory protection of apologies.
