Title       : Regional Trade Agreements as Security Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0241574

Award Number: 0241574
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathy L. Powers powersk@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Goertz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Regional trade agreements (RTAs) are trade institutions that can also be
              security institutions. Trade institutions specify rules for trade among
              members. Security institutions specify rules that prescribe how member states
              jointly address mutual security concerns among the membership. Though it is
              little known, RTA treaties may, and often do, include military alliance
              agreements and security components within their framework.  RTA membership
              often consists of former and present enemies as well as longtime rivals that do
              experience militarized conflict. Scholarly inquiry has analyzed the conditions
              under which regional trade agreements diminish militarized conflict indirectly
              through increased economic interdependence due to RTA-induced trade
              liberalization. The researchers in this investigation examine the direct
              impacts of RTA structure on conflict via the security components built into the
              structure of the RTA institution. Conflict among member states may lead to the
              transformation of RTAs  into security institutions. RTAs as security
              institutions not only influence the occurrence and severity of militarized
              conflict among its members, but such belligerence between members or in the
              region leads to institutional change within RTAs. RTAs become security
              institutions in part because their members face immediate and pressing security
              concerns. Hence, it is necessary not only to see how RTAs influence conflict
              but also how conflict influences the RTA. This implies a theory of
              international institutions, and in particular of institutional change, that the
              researchers develop and empirically test. The objectives of this study are
              two-fold: to develop and empirically test a model of (1) how variations in RTA
              security structure shape militarized conflict among member states and (2) how
              militarized conflict among member states alters RTA security structures during
              the period1950-2000. To accomplish these objectives, project activities include
              extending the existing RTA data set from African states and security
              integration in their twenty-plus regional trade agreements to all RTAs in the
              world during this time period. The broader impact of this project extends to
              integration of education and discovery as well as diversity. In terms of
              integration into education, graduate research assistants will be trained in the
              research process and present results at meetings; a new dataset will be
              incorporated into class assignments. Diversity is integrated through personnel:
              an African-American female assistant professor as the principle investigator
              and results will be disseminated at the National Conference of Black Political
              Scientists. Research infrastructure will be enhanced by products produced from
              project activities including a new data set. On the policy side, light will be
              shed on the consequences of policymakers using trade organizations to address
              regional security. International institutions are involved in dealing with
              almost all conflicts in the world today. It is imperative for diplomats and
              leaders to understand how institutions are used to mediate conflicts, and how
              conflicts are likely to put institutional change on their agendas.
