Title       : Paleoecology of Belizean Bajos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0241757

Award Number: 0241757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25652              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas P. Dunning nicholas.dunning@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Regional landscapes are the product of the long-term dynamics of
              human-environment interactions.  Geographers have played a critical role in
              such work using a combination of historical, archaeological, geoarchaeological,
              and physical geographical approaches to help establish the time depth, spatial
              extent, and causation of both intentional and unintentional human-induced
              environmental change associated with pre-Columbian populations in the New
              World.  This project will test a model suggesting that large karst depressions
              known as bajos in the Maya Lowlands region in and near the Yucatan Peninsula
              were transformed by human-activity from perennial wetlands and shallow lakes to
              seasonal swamps between 400 B.C. and 250 A.D.  This model was developed during
              the conduct of fieldwork in northwestern Belize and neighboring portions of
              Guatemala.  The principal investigator and his colleagues have argued that this
              environmental transformation helps answer several questions that have long
              puzzled scholars of Maya civilization:  Why were many of the earliest Maya
              cities built on the margins of bajos?  Why were some of these early centers
              abandoned between 100 B.C. and 250 A.D.?  Why did other centers construct
              elaborate water storage systems and survived into the Classic period (250 -900
              A.D.)?  The transformation of the bajos represents one of the most significant
              and long-lasting human-related environmental changes documented in the
              Pre-Columbian New World.  This project will use conjunctive method based on
              paleoecological and archaeological data to document past human-environment
              relationships.  A significant limitation of the data collected to date on the
              anthropogenic transformation of bajos is the proximity of study sites to
              ancient urban areas where human impacts may have been most severe.  This
              project will extend the sample from northwestern Belize into areas further
              removed from the region's major urban centers.  If the model of environmental
              transformation can be shown to hold in bajos of various sizes and distances
              from urban settlements, it will solidify basic understanding of the nature and
              extent of this environmental change.

This project will provide a much
              broader spatial and environmental sample of bajo soils and sediments than
              currently exists.  Any variability in the nature of environmental change that
              is detected in these new samples will be readily correlated with the presence
              or absence, density, and distance of archaeological settlement in surrounding
              areas.  A clearer picture therefore should emerge as to whether the
              transformation of bajos from perennial to seasonal wetlands was a ubiquitous
              phenomenon or a change largely limited to near-urban locations.  If this model
              of bajo transformation represents conditions affecting much of the interior
              portions of the central and southern Maya Lowlands, it will have important
              implications for understanding changes that occurred in Maya civilization
              towards the end of the Preclassic, including the abandonment of El Mirador,
              Nakbe, and nearby large Preclassic urban centers.  This research also has the
              potential to contribute to the corpus of evidence dismissing the "leyenda
              verde" or "pristine myth," the idea that the ecosystems of the New World were
              relatively undisturbed by pre-Columbian occupation.  Furthermore, the project
              will provide field training experience for up to ten graduate students.

