Title       : SGER: Testing Chemostratigraphic Correlation in Terrestrial Sediments: Hell
               Creek Formation, Northeastern Montana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0241190

Award Number: 0241190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17442              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nan Crystal Arens arens@hws.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hobart & William Smith Col
	      
	      Geneva, NY  14456    315/781-3000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The survival of many environ- mentally sensitive vertebrate lineages
              (Archibald and Bryant 1990) belies the hypothesized severity of the K/T
              boundary event. Testing alternative hypotheses of extinction and survival
              across the K/T boundary requires a more detailed understanding of environmental
              change and biotic response preceding the bolide impact. To develop this
              context, we need an integrated picture of change in the flora, fauna and
              physical environment in the latest Cretaceous. Such an integration has not yet
              been possible because fossil floras and faunas are preserved in different
              depositional environments at different localities within an outcrop belt. To
              unite these records, a method for detailed correlation among localities is
              needed.

I propose to develop the framework for carbon isotope
              chemostratigraphic correlation of fossil localities within the Hell Creek
              Formation (mostly latest Maastrichtian) in northeastern Montana.

The
              proposed work will test the following hypotheses essential to the development
              of the
chemostratigraphic framework:
o Secular variation in the carbon
              isotope signature of land plant organic carbon in the Hell Creek
Formation
              exceeds that expected by random variation and spatially averaged plant vital
              effects.
o Features of the secular carbon isotope curve are recognized at
              different localities and can act as stratigraphic tie points to correlate
              within the Hell Creek Formation.


I will test the first hypothesis by
              examining the curve for quantitative variation that exceeds that expected by
              random variation and plant vital effects (Arens et al.2000).I will then test
              the second hypothesis by correlating among individual localities, and to the
              marine record,using features of the reference curve. If successful, this
              approach could be widely applied in rocks younger than the Devonian, when
              vascular plants colonized land. It will allow fossil collections from various
              localities to be more precisely integrated, opening a new spectrum of questions
              to terrestrial paleoecologists.

