Title       : Empirical Testing of Crisis Bargaining Models with Incomplete Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0241647

Award Number: 0241647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Schultz kschultz@polisci.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A central problem in the study of international conflict is to understand the
              factors that influence states' incentives and behavior in crisis situations
              involving the threat or use of  force. What variables influence how states
              assess the attractiveness of waging war? When will the targets of threats
              choose to yield or resist? When will leaders implement the threats they make?
              This project advances a method for addressing such questions in a manner that
              is faithful to the nature of strategic interaction in international crises.
              Inferences from observational data can only be made with confidence when the
              uncertainty and potential for signaling that are inherent in such situations
              are accounted for. The project has three components. First, the project
              develops an empirical estimator (and computer software to implement it) that is
              derived directly from a game-theoretic model that incorporates incomplete
              information. Second, leveraging existing international data sets, data are
              collected that codes conflict outcomes in a way that is consistent with current
              theoretical treatments of interstate crisis bargaining. Third, the data and
              method are be used to test prominent theories of international conflict.
This
              project is part of the Empirical Implications of Theoretic Models priority area
              in the Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences Directorate.



