Title       : An Observing System for Meridional Heat Transport Variability in the Subtropical
               North Atlantic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0241438

Award Number: 0241438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2191760            (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Johns wjohns@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa Beal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Molly O. Baringer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0241438 Johns

The objective of this project is to develop a series of
              measurements that can provide a long-term, sustainable monitoring system for
              the meridional ocean heat flux in the subtropical North Atlantic. The goal is
              to provide continuous estimates of the heat flux and the meridional overturning
              circulation that are of suitable accuracy for detecting important trends and
              variability related to climate change. This goal is different from, but
              complementary to, the more established method of occupying high-resolution
              zonal trans-basin hydrographic sections to estimate the heat flux at irregular
              intervals. Regular estimates are needed to determine the magnitude and dominant
              time scales of variability, the climatological seasonal cycle, and to help
              filter out the higher frequency "noise" that may alias the determination of
              longer term heat ?ux variations from trans-basin sections that are widely
              spaced in time. The proposed program is a collaborative effort between the
              PI.'s and investigators from the Southampton Oceanography Centre in the United
              Kingdom who are funded as part of the Rapid Climate Change (RAPID) program of
              the National Environmental Research Council.

The U.S. contribution to the
              proposed in-situ observation system consists of the following elements:
1.
              Florida Current monitoring using the operational submarine cable, weekly
              shipboard Acoustic Doppler Current Pro?ler (ADCP) cross sections from a
              volunteer observing ship, and quarterly hydrographic/lowered-ADCP sections.
2.
              Continuous moored time series measurements across the Deep Western Boundary
              Current (DWBC) and Antilles Current region east of the Bahamas, including
              semiannual hydrographic/
lowered-ADCP sections.
3. Repeated (quarterly)
              high-resolution volunteer observing ship XBT sections across the Atlantic from
              Gibraltar to Miami, on the "AX7" line.

This component of the project will
              implement the moored component of element (2) for a  four year period beginning
              in winter 2004, and to supplement element (3) with deeper reaching XBT's as a
              contribution to the CLImate VARiability and predictability (CLIVAR) program.
              The U.K. will support the trans-basin hydrographic cruises and an array of
              profiling moorings along 26.5?N that will complete the continuous time series
              observing system. 



