Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Symphyseal Fusion in Ungulates and Anthropoids:
               A Case of Functional Convergence?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0241652

Award Number: 0241652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10592              (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Hylander bill_hylander@baa.mc.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In the last three decades anthropologists have been among the most active
              researchers on the mammalian masticatory apparatus. In addition to numerous
              comparative morphological studies, physical anthropologists have contributed
              significantly to the growing literature on in vivo masticatory function. As a
              result, much of what is known about the mammalian cranial form is based on
              primate models. These studies have revealed a number of interesting patterns
              regarding the evolution of primate craniofacial form.  
In particular,
              research suggests that jaw-muscle function has played a significant role in the
              evolution of primate masticatory form. During the early development of
              anthropoid primates (i.e., monkeys, apes and humans), the mandibular symphysis
              (the joint between the two halves of the mandible) fuses or becomes completely
              ossified. However, like most mammals, the earliest true primates (called
              strepsirrhines or prosimians) retain the primitive condition of a highly
              mobile, unfused symphysis. Interestingly, recent work shows that jaw adductor
              recruitment patterns during mastication differ between anthropoids and
              strepsirrhines with respect to the timing and magnitude of recruitment of
              transversely oriented force from the balancing-side (i.e., non-chewing side)
              muscles. Of particular interest is the activity of the balancing-side deep
              masseter muscle, which has a large transverse component to its force. Compared
              to strepsirrhines, in anthropoids this muscle is recruited late relative to the
              other jaw adductors and the magnitude of force from this muscle is increased.
              This pattern of deep masseter activity causes the two halves of the mandible to
              be pulled apart resulting in significant stress and strain in the symphysis.
              Thus, there is evidence that jaw muscle firing patterns, symphyseal loading and
              the evolution of symphyseal fusion are linked in anthropoids. 
The research on
              goats, alpacas and horses outlined in this study will contribute to the growing
              literature on the mammalian masticatory apparatus from an in vivo perspective.
              As little is known about masticatory function in ungulates, particularly in
              alpacas and horses, the electromyographic, strain and kinematic data collected
              here will expand our understanding of cranial form and function in two
              additional mammalian orders. More importantly, as alpacas and horses also have
              fused symphyses, this study will shed light on the evolution of symphyseal
              fusion in non-primates. To this end, these data will aid in identifying
              convergent trends in the evolution of masticatory form in primates and
              ungulates. Specifically, this research will clarify whether there are similar
              functional constraints on the symphysis in these animals despite differences in
              facial morphology.  
In addition to the scientific contributions outlined
              above, the broader impacts of this research include the participation and
              graduate training of a minority and female Co-PI. As much of the data collected
              in this study will be pertinent to future research, funding for this project
              will be integral in advancing the scientific career of this Co-PI.

