Title       : Computational and Mathematical Study in Protein Interactions and Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0241102

Award Number: 0241102
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1036000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Fengzhu Sun fsun@hto.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ting Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Deonier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0241102
Sun
Determining protein interactions and functions are central in most
              proteomics projects. This research focuses on the development of statistical
              and computational methods for the analysis of protein interaction data coming
              from high-throughput proteomic technologies such as yeast two-hybrid assays and
              mass spectrometry, and protein function data coming from databases of
              large-scale function annotations. The research involves the study of the
              following two important problems in biology: (1) identifying domain-domain
              interactions and protein-domain interactions from a large number of
              protein-protein interactions, and (2) assigning functions to unknown proteins
              from the knowledge of the functions of the annotated proteins, gene expression
              profiles, gene knockouts, protein sequence similarities, and protein-protein
              interactions. These results obtained for yeast proteins can help us predict
              interactions and functions of human
proteins. Training postdoctoral associates
              and graduate students from mathematics, statistics, computer science and
              molecular biology for proteomic research is an important part of the proposed
              research. Based on the existing excellent education program in the field of
              computational biology and bioinformatics within the Center for Computational
              and Experimental Genomics (CCEG) in USC, the principal investigators plan to
              train future researchers through rigorous course work, seminars, discussion
              groups, and participation in the research project.
In recent years, an
              increasing number of genomes of model organisms have been sequenced. Using
              these genomic sequences, researchers have been able to make tremendous progress
              in the study of genomes. Beyond these successes is the far more challenging and
              rewarding task of understanding proteomes. In addition to genome sequences,
              many other databases, such as protein-protein physical interactions, genetic
              interactions, protein-DNA interactions, and gene expressions, have become
              available. An important problem is how to combine information from the variety
              of different databases to understand the biological processes and biological
              functions of proteins. The principal investigators will develop new statistical
              and computational methods for estimation and prediction of protein functions
              and for understanding important biological problems integrating several
              relevant large databases. They will also train graduate students and
              postdoctoral associates in the field of computational biology and
              bioinformatics through their participation in research activities related to
              the proposed project. The proposed project will generate a suite of computer
              algorithms related to protein-protein interactions and functional predictions.
              Both the algorithms and results will be disseminated through the web. The
              results from this study will be important for basic biological studies as well
              as for disease related studies from identifying protein functions.

