Title       : Simulated-Based Estimation of Dynamic Discrete Games with an Application to
               Banks' Spatial Competition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0241943

Award Number: 0241943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210238             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor Aguirregabiria vaguirre@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research program develops new techniques for the estimation of structural
              
parameters in dynamic discrete games and applies these methods to study
              spatial competition in the US banking industry. Empirical discrete games are
              useful tools in the analysis of economic and social phenomena where strategic
              interactions play an important role in explaining behavior. The estimated
              models allow one to infer how different factors affect behavior, and one can
              evaluate the effects of changes in economic policies. 

This research project
              has three parts. The first part develops a class of estimators that deals with
              two important issues in the estimation of dynamic discrete games: the
              indeterminacy problem because of large numbers of possible solution to a game,
              and the large dimensions in the solution and estimation of these models. The
              method combines nonparametric techniques, to deal with the indeterminacy
              problem, and simulation techniques to avoid the large dimensions problem. This
              part of the project provides a class of estimators that extends the range of
              estimable dynamic discrete games. 

The second part of the project is to
              study the finite sample properties of the proposed class of estimators. When
              the dimension of the state space is large relative to the sample size, initial
              nonparametric estimates of players' choice probabilities can be very imprecise,
              which induces significant finite sample biases in the estimates of structural
              parameters. The proposed estimator is consistent only when the number of
              simulations to approximate players' best responses goes to infinity. The
              project proposes several techniques to reduce these sources of bias and will
              provide researchers an automated procedure to select the estimator in this
              class that minimizes mean square error. 

The third part of the project
              applies these techniques to study competition in the banking industry using a
              unique panel data set from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. This data
              set includes annual information on the location and deposits of all banks'
              branches in US between 1994 and 2001. The estimated model is then used to
              answer several questions including market power, mergers and acquisitions, and
              the effects of the Reigle-Neal Act on competition in the Banking industry. 

