Title       : Collaborative Research: Paleoenvironment and Paleoecology of a Late Cretaceous,
               High-Latitude Locality on Devon Island, Nunavut, Canada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0241000

Award Number: 0241000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34314              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Bloch jdbloch@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators at the Universities
              of Colorado and New Mexico.   They will document the stratigraphy,
              paleontology, geochemistry and geochronology of Late Cretaceous sediments in
              the Eidsbotn and Viks Fiord grabens, on Devon Island in the Canadian High
              Arctic. Devon Island was selected because a preliminary survey of the Eidsbotn
              graben in 1998 demonstrated that it holds an unusually diverse assemblage of
              marine organisms and coprolitic trace fossils.  This fossil assemblage
              represents a complex ecosystem that was characterized by an apparently
              temperate Arctic environment, even though it was subject to extreme
              photoperiodic seasonality.  A study of this unique site will provide the
              geological framework that will help reconstruct the paleoenvironment of this
              high-latitude locality and substantially increase our understanding of Late
              Cretaceous Arctic marine ecosystems.  Reconnaissance sampling of the Eidsbotn
              area revealed a wide variety of fossils, both whole and fragments, and a high
              concentration of unusual green and cream-colored coprolites.  A systematic
              sampling of the Late Cretaceous paleontological resources will provide
              stratigraphic and facies context, contribute more material for taxonomic
              identification, indicate patterns of abundance, and almost certainly reveal new
              Arctic taxa. The sediments are reported to contain numerous bentonites,
              glauconitic sands, siltstones, and mudstones that are overlain by a peat of an
              unknown age.  Stratigraphic sections will be measured, described and sampled
              for biofacies and geochemical analyses.  Fossils will be collected and
              taphonomic conditions described.  Bentonite samples will be collected for
              geochronological analysis of mica, sanidine, and zircon, and palynological
              samples will refine the lithostratigraphy and elucidate the age of the peat
              that overlies the Eidsbotn section.  Petrographic and geochemical analyses of
              coprolites will provide evidence of trophic interactions, and faunal lists will
              indicate the structure and ecological niches in the paleoecosystem. Oxygen
              isotopic analysis of the phosphate will contribute proxy sea-surface
              temperature information and may provide evidence for water-column temperature
              gradients, paleosalinity, and sedimentation rates.  The suite of sedimentary
              and paleontological resources in the Eidsbotn and Viks Fiords will provide a
              unique opportunity to fully characterize the paleoenvironment and paleoecology
              of a Late Cretaceous high-latitude marine locality, and to test paleoclimatic
              models for that period.  This project will also engage undergraduates, graduate
              students, people from the Inuit community, and international and intercultural
              discourse. 
 

