Title       : Structure and Diffusive Motion in Confined Multi-component Colloid Suspensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0241133

Award Number: 0241133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $501400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart A. Rice s-rice@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7202,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Stuart Rice is supported by a grant from the Experimental Physical Chemistry
              Program of the Chemistry Division to perform experimental and theoretical
              studies of the properties of quasi-two-dimensional systems.  The systems
              studied are suspensions of uncharged monodisperse colloid particles in very
              thin cells.  The proposed experimental studies are based on digital video
              microscopy measurements and image analysis, while the theoretical tools include
              computer simulations, statistical mechanics, and hydrodynamics.  Particular
              questions to be addressed include 1) the influence of the interplay between the
              range and strength of the direct (non-hydrodynamic) colloid-colloid interaction
              and the scale of confinement on the structures of the phases that a dense
              colloid suspension can support; and 2) the effects of the interplay between the
              direct colloid-colloid interaction, the hydrodynamic interactions in the
              suspension, and the scale of confinement on the diffusive motion of pairs,
              triplets, etc., of colloid particles in a quasi-two-dimensional or
              quasi-one-dimensional environment.

The main thrust of this project is to
              understand the structural and dynamical features of confined colloid systems
              and the application of that knowledge to other systems.  The studies will lead
              to a deeper understanding of the properties of liquid systems that, because
              they are constrained to two-dimensional motion, exhibit unique thermodynamic
              behavior.  This work will also enhance insight about the self-organization of
              colloids, and hence the nature of cell membranes, and it may ultimately have
              important applications for nanotechnology and the control of microfluidic
              devices.  In the course of these studies undergraduate and graduate students as
              well as postdoctoral researchers receive training in the use of state-of-the
              art experimental and theoretical techniques.

