Title       : The Interaction of Affect and Deliberation in Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0241313

Award Number: 0241313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243115             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Slovic pslovic@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen Peters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Decision Sci Res Inst
	      1201 Oak Street
	      Eugene, OR  974013519    503/485-2400

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research attempts to articulate the interrelated roles of affect
              and deliberation in guiding judgments and decisions. As used here, "affect"
              means the specific quality of "goodness" or "badness" (i) experienced as a
              feeling state (with or without awareness) and (ii) demarcating a positive or
              negative quality of a stimulus. We have characterized reliance on such feelings
              when making judgments or decisions as "the affect heuristic."

Research in
              cognitive and social psychology and cognitive neuroscience that informs us
              about two basic modes of thinking, experiential and analytic. The experiential
              system is intuitive, automatic, image-based, fast, and intimately associated
              with affective feelings. The analytic system is deliberative, reason-based, and
              slow. There are strong elements of rationality in both systems. It was the
              experiential system that enabled human beings to survive during their long
              period of evolution. Long before there was probability theory, risk assessment,
              and decision analysis, there were intuition, instinct, and gut feelings to tell
              us whether an animal was safe to approach or the water was safe to drink. As
              life became more complex and humans gained more control over their environment,
              analytic tools were invented to "boost" the rationality of our experiential
              thinking.

We plan in this project to conduct experiments to better
              understand the role of affect in decision making and the interaction between
              the experiential, affect-based mode of thinking and more analytic and
              deliberative processes. These experiments are designed to test specific
              predictions about the way that individual and environmental factors such as
              time pressure, cognitive load, age, mood, and instruction to think or give
              reasons influence the balance of affective and deliberative processing and the
              judgments and decisions that result from this processing. We shall also address
              the broader impacts of this research, by demonstrating how the findings provide
              insight into ways to improve a wide-range of important practical decisions
              about matters involving finance, medical treatments, cigarette smoking, health
              insurance, and risk perception.
