Title       : Semiparametric Bootstrap Methods for Time Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0241152

Award Number: 0241152
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251281             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Hansen bhansen@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NUMBER:		0241152
INSTITUTION:			University of Wisconsin,
              Madison
NSF PROGRAM:			ECONOMICS
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:	Hansen,
              Bruce
PROPOSAL TITLE:		Semiparametric Bootstrap Methods for Time Series

The
              bootstrap is a method of statistical inference is growing in popularity in
              applied econometrics due to its broad applicability and success in improving
              the accuracy of statistical inferences.  Bootstrap methods for time-series data
              are fundamentally different from those for random samples, as the bootstrap
              needs to replicate the dependence structure in the data.  The theory for
              flexible and practical bootstrap methods for time-series is sorely lacking. A
              promising new bootstrap method for time-series is the Markov bootstrap (MB),
              which is based on nonparametric estimation of the one-step-ahead conditional
              distribution function, and uses this estimator to construct the bootstrap
              distribution. 

This research extends the MB method to time-series.  It
              investigates theoretical structure of the bootstrap, leading to concrete
              methods of implementation.  The research discusses how to construct the ergodic
              density of the MB and how to calculate bootstrap parameters and moments from
              the ergodic density.  This is essential for practical implementation of the MB,
              as these calculations are a necessary input in its application. It also
              investigates the imposition of constrained on the ergodic density.  This is
              necessary for efficient inference, as a full nonparametric estimator does not
              make use of the available information about the model.  Furthermore,
              constraints must be imposed when the bootstrap is used to construct efficient
              confidence intervals.

The accuracy of the MB will depend on the accuracy of
              the nonparametric estimator of the conditional distribution; accordingly the
              research develops methods to improve estimation efficiency.  In this
              connection, new high order and low-bias kernel estimators explored.  The
              improvements in density estimation lead to improved rates of asymptotic
              refinements for bootstrap inference.  This improvement in density estimation
              requires theoretical investigation of the methods developed, which this
              research investigates. The theory and methods developed by this research will
              have broad impacts on bootstrap applications and will be useful to applied
              economists in both academic and public sectors.


 

