Title       : Aggregation of Probabilistic Opinions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0241434

Award Number: 0241434
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225039             (Estimated)
Investigator: David V. Budescu dbudescu@psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This proposal focuses on the aggregation process used by individual
              Decision-Makers (DMs) to combine probabilistic information from multiple,
              non-independent sources.  Typical examples are investors who combine forecasts
              from various financial advisors regarding the chances of certain stocks to
              appreciate in value, and patients who must aggregate information from various
              experts about the chances of success of a given medical procedure.

A model
              is described that assumes that (a) the DM combines information by averaging the
              various forecasts, and (b) the DM's confidence in the aggregate is inversely
              related to the variance of the (possibly weighted) mean forecast.  This model
              is used to derive a series of predictions about the factors that affect and
              drive the DM's confidence.  They will be tested in a series of experiments that
              would clarify (a) the nature of the aggregation rules used by DMs, (b) the
              factors that affect the DMs' confidence in the final aggregate, (c) the nature
              and level of dependence between the aggregates and the confidence they inspire,
              and (d) the factors that determine the DM's preference for certain
              advisors.

In addition to contributing to our understanding of the basic
              psychological process involved in aggregating opinions, the results have
              immediate implications for several questions of considerable practical interest
              that arise in many fields including, but not restricted to, financial, military
              and medical decision-making.  The results will provide (at least partial)
              guidelines for approaching questions such as:

(a) What kind of, and how
              many, advisors should a DM consult to achieve a desired level of
              confidence?
(b) What factors make some advisors more or less attractive in
              certain types of decision problems?
(c) What are the sources of the
              surprisingly high correlation among advisors? What is the relative importance
              of the various factors and how can one use this information to choose advisors
              in an optimal fashion?



