Title       : Collaborative Research: Obsolescence of Durable Goods and Aggregate Fluctuations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a0241701

Award Number: 0241701
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162432             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ennio Stacchetti ennio@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Obsolescence is the major reason for depreciation of durables in markets with
              high rates of technological innovation.  Since much of the technological
              innovation is incorporated in new durables, modeling obsolescence of durable
              goods is vital for our understanding of the macroeconomy.  The dominant way of
              thinking about durability is in terms of exponential physical depreciation. 
              Obsolescence is different from physical depreciation in two important respects.
               First, obsolescence is not a continuous process.  Development of new products
              is costly, which is why new goods are introduced only periodically.  For
              example, new car models appear every year, and new generations of Intel
              processors appear on average, every three years.  Thus periodic arrival of new
              models makes obsolescence discrete.  Second, with obsolescence, the service
              flow from the good is defined by its technological age.  Computers become
              obsolete because they cannot run the latest software.  New car inventory is
              heavily discounted when the latest models arrive, suggesting that obsolescence
              is important in cars as well.  Since durables age even if never used, consumers
              who purchase a new model with a delay will enjoy a lower service flow. Thus
              obsolescence gives consumers an incentive to coordinate their replacement
              decisions with new model introductions.  This way of thinking about
              obsolescence has not been fully explored before, yet it may have profound
              effects on the patterns of macroeconomic fluctuations.  This project studies a
              class of dynamic economies with durable goods subject to obsolescence.  It
              looks a general equilibrium models with competitive production of durable goods
              as well as models of durable good markets with strategic producers.
