Title       : Collaborative Research: Coalition Government and Parliamentary Oversight
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0241466

Award Number: 0241466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36827              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lanny W. Martin lmartin@garnet.acns.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses a central question in the comparative study of democratic
              institutions: How do coalition governments, which are composed of multiple
              parties with often conflicting ideological goals, manage to make policy?
              Surprisingly, relatively few studies have examined this issue in a systematic
              cross-national fashion. Instead, most research on multiparty government has
              focused on the formation and termination of coalitions, largely neglecting the
              policymaking process between these events. In this project, the principal
              investigators address this question by examining lawmaking in two European
              parliamentary democracies. Specifically, the investigators propose to collect
              primary data on the committee and floor stages of the legislative process in
              Germany and the Netherlands. The theoretical model in the project focuses on a
              central principal-agent problem that coalition cabinets must solve if they are
              to govern successfully. Because expertise is needed to plan and implement
              public policy, governments in parliamentary democracies must delegate important
              policymaking powers to individual ministers who have control over relevant
              issue areas. In particular, cabinet ministers enjoy considerable autonomy in
              drafting government legislation within their jurisdiction. For coalition
              governments, such delegation creates the risk that ministers will use their
              autonomy to bias policy in favor of their own parties without adequately taking
              into account the interests of their coalition partners. The incentive to do so
              grows particularly strong on issues that greatly divide coalition members. The
              argument proposed here is that parliamentary oversight provides a key
              institutional mechanism that allows coalition parties to deal with this
              problem. While it is difficult to police ministers from within the cabinet,
              coalition members can make use of the legislative process to scrutinize and
              amend legislation introduced by hostile ministers. The researchers contend that
              this mechanism is particularly important where the coalition is internally
              divided. If correct, this argument challenges the common perception that
              parliaments in Western Europe are largely irrelevant institutions. Legislatures
              may play a crucial role as an intra-coalition conflict management tool that
              allows parties with divergent preferences to govern jointly. 
An empirical
              evaluation of this theory requires detailed data on the treatment of government
              bills in the legislative process. In particular, such an evaluation requires
              information on the extent to which coalition parties make use of the
              legislative process to scrutinize and amend policy proposals drafted by
              individual ministers. With support from their home institutions, the principal
              investigators have already collected relevant data on nearly three hundred
              government bills introduced in the Netherlands and Germany between 1982 and
              1994. The existing dataset provides information on the ideological stance of
              coalition parties on the issues addressed by these bills as well as the length
              of delay these bills encounter in the legislative process. A preliminary
              analysis of the data has yielded results that are consistent with the theory.
              The financial support requested in this proposal enables the principal
              investigators to expand this dataset substantially and conduct a more direct
              test of the theory. The expanded dataset will consist of information on the
              exercise of parliamentary oversight as measured by changes made to government
              bills by coalition parties during the committee and floor stages of the
              legislative process.The proposed project has theoretical and empirical
              significance for scholars engaged in comparative legislative research. Most
              importantly, the project challenges the common assumption that legislatures in
              parliamentary systems are unimportant institutions. By suggesting that
              parliaments are significant primarily as mechanisms for managing
              intra-coalition conflict, the study encourages renewed theoretical and
              empirical efforts in understanding the role of legislatures. In addition, the
              project makes available cross-national legislative data consisting of detailed
              information on government bills in two major European countries. Currently, no
              comparable dataset on government bills and the legislative process is available
              to the scholarly community. 

