Title       : Collaborative Research: Revenue Maximization in Multi-Object Sales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0241173

Award Number: 0241173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244544             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Vincent dvincent@wam.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Consider a monopolist who intends to maximize her revenue from selling several
              objects but does not know the potential buyers' exact valuations for those
              objects. Situations of this sort are common -- a government agency selling
              spectrum licenses to one or many potential buyers, an automotive firm pricing a
              variety of options for its new models, an art collector deciding whether to
              sell all or part of the collection. When the seller only has a single object to
              sell, it is well known how the sale should be conducted to maximize
              revenue.
When the seller has two or more objects to sell, it is not known in
              general how the sale should be conducted in order to maximize revenue. The
              project addresses this question in three related parts. First, the study
              investigates the properties of all trading institutions that may be revenue
              maximizing. Second, it examines the optimality of a very simple and commonly
              used institution, "bundling," the posting of a price for each sub-collection or
              bundle of goods. The study offers conditions under which bundling is optimal.
              Finally, it explores the relationship between optimal pricing schedules in the
              monopolist problem and the determination of optimal reserve prices in
              multi-unit auctions.

The project contributes to our understanding in several
              related areas -- multi-dimensional mechanism design, multi-unit auctions, and
              price discrimination and bundling. Firms and governments frequently must buy or
              sell many goods profitably. The project offers answers to how this may be
              achieved. It also provides guidance to antitrust enforcement. The bundling of
              products to raise revenues often implies some loss in social efficiency. An
              understanding of the nature of revenue-maximizing schemes is necessary in order
              to evaluate the social costs of this behavior.


