Title       : Invasion of Semiarid Grasslands by Shrubs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0241604

Award Number: 0241604
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75477              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric E. Small eric.small@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0003514
Small


The semiarid American Southwest experienced a dramatic
              vegetation change during the 20th  century-perennial grasslands were invaded by
              shrubs.  Similar transitions have occurred worldwide.  As shrubs replace
              grasses, nutrients become increasingly concentrated in widely spaced "islands
              of fertility" around individual plants.  In addition, the top layer of soil is
              eroded from between shrubs, reducing infiltration and enhancing runoff.  Both
              processes may inhibit plant growth between shrubs, enhancing the initial
              vegetation change.

Plant-water interactions may also play an important role
              in the shrub invasion process, so we will test the following hypothesis.  The
              invasion of semiarid grasslands by shrubs enhances the convergence of overland
              flow and infiltration beneath plant canopies.  The most dramatic effects exist
              during high-intensity rainfall events and on steep slopes.  Compared to
              grasslands, infiltration is enhanced beneath shrub canopies because runon from
              upslope interspaces increases-interspaces are larger and the interspace
              infiltration capacity is reduced.  The result is that soil moisture is elevated
              for longer periods of time beneath shrub canopies.  Convergence of overland
              flow also yields net transport of soil from interspaces to beneath plant
              canopies.  If this hypothesis is correct, then a positive feedback exists
              between shrub invasion and hydrologic changes.  Other ecosystem links may be
              important.  Enhanced convergence of surface water and soil beneath canopies
              will yield higher concentration of nitrogen and carbon.  Deeper and
              longer-lived infiltration will enhance N mineralization.  Both of these
              mechanisms will intensify the islands of fertility observed beneath shrub
              canopies.

We will test this hypothesis via long-term monitoring and
              sprinkler experiments carried out in grass, shrub, and mixed environments on
              both gentle (2%) and steeper (7%) slopes (6 sites total).  Runon and runoff
              from interspace and canopy areas will be collected.  We will also measure
              surface flow convergence, infiltration, and soil moisture via a water balance
              approach.  This requires observations of the effects of vegetation shading and
              interception.  We will identify the causes of the observed changes in two ways:
               (1) mapping the interspace areas that contribute water to plant canopies,
              using tracers and photography; and (2) measuring variations in soil hydraulic
              properties in the field and in the lab.  Transport of soil by surface water
              will be measured in the collected runon and runoff and grain size will be
              analyzed.  We will use erosion bridges to further constrain source and sink
              areas for soil redistribution.

The research proposed here will enhance our
              understanding of plant-water interactions in semiarid regions.  Our results are
              important for quantifying historical changes in basin-scale water balance and
              recharge through desert vadose zones.  Our data will be useful for ecologists
              and hydrologists working at the Sevilleta LTER and elsewhere, and therefore it
              will be distributed on the Sevilleta web site.

