Title       : American State Constitutions: An Historical Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0241699

Award Number: 0241699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Wallis wallis@econ.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Since 1776, American states have written over 150 constitutions and amended them
              over 10,000 times.  States have experimented with a wide variety constitutional
              arrangements governing suffrage, representation, legislative structures,
              judicial structures, corporate law, and public finance.  The constitutions
              themselves record fundamental institutional change in American history, a
              record reflecting changes in the way Americans think about their governments
              and the changing political constraints on the American society and economy. 
              Because constitutions have changed so much over time, they provide a
              fascinating laboratory for social scientists.  But because they have changed so
              often, an enormous written record has accumulated: the complete constitutional
              texts and their amendments would fill up 15,000 printed pages.  Since 1997, we
              have been assembling the texts of the state constitutions and their amendments,
              correcting the errors and omissions of earlier editors, and bringing the
              complete series up to 2000.  To date, the complete texts of constitutions for
              twenty states are available on our web site,
              http://www.bsos.umd.edu/constitution, and we will have a complete set by early
              2006.  One drawback of printed volumes is the difficulty in sorting through the
              voluminous mass of text.  The constitutions on the web site can be searched by
              state, year, article and section number, and by keyword.  This enables readers
              to immediately access those parts of the constitutions they wish to examine. 
              The web site is designed around a data base search engine.  This allows us to
              associate amended text with the article and section it amends, making it much
              easier to track constitutional changes through time.  

Creating sustainable
              governments that respect the rights of individual citizens and provide a stable
              environment for economic growth is a fundamental challenge in the modern world.
               The European Union is currently struggling to write a workable constitution,
              as are the transition economies of Eastern Europe and Asia.  The United States
              not only has the oldest written constitution continuously in force (the
              Massachusetts constitution of 1780), but it has the widest and richest
              constitutional history of any nation in the world.  Until now, however, much of
              that experience has been locked away in inaccessible volumes, volumes literally
              too heavy to carry.  This rich history has had relatively little impact on how
              social scientists understand how institutions evolve.  Our project opens this
              tremendous national resource for everyone.


