Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Litigation and the Electoral Connection-An
               Analysis of State Attorneys General and Modern Business Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0241904

Award Number: 0241904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5837               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Teske pteske@datalab2.sbs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
  Research on policy entrepreneurs has grown into a thriving field, but its
              practical applications have been limited.  In this Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Project the student analyzes a much-overlooked policy maker-the state
              attorney general-as an entrepreneur.  Because they are motivated by reelection
              and the pursuit of higher office, attorneys general are alert to opportunities
              to spot market failures, punish businesses and score electoral points with
              consumer/voters.  The student posits that every state attorney general has the
              potential to be an entrepreneur, but various factors either hinder or help them
              in realizing this potential.   In the first study, the student analyzes the
              conditions under which state attorneys general join multi-state consumer
              protection lawsuits, arguing that increased activity results in entrepreneurial
              behavior.  He hypothesizes that a variety of ideological, institutional and
              environmental variables facilitate entrepreneurial behavior.  Preliminary
              findings show 
that a liberal electorate and increased legal personnel within
              the attorney general office result in attorneys general acting as
              entrepreneurs.  In the second study, the student aim to upholds the assumptions
              of the first study, by showing that attorneys general with strong records of
              consumer regulation enforcement are more likely to run for and win
              governorships or Senate seats.   


