Title       : Valence Politics with Activists: Empirical and Theoretical Models of
               Multicandidate Competition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0241732

Award Number: 0241732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman Schofield glolucy@wc.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The spatial voting model is a sophisticated methodological device to study the
              interaction of political agents (whether candidates, or political leaders) and
              voters.  However, the theory has predicted that all agents will be drawn to the
              electoral center in order to maximize votes.  The conclusion, then, is that
              political competition is void of any relevance.  Past research by the principal
              investigator and his colleagues strongly suggests that this conclusion is
              empirically invalid, both in polities based on proportional representation and
              in those based on plurality rule.  Recent work by the researcher has shown that
              the mean voter theorem requires a domain constraint, on the support of the
              distribution of preferred policies of the electorate.  Empirical analysis shows
              this constraint to be violated in polities as varied as Israel, Britain, the
              US, the Netherlands, etc.  Instead, if electoral uncertainty is low, then
              parties should optimally position themselves at a distance from each other in
              the policy space determined by the differences in popularity (or valence) of
              the agents.  "Popularity" is measured in the probit and logit models as
              constants in the voter utility functions.  Under proportional representation,
              agents with low popularity are shown to leave the electoral center.  Under
              plurality rule (as in Britain), agents with high popularity will contest the
              center.     This research  models the way activist coalitions make
              contributions of time and money to their preferred candidates.  In order to
              maximize vote shares, agents will optimize between activist coalitions and the
              electoral pull of the center.  The theory presented here develops the nature of
              response by agents to these electoral incentives.  However, the rationality of
              activist contributions has not, as yet, been incorporated into the model.  The
              investigation involves collaboration with Paul Whiteley of Essex University. 
              Whiteley's work has focused on British leader popularity and activist support,
              and he has developed regression models of the relationships between these
              variables.  The collaborative research  draws on this research, together with
              completed probit models of voter and elite preferences, to construct an
              interactive model of activist behavior and political response. 
