Title       : Mechanism of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) Viewed from Scale Interactions
               in the Frequency Domain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0241517

Award Number: 0241517
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sumant Nigam                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260949             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. N. Krishnamurti tnk@met.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project will investigate the evolution of the Madden-Julian Oscillation
              (MJO) in the tropics from diagnostic analysis of observations and numerical
              modeling of the atmosphere and the coupled atmosphere-ocean system. MJO is a
              key component of intra-seasonal variability, and plays a significant role in
              modulating the circulation and precipitation variability in the tropics and the
              extratropical Pacific/North American region. MJO also influences the
              Asian-Australian summer monsoons. Because of being sandwiched between two
              notable fluctuation time-scales--the shorter time-scale weather and the longer
              time-scale seasonal-to-interannual variability--MJO has not received the needed
              research attention up until recently. Dr. Krishnamurti (FSU) will investigate
              the role of intra-frequency interactions in MJO genesis and evolution.
              High-resolution numerical models of the atmosphere and the atmosphere-ocean
              system will be integrated to understand the spatio-temporal structure of the
              boundary layer fluxes of moisture, sensible heat, and momentum, in context of
              MJO variability. The project is driven by the PI's hypothesis that MJO
              time-scale flow components amplify from frequency interactions with a pair of
              synoptic time-scale (2-to-6 days) circulation features, particularly in the
              planetary boundary layer. 

The socio-economic impacts of Asian monsoon
              forecasts are felt by more than two billion people on the earth. The passage of
              intra-seasonal waves seems to have substantial impact on the wet and dry spells
              of the monsoon. This work has the potential to lead to real time prediction
              models of the MJO that can provide important guidance for sustained wet and dry
              spells of the monsoon.
