Title       : Metallacarboranes of Main Group, Transition, and Lanthanide Elements: Syntheses,
               Structures and Reactivities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0241319

Award Number: 0241319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Narayan S. Hosmane nhosmane@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division supports Dr. Narayan S. Hosmane, Department of Chemistry and
              Biochemistry Northern Illinois University, for research into the synthesis,
              structure, and reactivity of metallacarboranes of main-group, transition, and
              lanthanide elements.  The project has three main thrusts. The first is the
              development of a convenient, safe synthesis of natural and 10B-enriched
              C2B4-carboranes from readily prepared and/or available borane reagents, such as
              the Na(B3H8). The objective is a preparative route that does not require a
              vacuum line, thus enabling laboratories not experienced in the manipulation of
              boranes and carboranes to utilize these compounds. Secondly, a variety of ionic
              and neutral metallacarboranes, containing metals spanning groups 2-14, will be
              prepared using active-metal mediated reductive cage-opening reactions, with
              concomitant metalation of the opened carborane face. The specific purpose is to
              obtain a range of compounds- from water-soluble metallacarborane salts to
              lipophilic neutral metallacarboranes-of both the constrained geometry half- and
              full-sandwich organometallic species. Finally, cationic electrophilic
              metallacarboranes will be prepared with C2B4- and C2B9- or C2B10- carboranes
              both coordinating to the metal and serving as weakly coordinating anions. These
              will be studied as catalysts for olefin polymerization. 

The goal of this
              research is to produce a number of new and novel compounds containing cages of
              carbon and/or boron combined a wide range of metals. While cage compounds
              containing carbon and boron have been known for some time, they require very
              sophisticated techniques in order to prepare them conveniently and safely.
              Thus, the first part this project will be the design new preparative procedures
              that will allow these species to be synthesized in typical laboratories. The
              next section will develop routes to a variety of boron-carbon cage molecules
              that are stable under normal environmental conditions. The highly water- and
              fat-soluble species might be useful in applications such as Boron Neutron
              Capture Therapy and in homogeneous catalysis. The students involved in this
              project, both graduates and undergraduates, will learn a breadth of synthetic
              skills. Additionally, they will be involved with a number of collaborators at
              several national laboratories, other universities and research institutions,
              and at BP/Amoco. Thus they will take part in a true interdisciplinary research
              project at the interface of science and engineering.
 

