Title       : Cabinet Turnover in Parliamentary Democracies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0241566

Award Number: 0241566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149997             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Huber jdh39@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project examines patterns of turnover among cabinet ministers in
              parliamentary democracies. The project develops and tests a theory that
              explains how features of the institutional environment and the party system
              influence decisions to move individuals in and out of key cabinet posts. In so
              doing, it considers the incentives of individuals to accumulate both
              technocratic expertise, which is specific to particular portfolios, and
              political experience, which is useful in any portfolio. The project builds on
              the long tradition of studying government formation and cabinet instability,
              but  it differs in several respects. First, the research examines turnover in
              the individuals that control portfolios rather than the terminal events that
              end each government. Second, the theoretical approach brings theories of
              delegation to bear on understanding how prime ministers and party leaders use
              turnover to discover the most talented individuals, and to put the best people
              in the most important jobs at a given moment. The analysis will therefore
              control for the effect of bargaining processes among parties with divergent
              preferences, which have been emphasized by others, and concentrate on
              developing and testing arguments about variables that facilitate or discourage
              the accumulation of particular types of experience. This approach directs
              attention toward explanatory variables that are absent from studies of cabinet
              instability, such as institutional prerogatives of prime ministers,
              decision-making rules within political parties, and organizational
              relationships between ministers and
civil servants. Third, most studies of
              cabinet governance focus on advanced parliamentary
democracies, whereas this
              research combines the study of advanced and developing democracies.
Broader
              impact. The broader impact of the proposed research relate to its benefits to
              society, infrastructure improvements in political science, and unique
              educational collaborations. The benefits to society concern new insights into
              how to design institutional arrangements for effective democratic governance.
              Understanding how turnover affects policymaking requires knowledge of what
              causes turnover. To this end, the investigators  take an explicitly
              "institutional" perspective, examining the effects of formal rules within the
              political system and within political parties. This makes it possible to
              explore how institutional arrangements affect democratic performance, allowing
              us to begin building more precise and useful arguments about which tradeoffs
              will be associated with the choice of different institutional forms. Developing
              such argument is crucial to aid in the creation of stable and successful
              democracy around the world.
Regarding infrastructure, the project will make
              publicly available several data sets that will be useful to scholars who
              conduct research on parliamentary democracies. These include data on cabinet
              composition in 38 countries, as well as data on internal party organization,
              institutional arrangements for cabinet decision-making, and civil service
              organization. Importantly, these data are from both "advanced" and "developing"
              countries. Consequently, the project will make it easier for scholars to
              transcend the conventional "advanced" versus "developing" countries dichotomy
              that often exists in the scholarly community.
Finally, regarding educational
              collaboration, the project addresses a disconnect that often exists between
              social scientific institutional research of the form described here (i.e.,
              formal models and empirical tests) and education in policy schools. Students
              from policy schools often go on to become involved in shaping institutional
              reform processes, but their policy school curriculum typically does not given
              them a clear framework for thinking about these choices. In this research
              project, the PI will work with Masters students from developing democracies at
              Columbia's School of International and Public Affairs to teach them how
              scholars in the rational choice tradition study institutional tradeoffs, and
              how research can be designed to permit empirical claims about these
              tradeoffs.


