Title       : Measuring Quality Growth and Studying Stockout Behavior Using Micro CPI Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0241623

Award Number: 0241623
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128152             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Bils bils@troi.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research exploits confidential Consumer Price Index  (CPI) micro data, to
              study two issues---quality improvements for consumer goods and movements in
              firms' marginal costs and price markups due to temporary product stockouts over
              market fluctuations. 

The first part of the research studies the sensitivity
              of consumer price inflation and, quality growth, to treatment of the price
              increases associated with the introduction of new models of consumer durables.
              The BLS' resampling method can be exploited to gain information on how
              quantities sold change with model turnovers. This information is then used to
              gauge how much of price increases for new goods should be attributed to quality
              improvements. 

The second part of the research shows how information on
              temporary product stockouts, provide more direct information on how firms' cost
              and prices behave over the market cycle than existing methods. The stockout
              data are available for a much wider and more disaggregate set of goods than
              data on finished inventories. The research shows how price markups can either
              be attributed to price stickiness or active price adjustments by sellers.
              

Results of this research have important policy implications. The ability to
              break price increases between quality improvements and consumer price inflation
              is central to the goals of collecting information on prices. The results can
              directly inform measurement of price increases used to judge changes in
              standards of living. The results can yield suggestions for revisions of BLS
              methods or suggestions for additional statistics the BLS could make available.
              The results of the research could also have an effect on how inflation should
              be measured.  This could affect the determination of cost living adjustments in
              wage contracts, social security payments, insurance, and ultimately the rate of
              inflation itself.

