Title       : Firms and Product Choice in International Trade
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0241474

Award Number: 0241474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292329             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Schott peter.schott@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew B. Bernard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent empirical and theoretical work has established the importance of
              within-industry firm heterogeneity in international trade. This research has
              emphasized productivity differences across firms to explain why exporters are
              larger more productive and less likely to fail than non-exporting firms. 
              Although this emerging literature goes a long way towards integrating the firm
              into international trade, it consistently ignores the ability of firms to
              switch or upgrade their product lines in response to changes in the competitive
              environment.   This project has two objectives. The first is to extend the
              theoretical literature on firm-driven international trade to allow for
              endogenous product selection. The second is to construct two new firm-level
              panel datasets to test the importance of product switching in response to
              changes in domestic and international competition. 

The basic model extends
              the existing framework with heterogeneous firms, imperfect competition and
              trade costs to include endogenous product selection by individual firms. In
              response to changes in domestic or foreign market conditions, firms make
              decisions about whether to continue operations, enter foreign markets, and
              which product to produce. The model yields specific predictions about the path
              of industry productivity as well as firm exit, entry, growth and (product)
              switching up or down. 
The empirical work focuses on extending existing
              plant-level datasets on US manufacturing firms to incorporate detailed
              information on which products are manufactured. First, (often-overlooked)
              product-specific measures of plant output are employed from the existing
              plant-level dataset in the US Census Bureau's Longitudinal Research Database
              (LRD). The use of these data provide a detailed picture of the breadth of
              products produced by US manufacturing firms, generating a new set of facts
              about how firm product mix varies in response to changes in domestic and
              foreign markets. 
The second major data component of the project is the
              development of a dataset linking US transaction-level trade data to the LRD.
              These data are derived from the customs forms filled out by importers and
              exporters and include data on all individual trade transactions by US-based
              firms from 1992-2001. Construction of this linked dataset allows researchers to
              track the destination and unit value of product-level plant exports as well as
              the source, value and quantity of imported inputs. 

