Title       : Social Studies of Modern Science in India, Spring 2003 at MIT
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0241879

Award Number: 0241879
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Abha Sur asur@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The post independence era has seen a vast expansion in the infrastructure of
              science and technology in India, which now claims to have the third largest
              scientific personnel in the world. Yet we know very little about the social and
              cultural specificities of knowledge production and practices of science in
              India. We know very little about the pedagogy, cultural substrate, and training
              of Indian scientists who currently occupy significant positions (both in
              numbers and in rank) in the increasingly multicultural, transnational, and
              global scientific enterprise. Today, India is in the throes of increasing
              religious nationalism on the one hand and accelerated technological development
              on the other. In this milieu science, religion and nationalism have fused
              together in the popular imagination. Assertions of the sanctity of science and
              technology as well as the scientific validation of religion by the Hindu
              nationalists, as manifested in the euphoria surrounding the "Hindu Bomb," point
              to the need for understanding the processes of co-production of science,
              nationalism and religion. Science has always been a site of political and
              social contestation. In the earlier Nehru era as well, industrial development,
              and scientific rationality had defined the terms of India's modernity but in
              distinctly secular idioms. How do we understand the historical evolution of
              scientific structures and practices in modern India? In order to address these
              issues, we would like to organize a conference of scholars working on
              science-studies in India during the Spring semester of 2003 at MIT. The
              conference will bring twelve junior and senior scholars from a range of
              disciplinary and interdisciplinary backgrounds. The participants will share
              their work as well as discuss how best to further the emerging field of science
              studies in India. The papers will be collected in an edited anthology. Our
              objective is to probe deeper into the different perspectives of the scholars on
              nationalism, on local, religious and caste identities, and on the nature of
              science, for instance, in order to understand the ways in which different
              frameworks engender some questions and foreclose others. Such an engagement is
              essential for consolidating the intellectual base of the scholarship and for
              creating a vibrant and interactive community of scholars working on science in
              India.
