Title       : False-memory rejection: The role of the memorability-based strategy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0241125

Award Number: 0241125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180138             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simona Ghetti sghetti@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail S. Goodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Most studies in the false-memory literature have focused on how people come to
              report that a false event occurred. In contrast, this research focuses on how
              people decide that an event did not occur. In some forensically relevant
              contexts, individuals may be questioned about numerous possible events, some of
              which occurred and some of which did not (e.g., in child abuse investigations,
              children are typically questioned about all types of abuse even if only one
              type is suspected; in adult therapy sessions, adults may be asked about
              numerous types of victimization experiences, even if multiple victimization was
              not initially mentioned). In such situations, what psychological mechanisms can
              potentially protect children and adults from forming false memories? The answer
              to this question is crucial from both a theoretical and applied perspective.
              From a theoretical perspective, although appreciation of factors promoting
              false-memory formation is extremely important for theories of memory, such
              theories must also include principles of false-memory rejection. False-memory
              rejection may be governed by principles that are functionally distinct from
              those affecting false-memory acceptance. Memory theories must thus be able to
              explain false-memory rejection. From an applied perspective, understanding
              false-memory rejection may be key to improvement of forensic interviews and
              reduction of faulty eyewitness memory reports, which can result in serious
              miscarriage of justice. Despite the theoretical and applied relevance, little
              is known about how individuals perform false-memory rejection. Some of the few
              studies conducted in this area indicate that adults use the memorability of an
              event strategically to guard against false-memory formation. That is, if an
              event is highly memorable, its occurrence should be remembered; failure to
              recall the event is therefore taken as evidence that it did not occur. Do
              children also use this same memorability-based strategy? Previous research by
              the principal investigators identified age differences in this
              memorability-based strategy, using a list learning procedure and interviews
              about false autobiographical events. Specifically, it was found that young
              children (5-year-olds) did not use memorability to make decisions about the
              nonoccurrence of an event or did so in a limited fashion (7-year-olds), despite
              the fact that they explicitly recognized differences in event memorability. In
              this research, only older children (9-year-olds) and adults correctly rejected
              high-memorability compared to low-memorability false events. Little is known,
              however, about the mechanisms that underlie these developmental differences or
              about the forensically relevant variables (i.e., interview instructions) that
              may influence use of the memorability-based strategy. 

First, the research
              explains developmental differences in use of the memorability-based strategy.
              Participants will be interviewed about true and false autobiographical events.
              For each event, participants are either asked to tell the experimenter all they
              can remember about the event or will receive additional information.
              Specifically, participants either receive information about the event's
              memorability (i.e., the necessary premise for the use of the strategy), or, in
              addition, be told that, by considering the event's memorability, they can help
              correctly decide whether or not the event happened (i.e., the
              memorability-based strategy). The extent to which providing information at
              retrieval affects children's rejection of high-memorability false events will
              shed light on the factors determining young children's use of the
              memorability-based strategy. Second, the proposed research determines whether
              explicit instructions to use memorability as a basis for rejecting the
              occurrence of an event reduce misinformation effects in comparison with
              source-monitoring instructions. Participants experience witness high- and
              low-memorability events, receive misleading information about them, and then be
              questioned about the occurrence or non-occurrence of the events. At the time of
              retrieval, participants will be questioned either without any specific
              instructions or after receiving instructions derived from the
              memorability-based strategy or source-monitoring principles. Third, the
              proposed research will examine whether a memorability-based strategy can be
              executed in contexts that may challenge individuals.  Reliance on it, namely
              after individuals are pressured to produce reports of false events, may create
              difficulties for individuals.

