Title       : Nonperturbative methods for quasiperiodic discrete Schroedinger equations on the
               line
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0241930

Award Number: 0241930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37725              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilhelm Schlag schlag@its.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:
This proposal deals with various aspects of discrete Schroedinger
              equations
on the one dimensional lattice with deterministic potentials. So
              far, in 
collaboration with Jean Bourgain and Michael Goldstein, the author
              has 
considered quasi-periodic potentials given by ergodic shifts on tori,
              
potentials obtained by means of the skew-shift on the two torus, as well as
              
potentials defined in terms of strongly mixing dynamics, such as the doubling
              
map on the circle or hyperbolic automorphisms on the two torus. In each of
              
these cases, positivity of the Lyapunov exponent, regularity  of the
              
integrated density of states, and Anderson localization were studied. 
At
              this point, we are planning to address several remaining questions, 
including
              the following ones:
1) Is the Lyapunov exponent positive in case of skew-shift
              potentials 
   for small disorder ? 
2) Is it possible to obtained detailed
              information on the nature of the 
   eigenfunctions in the quasi-periodic case
              assuming only positivity of 
   the Lyapunov exponent ? In fact, do the non
              perturbative techniques
   allow the definition of the essential support as
              described in the 
   perturbative regime by Sinai and Froehlich, Spencer,
              Wittwer ? 
  These questions are intimately linked with Y. G. Sinai's recent
              work on 
   "anomalous transport in quasi-periodic media", and would provide
              better
   and more precise information on the subdiffusive behavior of the
              random
   walk considered by Sinai. 
3) Is it possible to extend the 
              nonperturbative methods to strips, or the 
   two-dimensional plane ?
4) Is
              the integrated density of states Holder continuous in the case of 
   several
              frequencies or the skew-shift ? 
5) What can be said about the statistics  of
              the level-spacings of the eigen
   values for the case of the skew-shift
              ?

Historically, the study of random Schroedinger operators started with
              Phil
Anderson's work in the late 1950's, for which he received the Nobel
              prize.
Before his work it was believed that small random impurities in a
              crystal
would not significantly change its conductance. Anderson, however,
              showed 
that this is not the case: Arbitrarily small random impurities
              occurring
independently at each lattice site turn a conductor into an
              insulator. Since
his work, which was not mathematically rigorous, the
              development of a precise
theory of "Anderson localization" has been pursued by
              many mathematicians. 
It turned out that there were connections with deep
              results from several 
areas of mathematics. For example, Fuerstenberg's
              theorem on products of 
random matrices was a crucial tool in the development
              of the theory. 
These works attracted the attention of physicists,
              particularly experts in 
statistical mechanics. To this day, there is an
              active and fruitful exchange 
of ideas between mathematicians and physicists
              in this subject. In fact, the 
interest in random phenomena and methods has
              intensified quite notably in 
physics in recent years, as many important
              problems posed by statistical 
mechanics have proved to be rather deep
              mathematical challenges whose 
solution has lead to significant advances of
              probabilistic techniques.
It is our hope that the projects set forth in this
              proposal will further
advance our insight into the models of statistical
              mechanics as well as 
providing useful tools for mathematicians working in
              ergodic theory, analysis, 
and mathematical physics.








