Title       : Computational Statistics For Phylogenetic Trees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0241246

Award Number: 0241246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $737913             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan P. Holmes susan@stat.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0241246
Holmes
	Classical statistics has developed various averages,
              projections and representations based on linear algebra. In recent years,
              non-numerical data and parameters have emerged. The object of this project is
              to provide ways of averaging, building confidence regions, running Monte Carlo
              algorithms, doing regression and testing models for rooted binary trees.
              Currently biologists validate their phylogenetic trees by perturbing the data
              through a simple bootstrap of the columns of DNA sequences and then summarizing
              the collection of trees obtained by associating p-values to the branches of a
              consensus tree. This reduces the problem to a collection of binomial
              parameters, losing much of the multivariate information. A more geometrical
              procedure based on confidence regions in tree space is preferable and overcomes
              the multiple testing problem. The projects extends both Bayesian and
              frequentist inferential procedures for binary trees to a nonparametric context
              using a complete geometric construction of the relevant tree space. The
              mathematical tools include probability theory, topology and algebraic
              combinatorics. Collaboration with Louis Billera and Karen Vogtmann (Cornell
              Mathematics Dept.) has enhanced our mathematical understanding of tree space.
              The space of trees has negative curvature, thus we know we can define geodesics
              on this space as well as convex hulls. Many of the actual distance computations
              can have exponential complexity, good approximation algorithms are important
              for the applications considered. This work helps think about the statistics of
              biological networks as generalizations or mixtures of trees.
	A new type of
              data has appeared in genetics and molecular biology, these data are not real
              numbers or vectors, but trees, family trees or phylogenetic trees relating
              different species and hierarchical clustering trees relating different genes
              according to their differing expression patterns. This project provides
              programs for visualizing and doing statistics on these new data, we will
              provide the biologists with open source computer packages that they can use to
              analyze their own data. For instance, classical linear regression is based on
              projections; in the same way if we want to compare two sets of trees, we will
              use distances and methods for projecting in tree space. The project includes
              two workshops, one for mathematicians in the first stage, to publicize some of
              the harder open problems, and another in the last year to teach biologists how
              to use the geometrical tools developed in matlab or R in practical examples.
              This grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support Research
              Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology. This is a joint competition
              sponsored by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the National
              Science Foundation and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences
              (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of Health.  

