Title       : Topics in Group Formation, Inequality and Conflict
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0241070

Award Number: 0241070
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247488             (Estimated)
Investigator: Debraj Ray debraj.ray@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project studies various aspects of group and coalition formation;
              the implications of such processes for economic efficiency, social
              polarization, and inter group conflict. The research project has three main
              components. First, several facets of group and network formation will be
              studied. At a theoretical level, the objective is to analyze group formation in
              the presence of farsighted economic agents. These topics have already been a
              major focus of past research by the principal investigator, but the new focus
              here is on network formation, a versatile concept that encompasses many
              standard theories of coalition formation. In addition, group and network
              structure will be investigated in leading special cases, such as those
              pertaining to insurance, information, or technology diffusion. Second --- and
              complementary to the first part --- the notion of ``social polarization" across
              economic, religious, or ethic groupings will be introduced and studied. It will
              be argued, both theoretically and empirically, that social polarization is
              closely connected with the incidence of social conflict. This claim will be
              evaluated by an empirical study of polarization and its correlates, as well as
              through behavioral models of social conflict in which the polarization of
              characteristics plays an explicit role. Finally, the project will apply some of
              these ideas to the escalating communitarian violence in India over the past two
              decades. The economic and demographic characteristics of different religious
              and caste groups in India will be studied, and such characteristics connected
              with the outbreak of religious or ethnic violence at the district level. In
              addition, several data sources will be combined to create a unique dataset for
              studying conflict and distribution in the Indian context.

Group formation is
              central to questions in economic theory, political economy, and sociology. This
              project describes --- among other things --- a methodology for thinking about
              coalition formation. This approach is likely to have implications for
              game-theoretic models, industrial organization, and political economy. From a
              more applied viewpoint, polarization is a topic of central interest, both to
              theorists working on inequality, as well as to practitioners seeking correlates
              of outcomes such as low growth, violent crime, and civil wars. Finally, the
              study of 
Hindu-Muslim and caste conflict is possibly the first that links
              economic and demographic variables to ethnic or religious conflict. This sort
              of analysis has implications not just for ethnic conflict within India but for
              conflicts in other parts of the world.

