Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Globalization and Representation in Developed
               Democracies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0241824

Award Number: 0241824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9300               (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Freeman freeman@polisci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Does economic globalization affect political representation in the world's
              established democracies? If so, how? Despite a growing literature on the effect
              of global markets on domestic politics, scholars have ignored the fundamental
              question of representation. The study of representation remains the province of
              a largely separate literature on the political behavior of masses and elites.
              And though economic performance figures prominently in these works,
scholars
              do not explore how the external economy affects the extent to which
              contemporary political systems live up to the democratic ideals of
              representation, accountability, and responsiveness. The proposed research will
              take up this task. Under globalization national governments become more
              dependent on the external environment, leaving policymakers with less control
              over the health of the economy. The electorate in turn becomes less inclined to
              evaluate elite performance in terms of economic conditions. 

This study
              argues that these developments carry two related consequences for
              representation. First, increased openness
reduces the likelihood that voters
              hold their governments accountable for past performance.  Second, openness
              reduces elite incentives to respond to mass preferences over economic policy. 
              In short, by upsetting links between domestic actors and policy outcomes,
              globalization alters the mechanisms of representative democracy.  

The
              proposed research will make a contribution to the globalization literature both
              substantively and methodologically. Substantively, the study parts from past
              work on performance and policy outcomes to argue that a complete understanding
              of the impact of globalization requires a consideration of citizen preferences
              and elite strategies.

Methodologically, the study will test the argument in
              four stages. First, dynamic analyses of government popularity will be performed
              to assess whether increasing openness affects the clarity with which citizens
              evaluate elite performance. Second, multilevel analyses will be conducted to
              investigate if this relationship is conditional on national political context
              or on voters' characteristics. Next, comparative case studies of politician
              strategy will be done to examine the extent to which policy choices in a
              partially globalized world are driven by the demands of
domestic politics.
              Finally, measures of elite and mass positions over policy responses to
              globalization will be combined to assess their congruence.

The proposed
              research has several potential impacts. First, it proposes one of the first
              comprehensive accounts of how economic openness affects representation among
              the developed democracies. Second, by doing so the research may call into
              question conventional assumptions over the bases of mass and elite preferences.
              And third, the research will reveal the extent to which national political
              institutions particularly elections themselves can continue to serve as
              instruments of democracy in an increasingly interdependent world.

