Title       : Primacy of Affect in Automatic and Deliberative Processing of Political Persons,
               Groups, and Issues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0241282

Award Number: 0241282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Milton Lodge milton.lodge@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles S. Taber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In a series of experiments carried out under an earlier project employing an
              attitude priming paradigm, the researchers found strong support for the
              automaticity of affect toward political leaders, as well as for groups, and
              issues. Then to explore the impact of prior attitude on political judgment the
              researchers looked at how citizens evaluated arguments about two public
              policies, affirmative action and gun control. They found  strong evidence, 
              especially among those subjects who feel the strongest and are the most
              knowledgeable about an issue, of a prior attitude effect, a disconfirmation,
              and a confirmation bias, with all three of these effects of prior attitude
              promoting attitude polarization.  In the 1st year of this investigation,
              building on the demonstration of the automaticity of affect for political
              leaders, groups, and issues the researchers test basic premises of the primacy
              of affect hypothesis.  Their first pair of studies explores the creation and
              updating of automatic affect, with one experiment using a fictitious political
              candidate and the other using real but unknown U.S. Congressmen as stimuli.  In
              years 2 and 3 the investigators turn to the "so-what?" question. They undertake
               studies testing the primacy of affect theory; to wit: that when one's affect
              is directly linked to a political object, be it leader, group, or issue, this
              affective tally will be "primary" in that it enters the judgment process first
              and dominates subsequent judgments and evaluations from start to finish. Taking
              their  lead from social identity theory which links one's self identifications
              to affect the researchers explore how one's political identifications (starting
              with party, ideology, and symbolic identifications and then turning to the most
              general "we" vs. "they" primes) will spontaneously impact how citizens think
              about and evaluate new political information that is directly or indirectly
              linked to self Employing a subliminal variant of the attitude-priming paradigm
              (to rule out conscious considerations), the investigators predict that the
              priming of self-identification will automatically invoke a strong affective
              response which will significantly impact one's political attitudes,
              orientations, and judgments.    
