Title       : Growth and Cycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a0241350

Award Number: 0241350
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245652             (Estimated)
Investigator: Boyan Jovanovic boyan.jovanovic@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop a model in which there is an incentive to
              adopt a new technology because it increases productivity, but the new
              technology may require a large adjustment in the level of human capital.   The
              model will be used to explain volatility of growth, growth-rate disasters,
              counter cyclical human capital accumulations and other empirical observations
              about economic growth.

Real Business Cycle research is a large and very
              useful literature on the relationship between business cycles, economic growth
              and technology shocks.  But almost all this research assumes that the
              technology shocks are exogenous and studies how the economy responds to them. 
              This project develops a model in which technology is chosen, total factor
              productivity depends on current technology and human capital, and human capital
              can be upgraded at a cost to better match future technology.   In this model
              technology adoption is risky.  The risk is one of possibly having the wrong
              skills and therefore of bearing large costs of retooling and there are
              additional risks.  So choosing a better technology increases tomorrow's
              productivity directly, but increases the risk that resources will have to be
              spent to upgrade human capital to keep pace.   If growth imposes risks, then it
              seems like we should observe a positive relation between the growth rate and
              its volatility.  Yet the data show a negative relation between the two over
              time.  This project develops a model that explains this, in that higher
              volatility leads to a greater mismatch between future technologies and skills
              and greater retooling costs.  The model can be decentralized and extended so
              that it fits the distribution of growth rates of output, consumption,
              investment, stock prices, and interest rates observed in post-war U.S. data and
              elsewhere.  Business cycles are partly an outcome of technology choices.  This
              project studies how policy implications hinge on external effects in the use of
              technology and in the adjustment of human capital.   

