Title       : Dissertation Research: Javier Lezaun: "Policing Purity: Testing, Traceability
               and the Governance of Genetically Modified Organisms"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0241484

Award Number: 0241484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5410               (Estimated)
Investigator: Trevor J. Pinch tjp2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                1
After several years of intense public debate and continuous regulatory
              restructuring, a new system for the control of agricultural biotechnology is
              currently taking shape in the European Union.  Based on the ability to make a
              distinction between genetically modified and conventional organisms in food
              commodities, this system aims to detect, identify and trace throughout the
              production chain all bio-engineered products entering the European market.  The
              commingling of conventional and genetically modified products, or any situation
              in which a single, clear-cut categorization cannot be established, is defined
              in practice as a form of pollution, which must be discovered, controlled and
              ultimately prevented.  It is this policing of purity that this the focus on
              this dissertation research grant. The dissertation tracks the controversies
              surrounding testing methodologies and the emergence of the principle of
              traceability for genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in the EU.  Given the
              transnational nature of the commodity flows, detection instruments and new
              regulatory provisions must operate beyond the strict geographical boundaries of
              the European Union. The dissertation explores the development of this new
              control system in the context of EU-US relations and compares developments on
              both sides of the Atlantic. Support is requested for additional fieldwork in
              Europe and the United  States to complete the previous research. 
              Intellectually, the dissertation draws together a number of disciplines and
              research interests.  By analyzing the role of techno scientific instruments in
              the stabilization and/or disruption of transnational marketplaces and
              regulations, the research tries to bring Science and Technology Studies into
              fruitful contact with Economic Sociology and International Relations.  Finally,
              the dissertation hopes to make a contribution to the ongoing international
              policy debate regarding social control of agricultural biotechnology. 


