Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Social Networks, Civic
               Capacity and Urban School Reform: A Multi-Level Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0241540

Award Number: 0241540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa J. Marschall marschal@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation examines the extent to which civic capacity drives reform and
              thereby directs which problems are tackled and the nature of the solutions
              offered.  Stone (1998) maintains that civic capacity is the mobilization of
              various stakeholders in support of a community wide cause. These stakeholders
              in most large urban systems include professional educators, parents, the
              business sector, community-based actors, and, in some cases, city hall. The
              building blocks for civic capacity are civic mobilization and shared
              understanding. The former addresses the degree to which various sectors of the
              community come together in sustained support of school reform and related
              efforts to improve educational opportunities and performance; the latter
              involves the extent to which stakeholders, or what Stone also references as the
              urban regime, share a common understanding of the education problem at
              hand.

While Stone's approach to civic capacity and urban regimes provides a
              new and important framework for conceptualizing urban education reform, it does
              not permit the development of an inferential theory that predicts both the
              effects of school reform on the community and the effects of the community on
              school reform. Interrelationships among civic capacity, institutions, social
              networks, and community organizations have neither been clearly specified nor
              analyzed empirically.

For example, what kinds of institutional changes are
              related to increased citizen participation in local
institutions and local
              policy-making? What types of interorganizational linkages foster citizen
              participation? How are these relationships related to school reform? In
              addition, empirical challenges remain. Most studies do not have a longitudinal
              base with which to track changes in civic capacity over time, are limited to
              single city case studies, or fail to fully operationalize key concepts. Thus,
              we have continued to build the case for the urban regime theory in theory, we
              have failed to test its
empirical validity.

This dissertation addresses
              these theoretical and empirical challenges.  Theoretically, it offers the first
              explanatory theory of the development of civic capacity and its effect on the
              success of reforms. In particular, the student proposes a Social Network Theory
              of School Reform that builds upon Stone's work and adds dimensions from
              sociological theories. This theoretical framework allows the student to address
              the following questions: How is cooperation established? What types of
              relationships are forged and which are maintained over time? How do various
              demographic, political, and social factors contribute to or diminish a city's
              ability to develop civic capacity for
education reform? Empirically, the
              student measures --- over time --- the levels of inter-community organization,
              cooperation and interaction for school reform. 

By pooling together data
              from multiple sources, the student will measure the elusive concepts of civic
              cooperation and civic capacity, and thus shed new light on questions of how
              relations among community organizations and schools are structured, how levels
              of community participation and support contribute to the social organization of
              communities, and how systemic school reform influences these relationships and
              processes.

