Title       : Constructing a Model of Abrupt Climate Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2002   
File        : a0241274

Award Number: 0241274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157527             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose A. Rial jar@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the development and use of a mathematical model using
              coupled nonlinear differential equations to help explain the physical
              mechanisms underlying signals of abrupt climate change found in paleoclimate
              records.  The LOgistic-Delayed nonlinear Differential Equation (LODE) model
              will be used to capture some important aspects of the physics of climate change
              at orbital and millennial scales, aspects of mid-Pleistocene climate, and
              Dansgaard-Oeschger oscillations of the last Ice Age. 

The LODE model
              possesses simplicity in its formulation (i.e., two equations, small number of
              adjustable parameters) and sufficient complexity in its dynamics (i.e.,
              infinite-dimensional nonlinear delay differential equation) to simulate details
              of climate change that other simplified models cannot.  

The study will
              validate the LODE model, expand its scope, and computerize and disseminate the
              final version.  Validation will involve comparing LODE's output with
              intermediate-complexity coupled ocean/ice sheet/atmosphere models that
              realistically treat ice cap evolution and greenhouse gas fluctuations.  The
              validation process will include stability analyses to determine the sensitivity
              of the model to variations in the adjustable parameters, probe the limits of
              predictability, and determine the phase-space structure and bounds of the
              attractor.  

The final model is expected to be of mid-range intermediate
              complexity and include Earth's geometry and land/ocean distribution.  It is
              planned that the model will be applied to data on centennial and decadal time
              scales.

The research will provide a simple and user friendly mathematical
              model for the paleoclimate science research community that can be used help
              explain some aspects of abrupt climate signals extant in the paleoclimate
              record.  The model can also be used as an important teaching tool for students
              in paleoclimate science.  Furthermore, this award will provide support for a
              post-doctoral researcher working under the mentorship of the principal
              investigator.
