Title       : Change Blindness: Representing Information Across Views
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0241684

Award Number: 0241684
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54749              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Simons dsimons@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              People often do not notice large changes to displays ranging from simple arrays
              of novel objects to complex, naturalistic motion pictures. For example,
              observers sometimes fail to notice when the central actor in a motion picture
              is replaced by a different person during a cut to a different camera view. Yet,
              the mechanisms underlying such change detection failures, or "change
              blindness," are not well understood. The primary goal of this proposal is to
              investigate the way in which our representations of the visual world influence
              our ability (or inability) to detect changes when viewers intentionally search
              for a change and when they do not anticipate a change. Experimental tasks will
              be used both in and out of the laboratory thereby including conditions in which
              the representation of visual scenes is tested under more ecologically valid
              viewing conditions. Variables will include the magnitude of the change, the
              initial viewing time, the delay between the original and changed display, and
              the complexity of the scene. Another series of experiments will use both
              intentional and incidental tasks to explore the detection of categorical
              changes to in simple arrays of objects, photographs of natural scenes, and
              motion pictures. A third series of experiments explores the possibility that we
              may form implicit or even explicit traces of changed objects even when we are
              unaware of the change itself. These experiments investigate whether failures of
              change detection imply the lack of a representation or simply the
              inaccessibility of a representation to awareness. Previous work on change
              blindness has assumed that the failure to detect a change implies the absence
              of a representation. This inference has led to the conclusion that people
              retain little information about their visual world from one view to the next.
              The studies in this proposal will explore the possibility that we represent
              more of our visual world than the existence of change blindness might imply. By
              using both intentional and incidental tasks with displays ranging from simple
              arrays of objects to complex, dynamic scenes, these experiments will allow a
              more complete description of the nature of our visual representations from one
              view to the next and of visual short-term memory in general.


