Title       : Ordinal Structure in Multi-Unit Auctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0241468

Award Number: 0241468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134273             (Estimated)
Investigator: David McAdams mcadams@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research project will contribute to the basic theory of auctions of multiple
              identical objects (``multi-unit auctions").  The focus of the project is on
              establishing ``monotonicity" of equilibria in such auctions, i.e. that bids are
              non-decreasing functions of the bidder's private information. Efforts to
              establish monotonicity using standard approaches have stalled for the most part
              in general environments of interest, but this research brings to bear promising
              new tools from lattice theory. Existing research has applied such tools to
              prove existence of monotone equilibrium in a limited model of one-sided
              multi-unit auctions. This project aims to develop that approach further to
              apply to large auctions with many buyers and sellers in more general
              environments. Since monotonicity is a crucial ingredient for efficiency, such
              research may lead to new results proving asymptotic efficiency of equilibria in
              uniform-price auctions.

Multi-unit auctions provide a compelling
              ``micro-foundation" for markets with many buyers and sellers. Multi-unit
              auction theory also models important real-world auctions such as U.S. Treasury
              bond issue and regional electricity procurement auctions.  Unfortunately, the
              basic theory of such auctions is quite incomplete. Worse yet, the existing
              single-object auction theory provides an unreliable guide for understanding
              multi-unit auctions. This research will clarify fundamental properties of
              bidding behavior in multi-unit auctions and leverage its basic theory
              contributions to re-address the fundamental and age-old question: ``When can we
              expect markets to efficiently allocate resources?"



