Title       : SGER: Exploratory Studies to Evaluate Potential of Novel Nanoporous Media for
               Highly Selective Separations of Biomolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a0241159

Award Number: 0241159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99394              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neville G. Pinto npinto@alpha.che.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Panagiotis G. Smirniotis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Proposal Title: SGER: Exploratory Studies to Evaluate the
              Potential of Novel Nanoporous Media for Highly Selective Separations of
              Biomolecules
Proposal Number: CTS-0241159
Principal Investigator:Neville
              Pinto
Institution: University of Cincinnati



The potential of MCM
              mesoporous molecular sieves for the separation of biomolecules is being
              investigated.  MCM materials are being synthesized hydrothermally and
              functionalized through the incorporation of metals. The structure of the
              materials is being investigated and optimized through characterizations using
              SEM-EDAX, BET surface area, XRD, and Mas-NMR, among other techniques.
              Fundamental data on adsorption equilibria and rates of adsorption are being
              obtained for these materials using probe biomolecules with a wide range of
              molecular weights (~250 to 650,000 Da) and sizes (up to ~ 60 angstrom).  A
              fundamental understanding of the relationships between material properties,
              solution conditions, and biomolecule characteristics, and selectivity,
              capacity, rates of adsorption and reversibility is being developed. 

In
              terms of the broader impacts, the proposed work represents a new approach to
              address the need for highly selective separation media for preparative
              bioseparations. The proposed research will provide new data on the adsorptive
              interactions of proteins with solid surfaces, and the kinetics of protein
              adsorption on MCM materials. Fundamental insights obtained from the data are
              expected to contribute to an improved understanding of the adsorption of
              proteins. The ability to synthesize adsorbents with a singular pore size and
              surface characteristics that are susceptible to a wide range of surface
              modifications is likely result in a versatile new class of preparative
              adsorbents with selectivities that can be tuned much more closely than is
              presently possible. The mentoring of graduate students will be educational
              component.  The potential for developing molecular sieve membranes with aligned
              pores and surface selectivity could lead to a completely new class of membranes
              for bioseparations. This project may be useful in both preparative
              chromatographic and membrane bioseparations applications.








