Title       : Collaborative Research: Anchoring and Insufficient Adjustment in Everyday
               Judgment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0241544

Award Number: 0241544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199871             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Epley epley@wjh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
People's judgments are often inordinately influenced by the first information
              that comes to mind.  Judgments of others' perceptions are unduly tied to one's
              own (Gilovich & Savitsky, 1999; Savitsky, Epley, & Gilovich, 2001; Keysar &
              Barr, 2002),  impressions of others' personalities overly influenced by initial
              dispositional inferences (Gilbert, 2002) and answers to general knowledge
              questions anchored on irrelevant information considered early in the processing
              stream (Chapman & Johnson, 2002; Wilson, Brekke, & Centerbar, 2002).  These
              effects, and many like them, have traditionally been explained as insufficient
              adjustment from an initial anchor or starting point, using what Tversky and
              Kahneman (1974) called the "anchoring and adjustment" heuristic.  In short,
              people make judgments under uncertainty of all kinds by starting with (or
              anchoring on) information that is presented to their attention or that comes
              quickly and automatically to mind, and then serially adjusting their initial
              impression until an acceptable judgment is reached.  Although originally used
              to explain numerical estimates, anchoring and adjustment has figured
              prominently in numerous theories of social judgment.

Recent evidence has
              cast doubt on the "anchoring and adjustment" heuristic.  In particular, it has
              come to light that the experimental paradigm long used to investigate anchoring
              and adjustment does not, in fact, involve adjustment at all.  These results,
              accompanied by failures to find conclusive evidence for a process of adjustment
              outside this paradigm, have led some researchers to reject the anchoring and
              adjustment heuristic altogether (Chapman & Johnson, 2002).  

Research
              conducted with funding from a current NSF grant indicates that this conclusion
              is premature:  The anchoring and adjustment heuristic is alive and well when
              one looks in the right places (Epley & Gilovich, 2001).  This research
              indicates that people adjust in a serial fashion from anchors they
              automatically generate themselves as a value known to be close to the right
              answer but in need of tinkering.  It appears, furthermore, that the processing
              of such "self-generated" anchors is common and pervasive in everyday life,
              making an accurate understanding of them critical to a broader understanding of
              social judgment.

The studies proposed here are designed to expand the work
              begun on the existing grant by: a) developing new methodologies for tracking
              the operation of true anchoring and adjustment; b) more clearly identifying the
              exact nature of anchors that stimulate adjustment and those that do not; c)
              expanding the scope of the anchoring and adjustment heuristic beyond questions
              of general knowledge and into social judgment more generally; and d) developing
              techniques for overcoming insufficient adjustment.


