Title       : Applications of Nonparametric Methods in Econometrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0241770

Award Number: 0241770
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264339             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuichi Kitamura ykitamur@econ.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project develops practical tools for goodness-of-fit testing of models
              subject to random censoring models subject to random censoring with specific
              reference to duration models, and proposes a new method of analyzing non-nested
              conditional models.
The literature of duration analysis is econometrics is
              large and growing. While many flexible duration models have been developed in
              the literature to deal with important features of economic data, a large
              majority of empirical econometric studies employ parametric duration models. It
              is, therefore important to have convenient specification techniques tailored
              for applied economists. Many researchers use x2 tests that rely on arbitrary
              sample space splitting. Also, residual analysis is often employed to conduct
              informal graphical analysis. While these techniques are useful, general
              specification tests with sound statistical foundations are lacking. This
              research develops a Kolmogorov-Smirnov type goodness-of-fit test for parametric
              conditional survival functions. This test is easily modified to "concentrates"
              on model features of interest to the researcher. An alternative specification
              test for parametric hazard functions based on martingale residuals is
              investigated. 
It is common in applied econometrics to write a model
              conditional on some variables, with unspecified probability law of the
              conditioning variables. Choosing between different types of conditional models
              is an important issue since it occurs frequently in applied econometrics. If
              the two models are nested, many well-established methods are available. There
              are, however, many situations not covered by these conventional methods.
              Examples include: (1) comparison of a conditional mean restriction model and a
              conditional median restriction model, (2) comparison of conditional quantile
              restriction models for two different quantiles, (3) comparison of two
              non-nested conditional mean restriction models, and (4) comparison of a
              parametric likelihood model and a conditional mean/median restriction model.
              There are no generally acceptable methods of choosing between different models
              in these situations. The research offers a likelihood-based measure of model
              fit that enables the researcher to compare a broad range of conditional models
              in a unified manner. The key idea is to introduce "likelihood" for
              semiparametric models such as conditional mean restriction models and
              conditional quantile restriction models. The measure is then used to develop a
              likelihood ratio test for model comparison. Some practical issues for
              implementing the method are addressed. 

The proposed research will yield
              software for scientists from many disciplines to easily use the methods
              developed in this research. 
 

