Title       : RUI Collaborative Research: Characterization and Control of Spatio-Temporally
               Chaotic Pattern Dynamics in Taylor Vortex Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0241890

Award Number: 0241890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bellave S. Shivaram                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Olsen olsen@lclark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lewis and Clark College
	      0615 S W Palatine Hill Rd
	      Portland, OR  972197879    503/244-6161

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Technical Abstract

The objective of this project is to quantitatively
              characterize the transition from localized chaos to spatiotemporal chaos (STC)
              as a function of system size.  This is a novel study that will lead to a better
              understanding of how dynamic spatial patterns become disordered. 
              Experimentally, Taylor vortex flow (TVF), with both long single and
              multiple-waist hourglass geometries will be studied.  Previous experiments by
              the PIs demonstrate that TVF with a short single hourglass geometry exhibits
              spatially-localized, low-dimensional chaotic pattern dynamics consisting of
              persistent phase slips near the center of the vortex pattern.  Lengthening this
              system, or introducing multiple hourglass waists, is expected to generate more
              complex dynamics that are no longer spatially localized.  Numerically, a
              spatially-ramped reaction-diffusion model and models of diffusively coupled
              nonlinear oscillators will be explored.  The reaction-diffusion model is
              already known to exhibit localized chaos in a short system and STC in a long
              system, but the transition between these states has not been examined yet. 
              Building on their previous success controlling localized chaotic pattern
              dynamics, the PIs will attempt feedback control of STC in the experimental
              geometries, informed by the development of control algorithms for the numerical
              models.  The project will offer highly accessible opportunities for
              undergraduate students to learn about chaos, nonlinear dynamics, pattern
              formation, control theory, and fluid mechanics.

Non-technical
              Abstract

The objective of this project is a better understanding and
              characterization of how dynamic spatial patterns become disordered, and the
              development of minimal interventions sufficient to suppress this disorder. 
              Constantly changing but recognizable spatial patterns occur throughout natural
              and human-made systems-for example, patterns of cloud formation, of electrical
              conduction in mammalian hearts, and of light output from high-powered lasers. 
              Dynamic patterns often display what is referred to as "spatiotemporal chaos"
              (STC), a combined state of order and disorder in which the changes in the
              pattern are unpredictable over both time and space.  How patterns make a
              transition from localized chaos to STC as the size of a system is increased is
              not yet understood.  This project will investigate this transition in a
              rotating fluid system in which a pattern of vortices is created and in computer
              models that simulate analogous dynamic patterns.  The geometry of the fluid
              system is designed so that there are regions in which vortices are chaotically
              created and destroyed.  The PIs will also attempt to control STC (i.e. suppress
              the disorder) by creating a feedback loop that makes very small changes to the
              speed of rotation.  The ability to control STC has important technological and
              medical implications (e.g. control of erratic lasers, arrhythmic hearts, and
              mixing processes in the chemical and pharmaceutical industries).  The project
              will offer highly accessible opportunities for undergraduate students to learn
              about chaos, nonlinear dynamics, pattern formation, control theory, and fluid
              mechanics.

