Title       : Enhanced New Production During Winter Mixing: A Missing Component of Current
               Estimates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0241662

Award Number: 0241662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $887391             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Lomas mlomas@bbsr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas R. Bates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fredric Lipschultz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bermuda Biol Sta Research
	      17 Biological Station
	      Ferry Reach, GE 01, BD      /   -

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0241662

Photosynthetic uptake of CO2 by oceanic phytoplankton
              and the export of the resulting organic carbon to the deep sea comprise a
              biological pump (Volk and Hoffert, 1985), capable of extracting globally
              significant amounts of CO2 from the atmosphere.   As a consequence, it is
              important from the perspective of the global carbon cycle to understand both
              the present efficiency and the main controlling mechanisms of this important
              carbon pathway.  In the open ocean the biological pump is driven by new
              production of organic matter (production supported by externally supplied
              nutrients) and export of that organic matter to depth. Many methods have been
              employed to estimate new production, with varying degrees of agreement.  In the
              Sargasso Sea, for example, geochemical estimates of new production largely
              exclude the winter mixing period (because their fundamental assumption are
              valid only during stratified periods).  Biological methods suggest that the
              pre-stratification period can be as important, in terms of new production, as
              the remainder of the year.   Those biological estimates are poorly constrained
              and based on sparse data.  Because of the enormous spatial extent of
              subtropical gyres similar to the Sargasso Sea, uncertainty in the rate of new
              production and organic matter export in those systems leads to large
              uncertainty in biologically-driven carbon fluxes at the global-scale.  Recent
              data suggest that in the Sargasso Sea, the passage of weather fronts leads to
              increased new production during the winter mixing period.   Some oceanographers
              believe that these events lead to enhanced nitrate input, followed by a rapid
              biological response and accumulation of biomass, and an equally rapid export of
              that biomass to depth.   

In this project, researchers at the Bermuda
              Biological Station for Research carry out a process-oriented study of new
              production and its control during the period before formation of the seasonal
              thermocline in the BATS/BTM/OFP region near Bermuda.  Researchers from Oregon
              State University, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, and the University of
              South Carolina will also participate in some aspects of the study.   This
              sea-going effort will be conducted during two 30-day cruises (one in 2004 and
              one in 2005) during the winter mixing period when the passage of these fronts
              is most common and when few data are available to constrain new production
              estimates.  It will be crucial for this study to sample from a fully
              weather-capable research vessel, which can stay out and continue operations
              through most winter storms.   The team will use direct measurements of nitrate
              entrainment, nitrate uptake, phytoplankton community structure change, and
              dissolved and particulate organic matter export to elucidate the linkages
              between new production and export production as well as determine the main
              biological responses to short-term physical forcing.  Particular emphasis will
              be placed on biogeochemically critical phytoplankton groups such as diatoms and
              coccolithophorids, which can exploit transiently favorable conditions of the
              kind hypothesized to occur in late winter/early spring and which play a
              disproportionately large role in organic-matter export in many systems.

An
              understanding of ocean function is no longer important just to practicing ocean
              scientists.  This project will provide information critical for biogeochemical
              modelers seeking to constrain future predictions of changes in the oceanic
              biological pump, and will also provide information of interest to students,
              teachers and the general public.  If in fact a significant, and previously
              unmeasured, amount of new production occurs in subtropical gyres during the
              winter mixing period, then biological processes in the central ocean gyres play
              a greater role in the global carbon cycle including regulation of atmospheric
              carbon dioxide than we recognize at present.  
 

