Title       : Welfare Reform and Migration of Poor Families
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0241848

Award Number: 0241848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon F. De Jong dejong@pop.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah J. Graefe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-0241848
Gordon F. De Jong
Deborah J. Graefe, 
Pennsylvania State
              University


This study examines whether devolution of welfare policy in the
              1996 welfare reform legislation created new state benefits and rules
              inequalities that engender inter- and intra-state migration among distinct
              groups of welfare poor families, specifically African American and white single
              mothers and immigrant families.  This study uses data from three sources-- the
              2001-2004 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), the
              Urban Institute's Welfare Rules Database and a local labor market
              characteristics file created from 2003 American Community Survey census data. 
              These databases will be merged to create a longitudinal, two-stage
              specification of welfare-benefit "push" and "pull" impacts on poor immigrant
              and single-mother-headed families' migration behavior.  Using a state welfare
              policy inequality framework, the investigators will use factor analysis to
              develop measures from post-2000 textual policy manuals to operationalize
              multiple welfare benefit and eligibility rule dimensions and to test
              hypothesized state program effects on migration.  A discrete-time event history
              analysis will be used to predict migration events (inter- and intra-state
              migration) in the SIPP data.  The investigations will use a multi-level
              hierarchical modeling strategy, which is an integrated, and previously
              untested, micro-macro analysis of three determinant-of-migration hypotheses for
              welfare poor families.  These tests evaluate effects of 1) time-varying state
              welfare policy characteristics; 2) individual and family characteristics,
              including fixed-time immigrant and marital status and race, from the
              information-rich SIPP files, and 3) local labor market-level economic
              opportunity structure indicators. Similar to previous studies, a separate
              analysis of push and pull migration effects of hypothesized co-variates  will
              be completed first through, a "destination model" for identifying pull effects,
              and then, a "departure model" which identifies push effects for potential
              migrants' origin locations grouped by class of states according to state policy
              criteria.  This two-stage model with state welfare policy, local labor market,
              and individual and household indicators will provide a strong test of the
              welfare policy impact on migration. 


