Title       : Informational Foundations of Economic Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0241506

Award Number: 0241506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268194             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry W. Samuelson larrysam@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks explanations for individual and collective behavior that is
              not readily explained by standard economic theory.  Standard economic theory
              assumes that people are relentlessly self interested and rational, in the sense
              that they are concerned only with their own consumption and invariably make
              choices to optimally configure this consumption.  However, growing evidence
              makes a persuasive case that this view is wrong on two counts.  People are
              routinely concerned with more than their narrowly defined self-interest.  For
              example, Americans contribute billions of dollars to charity each year.  People
              also regularly rely on behavioral rules of thumb rather than subjecting every
              choice to a detailed analysis.  Standard economic theory suffices for many
              purposes, but is ill equipped to deal with many other important questions. 
              Framing a policy response to the recent growth in economic inequality requires
              an examination of how preferences and motivation extend beyond considerations
              of pure self-interest.  Understanding the performance of our economy, including
              the recent stock market bubble, requires knowledge of how rational decisions
              are sometimes displaced by potentially inappropriate behavioral rules.

This
              research combines techniques from evolutionary psychology with techniques from
              economics to examine how people make decisions.  The point of departure is that
              biological and cultural evolution has influence the way people make use of
              information and reach decisions, just as it has influenced more obviously
              physical characteristics. The project begins with theoretical research
              examining how evolution is likely to have shaped our decision-making
              capabilities in response to environmental challenges and resource constraints. 
              The work will then proceed to applied and theoretical applications of these
              models.  The result will be insight into why one's evaluation of one's own
              consumption often depends upon one's past consumption or the consumption of
              others; why prices and markets are used to allocate some goods but not others;
              how trust and reputations for cooperation can be built and can allow mutually
              beneficial interactions that would otherwise be impossible; and how we should
              make welfare comparisons and evaluations in a society characterized by such
              behavior.

The goal of the research is a better understanding of economic and
              social behavior.  The research will provide better tools for analyzing and
              evaluating economic interactions and for designing economic policies.  The work
              on trust and cooperation will provide the foundations for a theory of
              institutional design that will allow us to structure the economy so as to rely
              more heavily on inherent incentives as the basis for mutually beneficial
              behavior, while relying less on explicit legal and government intervention. 
              The work on interpersonal consumption links will provide the foundations for
              policies to deal with income inequality.  Ultimately, the result will be a
              reevaluation of the rigidly individualistic view that characterizes much of
              current economics.

