Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Impact of Alternative
               Elite Discourse on the Formation of Public Opinion: A Study of the Racial
               Divide in American Opinion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a0241412

Award Number: 0241412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11870              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Valentino nvalenti@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
One of the more interesting empirical regularities within the study of
              American public opinion has been the enormous disagreement between black
              Americans and white Americans on issues of public policy. From affirmative
              action, to AFDC, to the United States intervention in the Arab/Israeli
              conflict, blacks and whites appear to disagree with each other on the direction
              that government  should take on a whole host of policy issues. While previous
              research has suggested why blacks and whites should differ in their opinions on
              race specific issues, we have yet to explain why blacks and whites differ in
              their opinions on ostensibly non-racial issues, such as social security or
              health care. 
 
 In this Doctoral Dissertation Research project the student
              explores more closely the nature of the black and white disagreement on
              non-race specific policy issues. Moving beyond other scholars focus on
              relationships between political predispositions and black and white differences
              in opinion on non-race specific 
issues the student develops a theoretical
              framework that considers the effects that exposure to differing elite
              discourses has on widening the gap in black and white public opinion. The
              student shows that an attempt to advance their own interests, ideas, and
              ideologies among their respective racial constituencies, African-American
              elites (including black elected officials, reporters, religious and
              
organizational leaders, etc) and mainstream elites (those elites who are able
              to dominate mainstream discourse) frame non-race specific political issues in
              substantively different ways. Given this difference, I will then show how
              African Americans exposure to their own indigenous elite discourse and white
              Americans. lack of exposure to this alternative discourse plays an important
              role in contributing to the differences researchers have observed in black and
              
white opinion on non-race specific issues.  To do this the student has
              formulated a research design that analyzes not only the content of black and
              mainstream elite discourse on non-race specific issues but which also, thorough
              a series of 
framing experiments, experimentally test the differential effects
              that the messages supplied by these distinct discursive communities have on
              African American and white opinion with regard to these issues. He begins with
              a content analysis where he examines the different ways in which both 
Black
              and mainstream media have framed three important non-race specific political
              issues: social security reform, the Arab/ Israeli conflict and 1993 Clinton
              health care reform act. Examining the content of national black media sources
              (national black news magazines and several black newspapers) and national
              mainstream media sources (national news magazines and mainstream newspapers) at
              various points over the last decade and a half, the student identifies
              differences in the way these issues have been framed by these respective media
              sources.  Next to get an idea about how the black and mainstream media's
              framing of these issues might influence black and white public opinion, I
              designed a set of experiments that allow me sort out the differential effects
              of black and mainstream elite issue frames on black and white public opinion of
              non-racial issues. These experiments allow testing of  whether the alternative
              framing of non-racial issues within the black community leads to different
              interpretations of non-racial issues and as a result may help explain
              differences in black and white Americans opinions on these 
issues. 


