Title       : The Markets for Children's Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0241559

Award Number: 0241559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156578             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Galaskiewicz galaskie@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SES-0241559
Joseph Galaskiewicz
University of Arizona

This project
              continues a program of research conducted on the non-profit sector in the
              Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area over the past 17 years.  There is a long
              and spirited debate in academic and policy circles about the differences among
              charitable, for-profit, mutual benefit, and public organizations, with some
              past research finding differences, other studies finding little or no
              differences.  The current study investigates the thesis that the matching of
              providers and consumers in the various markets for children's services-broadly
              construed-does not always follow an economic logic.  On the supply side, many
              providers are not free to respond to changing market conditions and to react to
              opportunities because of legal norms and rules that restrict what they can do,
              how they can do it, and who can they serve.   In short, legal constraints
              should explain differences in organization strategies, service mix, people
              served and performance.  On the demand side, because of "imperfections" in the
              marketplace in certain markets, public, charitable, and mutual benefit
              organizations enjoy competitive advantages over for-profits and are seen by
              consumers as more effective and desirable.  Study findings should shed light on
              whether charities, membership organizations and public agencies provide
              children's services better than for-profits.

The investigator will collect
              data from 600 households, with full-time residents and children between the
              ages of 5 and 12.  Phone interviews will be conducted with 400 households and
              on-site interviews with an additional 200 households. The purpose of the survey
              is to identify service providers that households use for various kinds of
              children services.  The on-site interviews will collect more in-depth
              information on one particular service activity (i.e., quality, location, price,
              trust identity, role social networks played in selecting a provider, and
              satisfaction with service). Lastly, a sample of service providers (n=250) will
              be interviewed to gather data on their legal status, mission/purpose, services,
              clients/customers, competitors, organizational strategy and institutional ties.
              

The research contributes to several fields, including organizational
              sociology, market behavior, institutional economics, public administration, and
              consumer research.  The research has important public policy implications in
              that government contracts, charitable deductions, various subsidies and tax
              status are premised on the assumption that sector (e.g., for-profit, public
              agencies, or non-profit) matters.  Also, the research involves a population
              that has previously been understudied.  A large percentage of the Phoenix-Mesa
              metro population is Hispanic (about 25%).  Thus, the research will have much to
              say about the urban living conditions of Hispanics in the Southwest.  

