Title       : Dynamics of First-Order Phase Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0241044

Award Number: 0241044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark R. Pederson                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $516000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Oxtoby d-oxtoby@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vicente Talanquer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,7202,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              David Oxtoby, University of  Chicago,  and Vincente Talanquer, University of
              Arizona, are supported to continue their research on the dynamics of
              first-order phase transitions. They use classical density-functional theory to
              understand the dynamics of first-order phase transitions with applications
              aimed at formation of bubbles in heated or expanding fluids.  The research
              proceeds by determining which order parameters play a role in phase transitions
              and in determining the conditions that lead to a breakdown in classical
              nucleation theory. The methodology allows one to systematically study how
              generic types of molecular characteristics influence nucleation. In addition to
              a strong focus on secondary school chemistry education,  Talanquer actively
              participates in physical-chemistry research with density-functional-based
              studies of partially miscible binary liquid interfaces.

When mixtures of
              surfactants, water and oil are brought together bilayer membranes occur which
              can spontaneously distort into closed bubble-like structures referred to as
              micelles or vesicles.  Such structures have many uses and may be used as
              templates for fabrication of small particles, for the capture and subsequent
              encapsulation of chemically aggressive constituents, or for programmed drug
              delivery. Further, such structures carry cholesterol in the human body. Fusion
              of such structures has been implicated in the growth of gallstones.  This work
              is aimed at computationally understanding growth and evolution of such
              structures using classical density functional theory.  In addition to the
              biological impact, understanding gleaned from this work is of import to
              metallurgical applications, atmospheric science, protein crystallization and
              petroleum engineering.

