Title       : Parties, Factions, and Incumbency in State and Federal Elections, 1870 to 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0241475

Award Number: 0241475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263904             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Snyder millett@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Ansolabehere  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Extensive study of U.S. federal elections has deepened understanding of the
              politics of representation. Empirical analysis of presidential and
              congressional elections has aided in the development of theories of party
              voting and party alignments, economic voting, personalistic politics, and the
              responsiveness of public policy to election outcomes. Publicly available data
              on federal elections has greatly facilitated the research programs surrounding
              the study of representation. This project is to assemble data on election
              returns for state legislatures and state executives for the period 1870 to
              present. General election data for gubernatorial elections are available in
              existing data sets. However, publicly available data on state legislative
              elections are only available for the period 1968-1988 and 1993-1994, and no
              comprehensive database on statewide elective officers other than governor
              exists. A publicly available state elections data base will be broadly useful
              to scholars of American politics and representation. These data will allow
              scholars to consider how voting patterns differ across varying economic,
              social, and legal contexts and to measure how short-run  fluctuations in the
              economy, long-run shifts in demographics, and changing election laws affect
              election outcomes. These data will also allow researchers to relate election
              results to policy outcomes. The researchers' interests in collecting these data
              are to better understand party voting and state party cleavages, incumbency
              advantages, and electoral accountability. Comprehensive state election data
              will allow for improved measures of party competition at the state and county
              level. Specifically, with many offices observed at a give election within a
              county or state it is possible to estimate the normal party division within a
              county or state. Measures of the normal vote at the state level are used for
              many purposes-e.g., to study the changing party alignments, to examine the
              connection between electoral competition and participation, and to test
              conjectures about the electoral responsiveness of public policy, such as Key's
              (1949) hypothesis that less electoral competition leads to policies that
              benefit wealthier voters and interests. The researchers focus on comparing
              national and state party cleavages, testing hypotheses about when and why these
              cleavages differ, and relating these differences to the strength of party vs.
              personal voting. State election data also provide unique opportunities for
              determining the sources of incumbency advantages

These data will be of value
              to numerous other scholars interested in the topic.

