Title       : The influence of gamete phenotype, gamete genotype and behavior on reproductive
               success in broadcast spawning invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0241678

Award Number: 0241678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don R. Levitan levitan@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Selection via reproductive success can have a major influence on the evolution
              of traits and patterns of gender dimorphism. Most research has focused on
              scenarios in which selection is more intense for one gender than the other. 
              Generally, males are thought to compete for mates while females choose among
              potential mates, resulting in high variance in male reproductive success and
              low variance in female reproductive success.  However, previous work has shown
              that at some population densities, variance in both male and female success can
              be high in broadcast spawning marine invertebrates.  This project will address
              the consequences of these patterns for fecundity selection in this primitive
              mating strategy.  

Three species of sea urchins will be used to address how
              spawning behavior, population density, and gamete phenotype and genotype
              influence reproductive success.  Microsatellite markers will be used to
              establish maternity and paternity of larvae generated from laboratory and field
              experiments.  The relative contributions of gamete recognition proteins and
              gamete morphology to reproductive success will be assessed, and the
              consequences of gender differences in spawning behavior in the presence and
              absence of gamete competition will be examined.  This study will provide
              insight into the resolution of fecundity selection and gender conflict in the
              sea. 

Broader impacts will include the training of numerous undergraduate,
              recent graduate and graduate student assistants.  The research program will be
              used as a mechanism to teach science in undergraduate and graduate courses
              taught at both at Florida State University and at the Bamfield Marine Sciences
              Center. 


