Title       : Optimization of Interactions and Dispersions in Multi-Component Polymer Systems:
               Blends and Nanocomposites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0241214

Award Number: 0241214
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Dadmun Dad@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A series of experiments that provide an understanding of how to control and
              optimize the extent of intermolecular hydrogen bonding that occurs in a
              multi-component polymer system are proposed.  DMR supported research has
              demonstrated that miscible blends containing a liquid crystalline polymer (LCP)
              and an amorphous polymer can be created by optimizing the extent of
              intermolecular hydrogen bonding between the two species.  The physical,
              engineering, and thermodynamic parameters of miscible LCP/amorphous matrix will
              be determined using small angle neutron scattering, its phase decomposition
              process monitored by time-resolved light scattering, and its engineering
              properties (tensile, strength and flow properties) measured by standard
              techniques.  The effect of LCP rigidity on the ability to form miscible blends
              will be examined to probe the universality of the ability to induce miscibility
              in LCP/amorphous polymer blends by optimizing intermolecular interactions.  The
              impact of controlling and optimizing the extent of intermolecular interactions
              on the properties of polymer nanocomposites will also be studied.  This will be
              accomplished by correlating the dispersion of single carbon nanotubes and
              layered silicates in a multi-component polymer mixture to the level of hydrogen
              bonding between the two components.  The completion of this set of experiments
              will furnish critical information that will define the limits of the
              optimization of hydrogen bonding between two components in a multicomponent
              polymer mixture to improve its dispersion and properties and define crucial
              parameters that will enable the design and production of robust multicomponent
              polymer systems, including true molecular composites and nanocomposites.

The
              broader impacts of this work will come from the experience of Science teachers
              from a public High School when they spend four weeks in a university lab
              contributing to this project, obtaining hands-on laboratory experience and
              training in polymer demonstrations.  The teachers will utilize this experience
              in their classroom to introduce high school students to polymers and research. 
              This research will also be disseminated to a broad range of audiences by the
              development a public outreach webpage called "The Fact of the Matter" to
              educate the public regarding the contribution of materials to technological
              advances.  Further impact will result from the completion of neutron scattering
              experiments at the National Institute of Standards and Technology as well as
              Oak Ridge National Laboratory where the students participating in this project
              will acquire hands-on experience in a multi-user facility and develop the
              next-generation of neutron users to insure the continued health of these
              National facilities.  Finally, Current collaborations and interactions with
              industrial and/or government laboratories will expedite the transfer of the
              guidelines and fundamental understanding garnered from this project to
              commercial viable technologies that will benefit society.  The results of this
              project will provide critical guidelines that will ultimately enable the
              rational design of multicomponent polymer mixtures (blends and nanocomposites)
              that can be used to create materials with a broad range of targeted properties
              for an enormous range of technological applications including the next
              generation of extraordinary structural, flame resistant, and/or thermally
              stable materials.

