Title       : Explaining Political Clientelism: Evidence from Argentina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0241958

Award Number: 0241958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan C. Stokes s-stokes@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This investigation assesses the causes and dynamics of clientelist political
              mobilization.  Under clientelism, political parties offer low-income voters
              individualized payoffs in return for political support, rather than (or in
              addition to) programmatic benefits or public goods.  The focus of the research
              funded by the National Science Foundation is Argentina, where scholarship
              suggests that parties adopt clientelist, programmatic, and other strategies
              when they attempt to generate electoral support.  In Argentina, the researcher
              conducts interviews with party officials and operatives, expand an ecological
              database she is constructing that contains electoral, fiscal, and demographic
              data, and conduct a sample survey, to test theory-driven hypotheses about the
              conditions leading political parties deploy clientelist strategies and leading
              voters to be receptive to these strategies.  The study evaluates the effects of
              economic structure, electoral rules, district size, and the density of social
              networks in encouraging parties to adopt clientelist strategies at the
              provincial and local levels, and the effects of risk-aversion, norms of
              reciprocity, and intimidation in encouraging voter receptivity to
              clientelism.
The study has a broader impact for scholars of Argentine politics
              and for political and economic reformers in that country and in new democracies
              elsewhere.  Regarding the first kind of impact, the study generates a large
              database with information on electoral returns, demographics, and budgetary and
              fiscal information, measured at the level of the municipality, for a number of
              Argentine provinces.  This database would enter the public domain.  Regarding
              benefits for economic and political reformers, theorists show that clientelism
              creates an incentive for parties to keep their constituents poor and dependent,
              even as they provide some valuable goods to these constituents.  Clientelism in
              developing countries and new democracies therefore may create a poverty trap,
              feeding on and perpetuating poverty.  Clientelism also diminishes the ability
              of voters to make autonomous electoral choices, hence tarnishing the quality of
              democracy.  Studies such as this, that identify the causes of clientelism and
              the factors that undermine it, can serve as guides to reformers.  

