Title       : Understanding the Uncovered Set
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0241778

Award Number: 0241778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William T. Bianco wbianco@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Itai Sened  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This research focuses on a fundamental constraint on legislative action: the
              set of proposals that are enactable, meaning there is an agenda of proposals
              and amendments that has the proposal as the result when legislators cast their
              votes.  This concept is critical to understanding many facets of legislative
              strategy:  
 - agenda-setting: guaranteeing a result by arranging a series of
              proposals and 
amendments to be voted on sequentially.  Regardless of who sets
              the agenda, their efforts must begin with what is enactable, as this set
              defines which outcomes can be produced by stacking the legislative deck in this
              way.   
- strategic voting, voting for an undesirable alternative at one point
              in an agenda to shape the ultimate outcome.  A group might vote for an
              amendment that makes a proposal they oppose even worse, knowing the unamended
              proposal will be enacted but the amended proposal will not.  This strategy is
              possible only if legislators know what is enactable, which allows them to
              predict the consequences of their behavior.  
- arm-twisting, securing an
              outcome with threats and rewards, by forcing some members to vote against their
              policy goals or constituents.  Before doing so, party leaders must determine
              whether their desired outcome is enactable, for if it is, they can secure it by
              constructing the right agenda and allowing legislators to vote freely.   
              
While much research has focused on showing the utility of these tactics, none
              incorporate a specification of what is enactable.  This specification is not
              needed to show how these tactics work, but is necessary to assess their
              potential impact in real-world settings, or to attribute outcomes to their use.
               For example, a party's success at enacting its program might result from its
              leaders success at agenda setting, but may also occur because enactable
              outcomes are naturally biased towards the party, without party leaders doing
              anything.  Without knowing what it enactable, it is impossible to distinguish
              between these explanations.     
Our approach characterizes enactability in
              terms of the uncovered set, a solution 
concept for spatial voting games.  The
              uncovered set captures the essence of enactability, and is an important
              refinement in the stream of research into the properties of majority rule.  
              The problem is, no one knows what the uncovered set looks like for a given
              spatial voting game or real-world situation.  As a result, it is impossible to
              use the uncovered set to make predictions about real-world behavior, or to
              evaluate the factors driving real-world outcomes.  It is impossible to
              determine whether the uncovered sets predictions differ from those obtained by
              other methods.  And it is impossible to test the uncovered set . to determine
              
whether it is an analytic curiosity or a valuable insight into legislative
              action.   
 The research we propose aims at addressing all of these questions.
               Using previous work that implements a computational method for estimating
              uncovered sets, we will conduct a series of experiments involving group
              decision-making to see if the uncovered sets behavioral predictions are valid. 
              We will also reanalyze data from classic experiments to see if their findings
              are consistent with the uncovered set.  We will also use our technique to see
              if the uncovered set is a good predictor of outcomes in the contemporary House.
               Finally, using a combination of formal analysis and simulations, we will
              refine our technique, and compare the uncovered sets predictions to those
              developed from other methods. 


