Title       : RUI: Scale-Dependence of Flow Effects on Coral Reef Community Primary Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0241885

Award Number: 0241885
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500288             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Carpenter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  913308309    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Understanding the control of material fluxes in marine environments is a major
              goal of oceanography. In coastal marine environments, there is a growing
              appreciation for the role of hydrodynamics in modulating these fluxes. Coral
              reefs are among the most productive ecosystems in the ocean and water flow is
              central to maintaining high rates of photosynthesis in reef primary producers.
              On many reefs the major primary producing component is comprised of free-living
              algae that form a thin veneer over dead coral. Rates of photosynthesis by reef
              algal turfs on spatial scales of tens of centimeters are enhanced significantly
              by water motion, and similar patterns have been demonstrated for rates of
              nitrogen fixation. Metabolic and nutrient uptake processes of other reef
              organisms are also positively related to flow speed on similar spatial
              scales.

This project will develop a more complete understanding of the role
              of water flow in modulating coral reef primary production by: 1) examining the
              generality of how flow effects reef community primary production at larger
              spatial scales and how surface roughness affects this relationship, and, 2)
              investigating in more detail the small-scale interactions between algal turf
              physical structure, flow, and boundary layer dynamics, as this will allow a
              coupling between the ecological process of disturbance and the physical
              processes of hydrodynamics and mass transfer. Using both correlational and
              experimental methods, explicit hypotheses about the effects of flow, shear
              stress, and roughness on net community primary production at several spatial
              scales will be tested.

Broader impacts include a significant contribution to
              the development of human resources in marine science via training of both
              undergraduate and graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher, and better
              understanding of flow effects on a critical marine ecosystem.


