Title       : Structure-Composition-Property Relationships in Complex Intermetallic Phases:
               Experimental and Theoretical Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0241092

Award Number: 0241092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon J. Miller gmiller@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project involves combining experimental and theoretical approaches to
              search for and study new complex intermetallic compounds that will have
              interesting structural and magnetic properties with possible applications to
              environmentally friendly refrigerants and magnetic sensors.  The compounds
              targeted consist of active metals (sodium, potassium, strontium, barium, and
              rare-earths) with combinations of magnetic elements (iron, cobalt, nickel) and
              the post-transition elements (aluminium, germanium, indium, silicon and
              germanium): such compounds should adopt beautifully complex structures
              involving metal clusters that are controlled by optimizing metal-metal bonding,
              but also showing arrangements giving interesting magnetic properties through
              exchange interactions coupled to their orbital overlaps, i.e., magnetocaloric
              effects and magnetostriction.  These studies will lead to fundamental
              understanding of how intermetallic compounds form and the factors that control
              structure in magnetic systems. If we are successful to optimize the
              magnetocaloric effect, we may find a material effective for refrigeration near
              room temperature that is environmentally benign and economically feasible. 
              Young scientists will learn state-of-the-art techniques in air-sensitive, high
              temperature synthesis, diffraction and in the theoretical calculation of
              electronic 

This project is designed to form and study new compounds between
              different metallic elements, called intermetallic compounds.  One component of
              these new compounds will be magnetic elements, like iron or cobalt, which will
              allow us to probe new compounds to serve as materials for refrigeration in
              place of chlorofluorocarbons ("magnetic refrigeration").  Such compounds use
              magnetism to perform refrigeration, which is a more efficient process and the
              materials are also more environmentally friendly than current substances.  An
              important fundamental goal of this research is to understand what factors
              control the formation and growth of intermetallic compounds, so that we may
              ultimately be able to design materials with specific electrical or magnetic
              properties.  We plan to achieve this goal by searching for new intermetallic
              compounds through careful synthesis, through measurement of the structure and
              arrangement of elements in their crystals, through determination of their
              magnetic properties and through computer modeling.  Students involved with this
              project will learn state-of-the-art techniques in metals synthesis,
              characterization and theoretical modeling.  This project, which combines
              experimental and theoretical work, will prepare these students for careers in
              academia (for training our next generation of scientists and engineers) or in
              industry (where they can apply new techniques for the fabrication of new
              materials).
