Title       : Development of Late Holocene Paleomagnetic Dating Curves for the High Arctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2003  
File        : a0241291

Award Number: 0241291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104210             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph S. Stoner joseph.stoner@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              New paleomagnetic observations on u-channel samples from two lakes on Ellesmere
              Island suggest that Arctic lake sediments can preserve a robust record of
              Holocene geomagnetic field behavior. The Principal Investigator will define,
              within the limits of available sediment, the Holocene paleomagnetic record of
              the High Arctic.  The available cores provide both the quality of material and
              the density of coverage necessary to meet established criteria for the
              development of secular variation  master  curves.  Relative paleointensity
              proxy records will also be developed.  The data will be tied to historical
              records and placed on robust independent chronologies based on varve counts for
              lakes and radiocarbon dating of marine sediments. The intellectual merits of
              this proposal are two fold. First, recent geomagnetic observations from
              historical data covering the last century, as well as the dynamo theory and
              modeling suggest that the polar geomagnetic field is unique and possibly
              substantially different than that of the rest of the Earth.   Because there are
              no prior high-resolution paleomagnetic observations from the High Arctic, the
              relationship between the polar field and the main field at  secular  variation 
              time  scales  is unknown.   If the polar field is unique, it should manifest as
              distinct secular variation behavior, as suggested by historical data that show
              accelerated changes relative to the mid-latitudes.   Second, dating of Arctic
              sediments is difficult, and in general, limited to those lakes producing varved
              sediments.  Because of this, paleo-studies are often limited to a small subset
              of the potential archives that could provide high quality records. A primary
              objective of this research is the inter-calibration of geomagnetic paleosecular
              variation (both directional and intensity) with varve based chronologies which
              will be augmented by radiocarbon dates on marine sediments studied in this
              proposal. Development paleomagnetic master dating curves will result in  an 
              important  new  dating  tool  for  the Arctic that would be  applicable to both
              lake and marine sediments, whether massive or laminated. Based on the geology
              and the environment of the region, Arctic lake sediments may in fact be optimal
              for paleomagnetic studies.  The proposed paleomagnetic study would be the first
              of its kind in the Arctic, and therefore a range of sediments will be explored
              to test the robustness and applicability of this record. Results from this
              study will have societal impact by providing a new tool to help understand the
              past environmental variability of the Arctic that is presently undergoing
              significant and accelerated change.  
 
 





