Title       : Determinants of Husband-Initiated and Wife-Initiated Divorces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0241893

Award Number: 0241893
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162555             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula England p-england@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES- 0241893 
Paula England  
Northwestern University 

The project seeks to
              extend our understanding of why couples divorce or stay together by studying
              determinants of wives and husbands initiating divorces.  The study is
              innovation in its approach of classifying divorces according to whether the
              wife or husband initiates the divorce. Who initiated the divorce is defined as
              the ex-spouse who reports to have wanted the divorce more.  The study analyzes
              the distinct determinants of women leaving men and men leaving women.  No
              previous research has distinguished between causes of husbands leaving wives
              and wives leaving  
husbands. The study uses all three waves of the National
              Survey of Families and Households; wave 3 becomes available in early 2003.  The
              PI draws upon theories of gender and exchange theory in sociology, and
              bargaining models in economics.  One goal of the study is to assess whether
              having better alternatives outside the marriage makes a partner more likely to
              initiate divorce, particularly if s/he is unhappy in the marriage.  Having
              higher earnings (which facilitate support of oneself, one's children, and
              possibly a new family) affect alternatives outside the marriage.  Better health
              (e.g. not having a physical or mental disability) may improve one's ability to
              live on one's own and prospects on the marriage market, and thus make
              initiation of divorce more likely.   The project also assess whether a partner
              receiving more benefits from a spouse is less likely to initiate divorce. 
              These benefits include income from the spouse's earnings, household work,
              emotional support, treatment perceived as fair, and the ability to rear
              children in an intact family.  Gender differences are also assessed, for
              example, if there is a double standard of aging, then age will deteriorate
              women's outside marriage market alternatives more than men's, and women's
              inclination to initiate divorce will decline with age more than men's.  The
              research also examines whether those with greater commitment to staying in
              marriage unconditionally are less likely to initiate divorce.  The investigator
              seeks to understand why women are reported by both husbands and wives to be the
              initiators in a majority of divorces, considering the hypothesis that rigidity
              of male gender scripts makes it harder for women than men to convert resources
              to bargaining power.  Competing-risk event-history models will be used to
              predict whether wives or husbands initiate divorce, each relative to the
              alternative of the marriage persisting.  This research will contribute to the
              development of theories of family behavior, as well as to policy discussions of
              the changing American family

