Title       : Temporal Evolution of Microstructures on a Nanoscale: Experiments and
               Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0241928

Award Number: 0241928
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $590002             (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Seidman d-seidman@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant explores the fundamental problem of the temporal evolution of
              decomposing microstructures in multicomponent alloys on a nanoscale, from both
              the experimental and simulation points-of-view. A basic understanding of the
              decomposition processes, involving nucleation, growth, and coarsening of
              precipitates of metastable or equilibrium phase(s) is technologically and
              scientifically interesting.  A major goal is to analyze nanostructural changes
              at the discrete atomic level by a combination of atom-probe (3DAP) microscopy
              and simulation techniques: specifically 3DAP microscopy yields the
              nanostructure in 3D, based on the millions of atoms collected; in concert with
              kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulations a nearly complete atomistic picture can
              be obtained. To obtain a complete analysis of the evolving nanostructures on
              all relevant length scales, transmission electron microscopies are used. The
              major focus concerns the effects of the alloying elements Ta, Nb, W, Re or Ru
              on the evolution of g' (ordered L12 structure) precipitates in a g?matrix
              (disordered FCC) in twelve different model nickel-base superalloys.  Ternary,
              quaternary, quinary and sexinary alloys are fabricated by adding one or several
              of these elements to an 81.5 Ni-8.5 Cr-10.0 Al (at.%) base composition. The
              kinetics of decomposition in model Ni-Al-Cr base alloys are also studied using
              KMC simulations, where diffusion of atoms on a rigid lattice is mediated by a
              monovacancy mechanism. KMC simulations allow one to study in direct lattice
              space the temporal evolution of a microstructure starting from a random solid
              solution and then following the decomposition at a selected aging temperature
              in real time and direct space. A subset of the alloys will be subjected to
              creep testing under constant compressive or tensile stress in air over the
              relevant temperature range (980 to 1150 degrees C) and strain rates (10-8 s-1
              to 10-4 s-1).
%%%
The 3DAP microscope is utilized to determine: (1) temporal
              evolution of the distribution of all elements with subnanoscale spatial
              resolution; (2) partitioning of the alloying elements between the g? and g'
              phases; (3) segre-ga-tion at the g?/g' heterophase interfaces; (4) number
              density of the g' precipitates as a function of time; (5) super-saturation of
              each element as a function of time; (6) mean diameter of g' precipitates as a
              function of time. This research program involves undergraduate students through
              the REU program along with outreach at Evanston Township High School (ETHS),
              which has resulted in the employment of both juniors and seniors at ETHS for
              developing and maintaining full-featured data analysis application, ADAM 1.5
              (Atom Probe Data Manipulation). An important goal of this research is to
              provide an experimental and quantitative verification of the properties and
              performance of alloys with fully characterized nanostructures.  
***



