Title       : Cross-Sectional and Time Series Approaches to Small Area Estimation: Methods and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0241651

Award Number: 0241651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gauri S. Datta gauri@stat.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tharuvai N. Sriram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project will develop classical and Bayesian model-based
              statistical procedures with the primary goal of providing accurate estimates
              for small areas, representing local geographical regions and/or demographic
              subgroups of population.  Primary motivation for this research stems from the
              need for precise estimates of small areas which facilitates the federal
              government's ability to initiate, formulate, and finally implement various
              socio-economic programs in order to address, among others, various public
              health issues, and income and poverty at local levels.  Usually, most
              population surveys are designed to achieve a high level of efficiency at the
              global level which leads to direct survey based estimates of smaller areas
              having large standard errors.  In many surveys (e.g., the Current Population
              Survey and the Current Employment Statistics Survey), data also are collected
              over time providing useful time series.  This project will exploit the time
              series nature of data and produce reliable estimates of small areas by
              borrowing strength from information across small areas as well as those
              available over time.  Explicit models will be developed incorporating linear as
              well as some recently developed nonlinear time series models.  In this context,
              the study will develop suitable statistical methodologies such as empirical
              best linear unbiased prediction, empirical Bayes and hierarchical Bayes
              estimation methods to produce reliable small area point and interval estimates
              useful in various federal and local government programs.  Markov chain Monte
              Carlo methods will be used in fitting Bayesian models.  Software based on SAS,
              FORTRAN, S-plus, and SCA will be developed for implementing methodologies
              developed in this project.  Furthermore, measure of accuracy of small area
              estimators will be assessed through second order approximations for the mean
              squared error of these estimators, even when the underlying distributions are
              unspecified, to check if the end results are robust against
              non-normality.

The importance of this project lies in its relevance and
              direct tie to some of the on-going programs in the Census Bureau and the Bureau
              of Labor Statistics.  This research will lead to precise estimates of (i)
              poverty rates and median family income in the Small Area Income and Poverty
              Estimates program launched by the Census Bureau, (ii) U.S. civilian
              unemployment rates, and (iii) accurate employment counts for major industries
              in various regions.  This research will, on the one hand, advance statistical
              methodology for small area estimation and, on the other hand, apply various
              newly developed methodologies to statistical issues important to society.
