Title       : Dissertation Improvement Grant Proposal: The Ecology of Oldowan Lithic
               Technology: Oldowan Behavior at Kanjera South and Koobi Fora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2002  
File        : a0241396

Award Number: 0241396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11661              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. K. Harris jwharris@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. J. W. K. Harris, Mr. David R. Braun will conduct his
              doctoral research on the ecology of stone artifacts in the time period known as
              the terminal Pliocene (~2 Ma). He will initiate excavations at new localities
              in the world famous Koobi Fora region known for its wealth of early human
              fossils and artifacts. These excavations will provide a comparison with one of
              the most exciting new finds in early human archaeology: Kanjera South. The site
              of Kanjera south has several thousand well-preserved bones and artifacts. With
              possible evidence of animal butchery and long distance transport of artifacts
              this site is on par with the Olduvai localities of Tanzania in its potential to
              elucidate early human behavior. Mr. Braun will compare interpretations of early
              human behaviors at these sites, as viewed through the window of lithic (stone
              tool) analysis. Lithics are a behavioral trace of the interface between early
              humans and their environments. Paleoenvironmental reconstructions at Koobi Fora
              paint a picture of a lake- and river-dominated ecosystem, with areas of swampy
              woodlands. Meanwhile, Kanjera is reconstructed as an open savannah grassland. A
              focus of Mr. Braun's analysis will be to compare the behaviors of early humans
              in the variable environments of the terminal Pliocene.

Mr. Braun's analysis
              of these artifacts will incorporate various new techniques to understand the
              importance of stone tools to these proto-humans. To determine the distances
              that early humans traveled to collect stones to make artifacts geochemical
              techniques (Energy Dispersive X-Ray Flourescence) will be used to link
              artifacts to rock outcrops. This analysis is the result of an important
              collaboration between American researchers and the Institute of Nuclear Science
              at the University of Nairobi. Furthermore, his analysis will incorporate
              digital imaging of stone artifacts. These techniques have not previously been
              employed on materials of such antiquity. Preliminary results from digital
              imaging analysis suggest evolution in early human ranging patterns and
              landscape use.
Crucial to an understanding of early human behavior is
              investigating the need and use of stone tools. Mr. Braun's analysis will
              approach stone artifacts using experimentally derived models to test theories
              of optimality in early human stone tool use. By applying an evolutionary
              ecological framework to the study of artifact assemblages in varying
              environments it is possible to further our understanding of the heterogeneity
              of early human behavior. The support of this project will provide vital new
              insights into the evolution of human behavior and further the career of a
              student committed to the study of African archaeology. 





