Title       : Timing Games in Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0241346

Award Number: 0241346
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247466             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lones Smith lones@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project explores issues of timing in economics and game theory. The first
              part concerns timing games - dynamic games where players need only decide when
              to stop. In the classic War of Attrition, later stoppers enjoy greater payoffs,
              while the reverse holds in the Pre-emption Game. While the literature dates
              back to the 1950's, only these extreme cases have been analyzed. But in most
              economic contexts, being first or last is not desired. This part introduces and
              fleshes out this larger class of timing games with general rank-dependent
              rewards.  The analysis employs tools novel to economics, as it turns on the
              theory of Totally Positive functions.  A second timing project analyzes a
              specific timing game in political economy. Recent developments in pivot voting
              theory suggest that unanimous jury verdicts are inefficient. This part recasts
              the jury decision not as a one-shot vote, but as a dynamic story of voting by
              individuals facing decision costs. Simply put, if delay hurts, then unanimity
              is the informationally optimal rule. What emerges is a rich and plausible story
              of how individuals' signal the strength of their information by holding out (as
              in dynamic auction theory), but later on are willing to switch sides of the
              vote parroting others (quite unlike auction theory). A final political economy
              timing project concerns decision theory. Namely, in parliamentary democracies
              like Britain and Canada, the incumbent government has the option to call an
              election any time before its term expires.  This project sets up a novel
              continuous time Bayesian model of the government's learning problem;
              preliminary tests reveal a good predictive match against British election data.
              The theory developed is inspired by the open problem of how to price put
              options in finance; however, electoral timing is a renewable put option. While
              the first two subprojects are purely theoretical, this part also envisions a
              numerical side, as well as some matching. 

This project offers a range of
              mostly substantive and cross-disciplinary advances. The first project provides
              a general analysis of models where "the early bird gets the worm, but the first
              one does not." This should have a wide range of broad impacts and applications
              across the social sciences - from market entry and investment decisions
              (industrial organization), to behavior in stock market bubbles (finance), or
              the phenomenon of being fashionably late, or joining a fashion (sociology).
              Since decisions about timing are often the easiest bits of industry data that
              can be observed without error, these applications should have much empirical
              content. The jury project counters a recent influential theoretical arguments
              for the inferiority of unanimous jury verdicts. The analysis should also
              introduce a simple framework for thinking about costly decision-making in
              committees. The election timing project shows how to use insights from finance
              theory in political economy. It should inform the debate on constitutional
              reform in new democracies, highlighting the incumbent advantage without fixed
              election cycles. 
 



