Title       : Military Strategy and Civilian Suffering in Wartime: Understanding the
               Consequences of War for Non-Combatants in the 20th Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2002  
File        : a0241665

Award Number: 0241665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul K. Huth phuth@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The causes of interstate and civil war have been a topic of central concern to
              social scientists. In addition, there is a growing body of systematic research
              on the outcomes of war for the opposing armed forces of each side. A
              significant gap in basic research on war, however, is the relative lack of
              rigorous theoretical and empirical analysis that seeks to account for
              systematic differences in civilian loss of life and suffering in wartime across
              both time and space. 
This research project addresses this critical
              shortcoming in scholarly research with a study of the consequences of armed
              conflict for non-combatant populations in 219 wars from 1900-2000.  In this
              project a rational choice theoretical model is developed to address the central
              question: When and why would opposing armed forces in wartime, as a matter of
              military strategy, adopt policies that target civilians with the result that
              large numbers of non-combatant populations are directly killed, or are forced
              to endure conditions that threaten large losses of life?  Specifically,
              hypotheses are developed to explain when opposing armed forces engage in: a)
              direct military attacks on civilians, b) coercive displacement of civilians
              from their homes resulting in large-scale refugee flows or internally displaced
              populations, and c) deliberate policies of destroying agricultural production
              systems and denying access to adequate food supplies resulting in conditions
              that threaten famine and starvation. The hypotheses are empirically tested with
              statistical models on the population of 219 wars (interstate, civil, and
              de-colonization conflicts) in the 20th century. Comparative case analyses are
              utilized to illustrate and evaluate the causal inferences drawn from the
              statistical findings.  The published results of the project will produce
              important contributions to the scholarly literature of political scientists on
              a neglected aspect in study of war. In particular, the project 
can broaden
              existing research to include a systematic analysis of when and why wars can
              produce devastating consequences for non-combatant populations. While existing
              research does not provide compelling answers to this question, this project's
              findings should advance scientific knowledge on this topic.              
This
              project can produce broader contributions beyond advances in the research of
              political scientists on war. First, new data sets on civilian loss of life and
              suffering in 219 wars are created. These newly created data sets will be made
              publicly available and should be of value to social scientists studying a
              cluster of related issues, such as the laws of war, outside intervention in
              wars, and changes in wartime military strategies. Second, the results of this
              project should contribute to scholarship in the field of Public Health.
              Researchers in this field are increasingly concerned with understanding the
              public health consequences of armed conflict. As a result, the data sets
              created and the findings of this project should be of interest to Public Health
              analysts who seek to better understand how political and military decisions
              increase the vulnerability of civilian populations to risk factors associated
              with disease and death. Third, the 
results of this project should be useful
              to policy makers in states, international institutions, and non-governmental
              organizations that seek to prevent and respond to humanitarian crises in
              wartime. For example, by better understanding when civilian populations are at
              greater risk, policy makers can try to devise policies that will deter
              combatants from targeting civilians with coercive military force.  

