Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Rational Expectations,
               International Trade, and Interstate Conflict
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0241877

Award Number: 0241877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5504               (Estimated)
Investigator: Will H. Moore whmoore@garnet.acns.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              International conflict scholars often focus on the farsighted behavior of states
              involved in military conflict.  Those analyzing the relationship between
              international trade and interstate conflict argue that greater interdependence
              among a pair of states increases the costs of military conflict, reducing the
              incentive for state leaders. to engage in conflicts with trade partners.  But
              until recently researchers did not attribute the same level of strategic
              sophistication to the economic actors involved.  Morrow (1999) suggests a
              rational expectations approach to the study of trade and conflict.  He argues
              that traders are rational actors who develop expectations about interstate
              conflict from the political relationships between states.  Other scholars find
              partial empirical support for this claim.

This Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Support project advances the study of trade and conflict further by
              incorporating rational expectations of conflict into a gravity model of
              bilateral trade flows.  The Ph.D. student examines the question of how conflict
              influences international trade both directly when violence occurs, and
              indirectly through the expectations of conflict that trading firms develop.  In
              this proposal, bilateral trade levels are the result of market behavior by
              firms, but conflict between or within states influences the economic forces
              that determine trade. The student uses the gravity equation to explain trade
              flows based on purely market forces and argues that conflict affects these
              market forces, changing the level of bilateral trade in the process.  The idea
              that conflict affects trade is then extended by assuming that firms develop
              rational expectations about future conflicts.  The student argues that
              expectations of conflict will also affect the market for traded goods. 
              Moreover, he extends this argument to suggest that factors associated with
              recurrent conflict between the same states will increase expectations of a
              future conflict.  This results in hypotheses about the effects of rivalry,
              conflict over territory, and imposed regime changes on trade between states and
              the student develops a research design that tests these hypotheses on post-war
              bilateral trade.
Broader Impact
This project has more general implications
              for those in the economics/security discipline and those in policy-making
              circles.  A rational expectations approach to the study of trade and conflict
              could have significant implications for the liberal-trade brings peace
              proposition.  


