Title       : Human Capital, Social Capital and Infant Health: Evidence from New Panel Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0241861

Award Number: 0241861
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179456             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Currie   (Principal Investigator current)
              Enrico Moretti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Infant health is a key determinant of an individual's future success in life.
              For example, surviving infants of low birth weight are more likely to suffer
              from learning disabilities and other cognitive problems.  Moreover, children of
              lower socioeconomic status have much poorer birth outcomes on average. To the
              extent that infant health is compromised by the mother's lack of opportunity,
              it represents a mechanism for the intergenerational perpetuation of poverty and
              inequality. This project assembles a new panel of data on infant health using
              California's Vital Statistics Natality Records for 1982 to 2001. This panel
              allows them to follow mothers between births in order to answer three
              outstanding questions about the relationships between human capital, social
              capital, and the determinants of infant health. 
First, how does maternal
              education affect infant health in a rich country such as the United States? 
              Can spillovers from maternal education to infant health be considered as an
              additional return to education? Do estimated effects of maternal education
              differ with socioeconomic status, immigrant status, or race/ethnicity? In order
              to answer these questions this project compares the infant health outcomes of
              siblings whose mothers increased their education between births to those whose
              mothers did not. The project also examines the channels through which increased
              education improves infant health. Second, can "network effects" explain
              geographical/ethnic correlations in the use of publicly funded maternity care
              services. Many researchers have noted strong correlations 
between behaviors
              of women in networks defined using geographical and ethnic/racial affiliations,
              but it is difficult to prove that there is a causal link. A panel of data
              allows the researchers to control for many unobservable determinants of infant
              health which have confounded previous non-experimental studies. Moreover this
              project tests the prevalent hypothesis that estimated network effects reflect
              shared information. If networks act by transmitting information, then the
              estimated effects should be larger among mothers who have not previously used
              public maternity care services, since mothers who have 
already experienced
              the services will know how to access them and do not need to gain this
              information from networks. The panel permits comparisons of the estimated
              effects of networks on women who did and did not previously receive the
              services in order to conduct this test. 
The third question is how the
              implementation of Medicaid managed care in California 
has affected access to
              maternity care services. The construction of the panel enables the project to
              ask, for example, whether Medicaid mothers who are constrained to join Medicaid
              managed care organizations become less likely to enroll in Medicaid, use
              certain hospitals, to receive services, and ultimately to have healthy infants.
              This project assesses the extent to which an important change in access to
              health care for low income mothers has played a role in ameliorating or
              acerbating inequalities due to differentials in health at birth. 

