Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Inviting Outsiders In:
               Learning and Legitimation in Agency Policymaking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0241406

Award Number: 0241406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11842              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Hall rlhall@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Private information is a hallmark of bureaucratic power. On the one hand,
              specialized knowledge and skills are essential for agencies to perform their
              tasks effectively. On the other, however, such specialized knowledge may
              insulate agencies from democratic influence. Not surprisingly, Congress has
              created advisory committees composed of outside experts as a check on agencies'
              informational power. A growing literature on political control of the
              bureaucracy has called attention to these ancillary institutions. Yet,
              government agencies themselves have created hundreds public advisory committees
              to participate in agency policy-making. And, agencies call upon Congressionally
              created committees even when they are not mandated to do so. What explains this
              behavior? Under what conditions do agencies risk compromising private
              information to seek public advice? Are they able to do so in ways that augment
              their knowledge and policy-making leverage? 

This dissertation takes up
              these puzzles.  This dissertation argues that capable agency leaders structure
              public advisory committee deliberations in ways consistent with supporting
              agency reputation for expertise. Existing
scholarship focuses either on
              committees' informational contributions or on their potential to confer
              legitimacy. The concept of reputation, this research argues, invites us to
              understand learning and legitimation as two facets of an overarching
              bureaucratic goal, not as a dichotomy.  An agency reputation for expertise,
              this research contends, hinges both on demonstrated agency capabilities and on
              external perceptions of agency policies and process. 

Developing and testing
              a theory of agency reputation for expertise in the context of public advisory
              committees advances extant scholarship in the fields bureaucratic politics,
              organization theory, and institutional theories of inter-branch relations. This
              research also bears on applied public policy issues of national importance:
              drug approval and national education testing.  The dissertation employs large-
              sample statistical analysis coupled with analytic narratives to demonstrate
              whether and when agency leaders in the Food and Drug Administration and the
              Department of Education structure public advisory committee deliberations in
              ways consistent with supporting agency reputation for expertise. 

These two
              agencies were selected for their important internal and cross-agency variation,
              which allow both within-agency and cross-agency generalizations. The
              overarching dependent variable in this work is advisory committee use measured
              systematically by looking at three sources of policy influence: agenda setting,
              participation and timing. Independent variables measure policy conditions
              including uncertainty, conflict, visibility, agency capability, and committee
              characteristics in addition to political variables. The research is designed to
              test rival hypotheses advanced in current scholarship.

Preliminary results
              from the FDA suggest that by strategically compromising private information and
              inviting outsiders in, agencies can mobilize a valuable political resource: a
              reputation for expertise.  Public information does not replace private
              information as a hallmark of bureaucratic power: wise agencies are judicious in
              their agenda setting strategies. But, public advice stands alongside private
              information as a potential source of bureaucratic power.

