Title       : Solvation, Spectroscopy and Dynamics in Supercritical and Expanded Solvents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0241316

Award Number: 0241316
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $416561             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Maroncelli mpm@chem.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7202,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Maroncelli will study solvation, spectroscopy, and dynamics
              in supercritical fluids (SCF) and expanded-liquid mixtures.  Computational and
              spectroscopic techniques will be used to obtain a molecular-level understanding
              of fluid environments near their critical points.  Static and time-resolved
              electronic spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulations will be applied to
              study solvation and its influence on excited-state charge-transfer reactions in
              prototypical dipolar, quadrupolar and nondipolar solvents.  Time-resolved
              Stokes-shift experiments on solutes in supercritical fluids will probe local
              solute-solvent dynamics.  Gas-expanded liquids will be studied as potential
              anti-solvents that may be capable of selective precipitation.  Results of this
              project will impact not only research on supercritical fluids, but also more
              general areas such as the dynamics of regular liquids, dipolar and ion
              solvation, dielectric friction, optical line shapes, spectral shifts, and
              modelling of interaction potentials.

The molecular interactions within a
              liquid and those between solvent and solute molecules have been the object of
              numerous studies.  Supercritical fluids are materials in a low density state
              that lacks the distinction between liquid and gaseous states.  Currently SCFs
              are receiving considerable attention due to the possibility of interesting and
              technologically important applications in materials processing.  However, our
              understanding of these complex systems is far from complete.  The well balanced
              combination of experiments and simulation in this project will provide critical
              tests for  models of solutes and solvents and helps train students in a growing
              field with both technological and fundamental relevance.

