Title       : Automated Alignment and Segmentation for Electron Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0241182

Award Number: 0241182
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281494             (Estimated)
Investigator: Qiang Ji qji@ecse.rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0241182
Ji
	The current project addresses two procedural bottlenecks that
              limit high throughput electron tomography: image alignment and volume
              segmentation. Presently, image alignment requires the use of fiducial markers
              and is relatively labor-intensive and error prone. An information theoretic
              procedure is proposed that performs automatic image alignment without fiducial
              marks. The proposed solution exploits the rich information content in
              tomographic images and explicitly accounts for the unique transformation
              between images. Volume segmentation is one of the most crucial, yet
              labor-intensive, time-consuming, and subjective steps in electron tomography.
              Automated segmentation of tubular objects can be very challenging because of
              extremely low object contrast relative to the surroundings, a highly uneven and
              irregular surface topology, and significant variations in cellular attachments.
              The proposed segmentation approach consists of dividing the problem into three
              major tasks: 1) tubular structure enhancement; 2) tubular structure detection;
              and 3) tubular surface morphology reconstruction and detection of end
              structures. Towards the first task, a model-based filter is proposed that will
              enhance cylindrical structures while de-emphasizing the irrelevant structures.
              Towards the second task, a robust feature detection technique is proposed to
              localize the tubular portion of fibers. Towards the third task, a statistical
              local region growing technique is proposed that will grow the detected
              underlying cylinder in all directions to produce the surface morphology and
              internal discontinuities of the actual structure. 
	The proposed methods will
              have wide applicability to electron tomography and other forms of medical
              imaging. The alignment methods are completely general and the prevalence of
              microtubules and similar tubular or fibrous motifs in cellular and medical
              imaging ensures wide applicability of the segmentation methods. With
              appropriate modifications, the proposed segmentation methods could be adapted
              to membrane and vesicle geometries. By addressing the two bottleneck steps, the
              proposed methods have the potential to transform electron tomography into a
              powerful, routine tool for research and diagnostic investigations. These
              methods also have potential application to other medical imaging projects.
              Thus, this project is designed to enable electron tomography to realize its
              full potential for analysis of subcellular structure and function in the
              post-genomic era. This grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to
              Support Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology. This is a joint
              competition sponsored by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the
              National Science Foundation and the National Institute of General Medical
              Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of Health.

