Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research Project 'Particularistic' Liberalism: Industries,
               Institutions, and Influence in Liberal Market Economies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0241937

Award Number: 0241937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6765               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Lange plange@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Globalization's onset inspired predictions about convergence of capitalist
              economies to American-style liberalism.  Even dissenters agreed on liberalism's
              comparative advantages: fewer regulations, less particularistic policy making,
              and swift asset redeployment.  Ironically, however, this consensus has
              coincided with striking departures from laissez-faire in so-called liberal
              states. Neither the convergence school nor its critics can explain when and why
              the liberal market economies (LMEs) in the UK, the US, and Canada stray from
              laissez-faire.   
 
This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project
              posits that political institutions explain LMEs departures from liberalism and
              differences among the three countries policies.  First, party discipline,
              combined with ideology, conditions politicians. Incentives to adopt
              universalistic policies 
versus particularistic policies to benefit specific
              sectors.  Where party discipline is weak, particularism is greater than where
              it is strong.  Second, federalism leads to inter-state bids for mobile
              industries capable of making credible exit threats.   This research project
              employs evidence from interviews, quantitative analyses, and case studies, to
              investigate links between political institutions and industry policymaking. 
              National Science Foundation support improves this dissertation by funding
              interviews with actors and policymakers in three U.S industries: steel, autos,
              and pharmaceuticals.  Data will be collected on firm's policy preferences;
              lobbying and campaign contributions; and taxation, research and development,
              industry location, and industry consolidation policies.  This research
              contributes to the debate about globalization and domestic policy by
              systematically testing the relationship between political institutions and
              policy particularism. 

