Title       : Sequencing for Nitrogen Fixation: An Oral History Project on Rhizobial Research
               Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a0241349

Award Number: 0241349
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147574             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Fortun fortum@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study will document and analyze the recent history (1970-present) of
              symbiotic nitrogen fixation (SNF) research, conducting oral history and
              ethnographic interviews with leading scientists to map both the major
              scientific transformations that SNF research has undergone during this period,
              and the changing social, political, and economic context in which SNF research
              has been conducted. The study will also draw from participant observation at
              interdisciplinary conferences and a review of the primary scientific
              literature. The study will focus on research surrounding two economically and
              scientifically significant symbiotic associations, that of the soybean (Glycine
              max) with the bacterium B. phaseolus, and that of the model plant organism
              Medicago truncatula (a relative of alfalfa) with the bacterium S. meliloti. The
              historical and ethnographic study of the research activity and groups around
              these two symbiotic systems will illuminate key achievements and trends in the
              field of SNF research, and will provide rich empirical material for
              contributing to key thematic areas in the social studies of science literature.
              The study will also draw out the changing institutional and social context of
              SNF research, in a period shaped by the energy crisis of the 1970s, the promise
              of profitable agricultural biotechnology ventures in the 1980s, ecological
              concerns, and visions of sustainable agriculture and reduced reliance on
              synthetic fertilizers, for both the U.S. and the developing world. The study
              has two primary aims: To create new knowledge about the effects of
              technological change within the sciences, and within SNF research in
              particular; To create new knowledge about the political-economic,
              institutional, social and ethical dimensions of scientific research on nitrogen
              fixation. The study will result in presentations at conferences, journal
              articles, and a book   It will also contribute to existing literatures focused
              on the scientific and institutional effects of the diffusion of genomic
              technologies since the 1970s; on the importance of model organisms in the
              development of genetics research; on the history of theories of symbiosis; on
              changing modes of institutional support for science since the 1970s; on the
              shape and effect of interdisciplinary collaboration in the sciences; on the
              role of women in the sciences; and on the ethical thinking of scientists.


