Title       : Mechanical consequences of flexibility for benthic marine organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0241447

Award Number: 0241447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348026             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian P. Gaylord gaylord@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark W. Denny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mimi A. R. Koehl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Scientific context and intellectual merit: Mechanically flexible, benthic plants
              and animals are ubiquitous members of coastal communities in nearly all marine
              systems. Such organisms move passively in response to flow as water moves past
              them. However, the full effects of this motion, and in particular the way it
              influences an organism's vulnerability to flow-driven disturbance, is poorly
              understood. Traditionally, the view has been that a compliant construction
              enhances the ability of sessile plants or animals to cope structurally with
              time-varying water motion. However, more recent research has noted that passive
              movement in flow can also have subtler consequences. For instance, an attached
              organism that is swept back and forth by ocean waves acquires momentum, and
              this momentum can impose a subsequent inertial force when the mass of the
              organism is eventually decelerated upon reaching the limits of its range of
              motion. Such complexities emphasize the need for a more complete and consistent
              examination of the biomechanical and survivorship implications of flexibility
              for intertidal and subtidal organisms.  Without these further examinations,
              attempts to develop quantitative and mechanistic predictions of the mortality
              consequences of flow (long recognized as a dominant agent of disturbance and as
              a critical factor influencing population dynamics in these communities) will
              remain ineffective.  Meeting this need is the goal of the proposed
              study.

Research efforts will focus on measuring real-time forces applied to
              flexible organisms in the field and comparing those forces to quasi-static
              estimates based on hydrodynamic shape factors (drag coefficients determined
              previously for the same sample individuals) and simultaneously recorded flows. 
              Differences between actual and quasi-static time series of force will then be
              used to quantify the way in which the passive motion that intrinsically
              accompanies organism flexibility alters applied force.  Multiple sets of
              recordings will be conducted within three distinct fluid-dynamical "realms" on
              the shore (subtidal, submerged intertidal, and regions subjected to direct wave
              impingement where organisms are emergent between waves). Laminarian kelps,
              including the ecologically important Macrocystis pyrifera, Nereocystis
              luetkeana, Egregia menziesii, and Alaria marginata will be employed as focal
              species.

Results will be compiled and expressed in terms of underlying
              nondimensional parameters that together govern organismal dynamics across
              species and the three shoreline realms. Relationships among the nondimensional
              parameters will be examined quantitatively and synthesized overall to develop a
              general, coherent framework that defines how flexibility influences imposed
              force across a wide range of organisms living across a full spectrum of flow
              environments. This ensuing biomechanical framework will then be used to predict
              actual rates of flow-mediated mortality for kelps in the field as a function of
              the nondimensional parameters, and these predicted rates will be compared to
              the observed rates across tagged individuals of a spectrum of sizes, growing in
              a range of water depths and heights on the shore.

Broader impacts: The
              activities proposed here have important implications for predicting the
              response of critically important community players (Macrocystis provides
              necessary habitat for hundreds of coastal species, including many with economic
              and recreational value) to ongoing shifts in wave regimes due to global climate
              change. Biomechanical insights will also inform issues of coastal engineering
              where kelps affect nearshore currents and sediment transport, and the field of
              biomimetics. In addition, there are strong educational/partnership
              implications, since undergraduate and graduate assistants, both paid and
              volunteer, will be involved intimately in core experiments and analyses. Such
              opportunities will provide for rigorous, team research experiences that foster
              the scientific development of students early in their careers. Results of the
              project will be further conveyed to wider audiences via the incorporation of
              results into formal university courses, books written for the general
              scientific arena, and through existing ties with public-sector agencies. Basic
              intellectual exchange and discourse will be enhanced through a close
              collaboration that brings together scientists and labs from three
              institutions.

