Title       : Specialization, Inequality, and the Labor Market for Married Women
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0241148

Award Number: 0241148
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300910             (Estimated)
Investigator: Casey B. Mulligan c-mulligan@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Perhaps the most dramatic socioeconomic changes over the last century, and
              especially the last three decades, is the increasing presence of women in the
              labor market, the growing professional achievements of those women, and how
              most of the increase occurred among married women.  Over the past thirty years,
              growing (within-gender) wage inequality has also been a dramatic and important
              phenomenon.  Previous studies have modeled and measured inequality and female
              labor supply separately, even though the household specialization model implies
              a strong link between the two series.  Such a link is evident in a variety of
              time series and cross-section data, and further research on household
              specialization is important for a full understanding of both inequality and the
              female labor market.  
Since the vast majority of prime-aged women live with a
              husband, this project investigates the importance of family situations by
              exploring some of the important implications of the household "specialization"
              model, and the role in which the market wage structure plays in those models. 
              The investigator builds a simple mathematical model of household specialization
              and shows (a) how wage inequality can affect female labor participation, (b)
              why the wage structure is best understood in a family context, (c) why more
              wives should enter the labor force than husbands leave it, (d) why a married
              person's potential to be the primary family earner might be as an important
              predictor of behavior as his or her gender.  This approach is compared to other
              explanations of historical female labor trends.  New cross-section and
              longitudinal data sets are constructed for the use of other family researchers,
              and to further study the economics of specialization.  Specifically, Census
              Bureau individual-level data and Population surveys spanning the years
              1940-2001 are used to construct matched couples-level data sets with matched
              husband and wife labor market information. One of these data sets will feature
              repeated cross-sections, and the other repeated and overlapping two
              year-panels.  The project also uses the data to extend the Census Bureau's time
              series on the fraction of married women who are the primary earner in their
              family (a relevant statistic for the specialization model of labor supply, and
              other models of household decision-making), and to explore additional
              cross-sectional and longitudinal implications of the household specialization
              model.  By the end of the project, the investigator will have a full general
              equilibrium approach to the female labor market, endogenizing wages, fertility,
              life cycle profiles, and the composition of the married and single populations.
               This research may lead to some important and surprising conclusions. As a
              study of a major change in the labor force, our investigation will provide
              progress on general policy questions, like the determinants of aggregate
              employment and income, the effects of policies with the potential to distort
              the labor market, and the reasons why men and women have different labor market
              outcomes. 

