Title       : Collaborative Research: A Markov Chain Approach to Classical Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0241810

Award Number: 0241810
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135784             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor Chernozhukov vchern@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project develops the statistical properties of a class of new estimators,
              called quasi-Bayesian (QBE) or Laplacian estimators. These estimators are
              applicable to highly nonlinear classical M estimation problems, and to many
              non-smooth semiparametric estimation problems.  They use the latest development
              in Monte Carlo Markov Chain simulations in Bayesian statistics to overcome the
              computational difficulty of many nonlinear classical estimators. The results of
              this research project contribute to the understanding of computation and
              inference in general nonlinear econometric models. Computation and inference
              are two inseparable essential parts of any econometric model. The proposed
              estimators address both issues and can potentially be used extensively in
              empirical work. 
Many parametric and semiparametric estimators involve
              non-convex and nonsmooth objective functions. This not only makes proving large
              sample statistical properties difficult, but also makes the estimators
              difficult, if possible, to compute in practice. The first part of this project
              defines quasi-Bayesian estimators that aim at overcoming these two prominent
              issues, and studies their regular consistency and asymptotic normality
              properties. When the underlying objective function is an actual log likelihood
              function of the data, the QBEs reduce to the usual Bayesian approach. The
              second part studies the properties of likelihood based inferences, including
              Bayesian and maximum likelihood estimators, in a class of nonregular structural
              econometric models, in which the support of the dependent variable can depend
              on both the model parameters and the independent covariates. These models arise
              naturally in the context of structural auction models, empirical equilibrium
              job search models and frontier production analysis. This part of the project
              provides a unified treatment of likelihood based estimation and inference in
              these models. 
The first two parts apply to finite dimensional parameters. 
              The third part extends the quasi-Bayesian approach to estimate finite and
              infinite dimensional parameters simultaneously, in which the infinite
              dimensional parameter is approximated by a sieve space. The quasi-Bayesian
              estimator overcomes the computational obstacle of sieve semiparametric models. 
              The fourth project analyzes the properties of QBEs when the parameters are on
              the boundary of the parameter space, which can be defined through linear or
              nonlinear constraints on the parameters. While the properties of M estimators
              have been extensively analyzed in the literature, they do not share the
              optimality properties of M estimators when the parameter is in the interior of
              the parameter space. QBEs provide useful alternative optimal estimators, and
              enjoy tractable computational and inference properties. 
The fifth part
              focuses on the computational properties of QBEs and the implementation details
              for a range of specific problems. It studies convergence criteria that are used
              to monitor the computation of QBEs and improvements to the popular generic
              optimization algorithm simulated annealing, by replacing the generic Metropolis
              step with other Gibbs sampling algorithms. 
 

