Title       : Collaborative Research: States, Rates and the Fates of Federations: Provincial
               Politics and Fiscal Policy Around the World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0241523

Award Number: 0241523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99947              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan A. Rodden jrodden@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This investigation supports  the completion of a large data set that  makes it
              possible to conduct comparative analysis of provincial-level fiscal performance
              in federations around the world. In recent years, central governments in
              federations have devolved profound functional responsibilities to provincial
              governments. Concurrently, there has been renewed interest in federalism as a
              tool to solve issues of regional governance in settings as diverse as the
              European Union and South Africa. At the same time, a number of researchers of
              Russia, Brazil, and Argentina have noted a common pathology whereby federations
              generate incentives for provincial politicians to over-fish the common pool of
              revenue, overspend in the expectation of national bailouts, and expend
              resources on the sustenance of political machines. As a result, the comparative
              investigation of federalism has become a booming research program at the
              intersection of political science, economics, and policy studies as researchers
              attempt to answer questions about the driving forces behind government fiscal
              decisions and more broadly, the nature of accountability in multi-tiered
              systems of government.
Intellectual Merit: Current research on comparative
              federalism provides three justifications for the proposed research. First,
              while some researchers have begun to investigate the institutions that underpin
              divergent economic outcomes across federations, they have treated federations
              en toto. There is little recognition that provinces within federations vary
              dramatically in their incentives and behavior. Second, because of this
              shortcoming the field has little ground on which to generalize about the
              conditions under which provincial governments are able to serve a positive
              mediating role between an increasingly global economy and local citizens, as
              asserted by many proponents of federalism. Third, the vast majority of research
              on provincial fiscal policy focuses on the U.S. states, which are quite
              anomalous and provide a limited foundation for broader theorizing on provincial
              fiscal performance. Even where researchers have begun to address
              inter-provincial variations in fiscal policy elsewhere, none of this research
              has been explicitly comparative.   Method: In developing a comparative model of
              provincial fiscal behavior the researchers begin with four hypotheses culled
              from their own work and other recent theoretical and empirical literature: (1)
              Provinces more dependent on fiscal transfers from the central government are
              more likely to run larger deficits. (2) Under some conditions shared
              partisanship across levels of government generates incentives for budgetary
              restraint on the part of provincial governments. (3) Provincial institutions
              that increase the number of checks and balances on fiscal decision-makers
              foster overspending. (4) Provinces that lack competitive provincial party
              systems are more likely to run larger deficits. The investigators test whether
              these hypotheses are contingent on a variety of other characteristics of each
              country's fiscal and political system.  This collaborative research project
              requires the collection of comparable political, fiscal, macroeconomic, and
              demographic data on each provincial government in 18 federal systems from 1978
              through the late 1990s. To date with support from their respective
              universities, the researchers have collected much of the relevant data for
              Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Germany, India, Mexico, Nigeria,
              Pakistan, Switzerland, the United States, and Venezuela. The investigators seek
              support to complete the collection, coding, and organization of the remaining
              data, including the addition of Austria, Belgium, Malaysia, Russia, South
              Africa, and Spain. 
Broad Impact: The investigators will prepare a series of
              articles based on each of the research hypotheses above, eventually culminating
              in a book manuscript written for non-specialists.  The research has very
              important policy implications. Redesigning the basic structure of fiscal
              federalism to improve fiscal discipline is at the top of the reform agenda in
              many federations.especially those that have suffered severe macroeconomic
              consequences of dysfunctional federalism.  Moreover, the data set will be made
              available on the internet to other researchers, and has the potential to become
              an often-used data resources in comparative politics and economics. Examples of
              future uses include studies of political accountability in multi-tiered system,
              trends in inter-regional inequality, redistribution, and risk-sharing. 

