Title       : Characterization of SAR-Independent Pathogen Induced Defense in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0241272

Award Number: 0241272
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrence P. Delaney tpd4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1136,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plants employ an array of distinct inducible defense responses to prevent
              infection and to recover from disease. While a few of the pathways that
              regulate these defenses are known, such as systemic acquired resistance (SAR),
              other critically important systems have eluded discovery. The proposed research
              is aimed at elucidating a novel form of SAR-independent resistance (SIR)
              expressed in Arabidopsis son1 (suppressor of nim1-1) mutants, and at defining
              and testing genes whose expression is associated with SIR. Two of the three
              objectives are focused on study of the son1 mutant phenotype and on the SON1
              gene product, which was recently described (Kim and Delaney, 2002a). Because
              son1 plants express a novel form of resistance, it is essential that the
              resistance phenotype be fully described. Therefore, the defense signal
              transduction pathway requirements for son1-mediated resistance will be
              determined using double mutant analysis, the range of pathogen types
              susceptible to this resistance assessed, and the interactions between SAR and
              son1-mediated resistance evaluated (Objective 1). Investigations under
              Objective 2 will examine the SON1 protein itself, whose structure suggests it
              may be a component of an ubiquitin ligase complex that targets proteins for
              destruction. To assess whether SON1 plays this role, tests will be performed to
              determine whether SON1 interacts with core components of the ubiquitin ligase
              complex. Other work will seek to identify proteins targeted by SON1 that are
              hypothesized to act as positive regulators of SIR. The third objective of the
              project is to identify genes whose expression is altered in two genotypes of
              plants that express SIR; -son1 mutants and transgenic plants that were
              developed to overexpress the TGA5 transcription factor that interacts with the
              SAR-regulator NIM1 (Kim and Delaney, 2002b). The transcriptional profiles of
              son1 and TGA5-accumulating plants will be analyzed using oligonucleotide-based
              microarrays that include nearly all the Arabidopsis genes. By comparing gene
              expression in the two independently derived SIR-activated plants, the genes
              common to each will be evident. Some SIR-associated genes will be subjected to
              functional analysis to determine their role in SIR. The research described will
              yield important information on SIR expressed in son1 plants, provide insight
              into the regulation of SIR by SON1, provide molecular markers associated with
              SAR-independent resistance, and provide information that may lead to
              development of novel forms of disease control in crop plants. 

The research
              described has a number of broader impacts outside of its biological aspects.
              These include: thorough training of undergraduate and graduate students and a
              postdoctoral fellow, broadening participation in research of underrepresented
              groups, enhancing the infrastructure for research through the sharing of
              transcriptional profile data generated by this project; and the broad
              dissemination of knowledge through presentations at conferences by
              undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral personnel. The research can also be of
              general benefit to society by providing understanding of novel pathways that
              will enable creation of highly disease resistant crops, thus improving the
              economics of food production, and reducing the environmental impact and health
              consequences of currently used chemical disease control agents.




