Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Aging Conceptualizations and Personal
               Relationships of Mature Women and Primary Care Physicians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0241675

Award Number: 0241675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8239               (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Stansbury jstansbu@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0241675
Stansbury / Grant
Health care providers often share the widespread
              view that sexuality becomes less important as people age, particularly for
              those who are no longer married due to divorce, separation or widowhood. Many
              physicians appear to be reluctant to discuss these issues with their mid-life
              and older patients, which can be problematic not only for patients' health and
              well-being. A lack of knowledge can have serious consequences regarding
              clinical HIV prevention. Since the transmission trends of those age 50 and over
              with HIV/AIDS are beginning to mirror those of younger populations, with
              increases in heterosexual transmission as well as increasing percentages of
              women and minorities, additional understanding of the risky behavior of
              mid-life and older persons is important.  This dissertation research, by an
              anthropology graduate student studies how physicians and "recently single"
              (separated, divorced or widowed) women age 45-70 in a large, conservative
              Northeast Florida city conceptualize aging and sexuality. The information will
              be gathered through in-depth interviews with 60 women drawn from African
              American, Latina, and EuroAmerican populations. The project will use systematic
              data collection techniques (called cultural consensus analysis) to assess the
              cultural models of the respondents. 
The project will advance our
              understanding of how varying perceptions about patient-doctor communication
              might differ in such a way as to inhibit effective interaction. The broader
              impacts of this project include aiding the training of a young social
              scientist, and advancing our understanding of how "recently single" mature
              women (including Blacks, Whites and Latinos) deal with their sexual behavior in
              a medical context. The new knowledge should serve to aid in targeting safer-sex
              messages to hard-to-reach populations. The knowledge will be useful for public
              health campaigns, and will provide the basis for developing physician-training
              modules to address sexual health and clinical HIV prevention with mature women.
              In addition, the project builds on the work of other medical anthropologists
              studying health perceptions by combining qualitative and quantitative methods
              to explore variations in health beliefs. 


