Title       : Multidisciplinary Systems Assurance Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0241856

Award Number: 0241856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2519166            (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Older sueo@ecs.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steve J. Chapin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shiu-Kai Chin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart J. Thorson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth D. Liddy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1668      FED CYBER SERV: SCHLAR FOR SER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Faculty members at Syracuse University will offer 30 scholarships in
              Multidisciplinary Systems Assurance Education for graduate students. Systems
              assurance comprises the related areas of information assurance, computer
              security, and infrastructure protection.  With the continuing growth of
              computing and communication technology, and its increasing integration into
              almost all aspects of our society, systems assurance will play a vital role in
              the future of our nation. As this integration takes place, many issues not
              related to the core technology arise, issues of management, public policy, law,
              education, and ethics. For this reason, systems assurance is truly a
              multidisciplinary area of intellectual inquiry, and we are therefore providing
              a multidisciplinary, pan-University education program in systems assurance. 

              
The Center for Systems Assurance (CSA) at Syracuse is an NSA designated
              Center of Excellence in Information Assurance Education. We are expanding the
              CSA beyond the L. C. Smith College of Engineering and Computer Science (ECS) to
              include faculty from Information Studies (IST) and the Maxwell School of
              Citizenship and Public Affairs (Maxwell).  This expansion will be followed in
              later years by inclusion of additional IA-related areas, including law,
              philosophy, and education. 
 
The Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
              (EECS) department, within ECS, currently offers Masters degrees in Computer
              Science or Computer Engineering with a concentration in Systems Assurance. 
              Students in these courses take the core courses their major (three or four
              courses), a five-course concentration in a Systems Assurance technology core,
              and at least one elective from an allied area.  We propose to implement similar
              tracks in IST and Maxwell.  We will support students in ECS for the first year
              of the grant, and then support students from all three schools when their
              programs are on-line.  

