Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The "Give" and "Take" on Restaurant Tipping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0241935

Award Number: 0241935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11860              (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine C. Eckel eckelc@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9218,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Using both laboratory experiments and survey data collected from several
              Richmond, Virginia restaurants, this study explores various aspects of
              restaurant tipping, along with their implications for both the consumer (the
              "give") and the server (the "take").  Several consumer-side issues will be
              tackled.  For example, what impact does the size of the table have on a
              customer's incentive to tip?  Standard economic theory predicts an inverse
              relationship between tip size and table size, but does this relationship hold
              empirically?  Also, what impact does the composition of the table have on a
              customer's incentive to tip?  For example, do women tip more than men?  There
              is a good deal of research in economics that finds that women are more generous
              than men, but does this also hold true in a tipping situation, especially when
              men tip in the presence of women?  Finally, this study examines the recent
              (June 2002) Supreme Court ruling in United States v. Fior d'Italia, Inc., which
              allows the IRS to estimate a restaurant's tip income based on credit card
              receipts.  On the server side, this study investigates the effect of tip
              pooling, a method of server remuneration in which servers share all of their
              tips equally among each other, on server effort.  Is service under a standard
              tipping arrangement, whereby the server retains, for himself, all of his
              customers' tips, superior to service under a tip pooling arrangement?  Here,
              standard economic theory says that service under a standard tipping arrangement
              should exceed that under a tip pooling arrangement.   

The issues that are
              examined in this study have several important implications.  First, this study
              should help to explain why some restaurants add an automatic service charge
              onto bills at large tables, while others do not; secondly, it provides insight
              into why some restaurants are more likely than others to use tip pooling as
              their method of server remuneration.  Third, this study will provide evidence
              of the effect of the Supreme Court ruling in United States v. Fior d'Italia,
              Inc., which allows the IRS to estimate a restaurant's tip income based on
              credit card receipts.  A statement by the National Restaurant Association said
              that "Seven out of 10 restaurants are small businesses, many of which operate
              with slim margins.  Quite frankly, this decision could mean the difference
              between a restaurant staying in business or closing its doors."  Finally, there
              is a fairly sizeable literature in economics on sex differences, which analyzes
              both whether, and why, men behave differently than women.   This study will add
              to that literature by exploring sex differences in tipping behavior.   



