Title       : Statistical and Computational Approaches for Integrated Genomics and Proteomics
               Analysis and Their Applications to Modeling G1/S Transition During Yeast Cell
               Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0241160

Award Number: 0241160
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Hongyu Zhao hongyu.zhao@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark B. Gerstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin H. Schultz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael P. Snyder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Advances in technologies are changing the field of biology to move beyond
              genomes to transcriptomes, proteomes and metabolomes.  It has become clear that
              the combination of predictive modeling with systematic experimental
              verification will be required to gain a deeper insight into living organisms,
              therapeutic targeting and bioengineering.  Although the importance of
              integrating various types of biological data to address scientific questions is
              well recognized and appreciated, the potential information carried in different
              types of data may not be fully realized without a sound and comprehensive
              statistical framework to integrate these data.  In addition, close
              collaborations among statisticians, biologists, bioinformaticians, and computer
              scientists are essential to ensure that these statistical methods provide a
              reasonable description of the biological processes studied and the validity of
              these methods should be rigorously tested through biological experiments.  In
              this project, a team of researchers with expertise in statistics, genomics and
              proteomics, bioinformatics, and computer science will develop an integrated
              approach to reconstructing biological pathways.  Statistical and computational
              methods will be developed to better identify transcription factor targets, to
              integrate yeast two-hybrid data, protein complex data, protein localization
              data, and gene expression data to infer protein interaction networks, and to
              further integrate DNA- protein binding data to reconstruct transcriptional
              regulatory networks.  This project focuses on the G1/S transition during the
              yeast cell cycle to statistically model and experimentally validate inferred
              regulatory networks.  In addition, parallel computing methods will be developed
              to overcome the computing bottleneck in the analysis of large-scale networks. 
              The resources generated from this project, both computer programs and network
              information will be made available to the scientific community.  It is
              anticipated that this project will lead to a statistical framework that can be
              utilized to dissect biological pathways and also will lead to an approach to
              integrating expertise from diverse disciplines to address important scientific
              problems in the post-genome era.
With recent progresses in biotechnologies, it
              has become reality to collect tens of thousands of gene expression and protein
              expression levels in humans and other organisms.  In addition, scientists now
              are able to monitor interactions among proteins and interactions between
              proteins and DNA sequences, to investigate the location that each gene is
              expressed, and to study the overall effects on the whole organism of individual
              genes through large collections of mutation strains.  The availability of such
              data has led to a revolution in biological and biomedical sciences.  Although
              there is a great potential and an enormous amount of information in these data,
              the major challenge is how to best integrate, analyze, and interpret these data
              to understand biological pathways.  In this project, statistical and
              computational methods will be developed to integrate various types of data in
              an effort to reconstruct biological pathways with a focus on the understanding
              of gene regulations in cell cycle.  The statistical models to be developed will
              be validated with biological experiments.  Computer programs will be developed
              and distributed to the scientific community after extensive testing to allow
              biologists and medical researchers to use these tools to study other biological
              pathways.  This project will also develop high-performance computing approaches
              to implementing the developed methods and will involve training activities in
              the general area of computational biology and bioinformatics. This grant is
              made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support Research Grants in the
              Area of Mathematical Biology. This is a joint competition sponsored by the
              Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the National Science Foundation and
              the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the National
              Institutes of Health.  

