Title       : GOALI: Low-Order Dynamic Modeling and Nonlinear Model Predictive Control of
               Cryogenic Gas Separation Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a0241211

Award Number: 0241211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251670             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Henson henson@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence Megan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This NSF GOALI project is a joint effort between the University of
              Massachusetts/Amherst and Praxair aimed at the development and implementation
              of nonlinear model predictive control (NMPC) technology for cryogenic air
              separation plants.  The planned methodology involves the construction of
              low-order distillation column models based on nonlinear wave theory.  The wave
              modeling approach will be applied to the problem of triple column plant used to
              separate nitrogen, oxygen and argon.  The low-order models will be compared to
              a rigorous cryogenic plant simulator developed using the Aspen Technology suite
              of dynamic simulation tools.  The nonlinear wave-modeling framework will be
              used to develop NMPC technology specifically designed for cryogenic air
              separation plants.  The planned control strategy will be evaluated utilizing
              the Aspen simulator as a surrogate for an actual cryogenic separation plant. 
              The project will culminate with the implementation of the triple column NMPC
              controller at the Praxair Laporte, Texas plant site.

Cryogenic gas
              separation plants produce large quantities of liquid and/or gaseous products
              for the chemical and steel manufacturing industries.  Domestic consumption of
              electricity by industrial gas producers is estimated to be over $700 million
              per year.  Continued deregulation of the electric utility industry will lead to
              more frequent and unpredictable changes in electricity costs.  This will
              dictate fundamental changes in the operating philosophy of gas separation
              plants.  Large production rate changes and more frequent startups/shutdowns
              will be required to take full advantage of time-varying utility costs. 
              Consequently, small improvements in automatic process control have the
              potential for substantial economic benefits.  Preliminary economic analysis for
              a representative plant indicates that the proposed control technology has the
              potential to recover $120,000/year of products lost during startups.  The
              research will provide Praxair with a control system prototype for the 60
              cryogenic air separation plants in the United States and will provide impetus
              for other domestic gas suppliers to implement nonlinear control technology.

