Title       : Will Stronger Intellectual Property Rights Increase International Technology
               Transfer? Empirical Evidence from U.S. Firm-Level Panel Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0241781

Award Number: 0241781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124417             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee G. Branstetter lgb2001@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fritz Foley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond Fisman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Despite the dedicated efforts of many respected scholars over the last 20 years,
              the international impact of intellectual property rights (IPR) remains an
              understudied area within international economics.  The proposed study will take
              a novel approach to the analysis of the impact of changing IPR regimes on
              innovation and international technology transfer.  Over the past two decades, a
              number of countries undertook extensive unilateral reform of their IPR systems,
              often in response to diplomatic pressure from the United States or other major
              trading partners.  By employing data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis's
              survey of U.S. multinational activity, this study will be able to examine the
              responses of individual multinational enterprises to a series of these
              reasonably well-documented recent IPR regime changes.  The use of firm-level
              data on exports, investment, affiliate sales, and, especially, technology
              transfer abroad provides the authors with a number of dimensions of variation
              within which we can explore these issues.  In principle, one can observe the
              same firm responding to various kinds of IPR reform in different countries,
              allowing for much better measurement the differential impact of national
              characteristics and particular aspects of patent reform on the variables of
              interest.  This wealth of data will allow this study to avoid many of the
              problems that have plagued previous efforts.  

This improved empirical
              approach has the potential to deepen understanding of the effects of IPR on
              firm-level decisions and further inform the current policy debate over the
              manner in which recent and highly controversial international treaties on
              intellectual property rights should be implemented.  The most significant of
              these treaties, The TRIPs (Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
              Rights) Agreement, concluded in the 1990s, requires a large number of
              developing countries to strengthen their patent and other intellectual property
              rights (IPR) systems.  While some signatory states still have several years to
              fully comply with the terms of TRIPs, there is already sharp disagreement
              between developing and developed nations concerning the impact of TRIPs.  Many
              policymakers in developing nations believe that the policy changes mandated by
              TRIPs will work against their national economic interests, transferring rents
              to multinational corporate patentholders headquartered in the world's most
              advanced countries, especially the United States.  Advocates for strong IPR
              counter that strengthening IPR in developing countries will induce more
              innovation, both in the developing world and in the developed world, fostering
              more rapid economic growth.  These advocates also believe that a strengthening
              of IPR will accelerate the transfer of technology from the developed world to
              the developing world, ensuring a relatively equal distribution of gains from
              this policy change.  As important as this debate is, the competing claims of
              the opposing sides have been insufficiently grounded in empirical research.  By
              examining the response of multinational firms to international IPR agreements
              that predated TRIPs, this study will provide invaluable evidence to guide the
              ongoing international policy debate.


