Title       : Regulation of Microtubule-Dependent Motility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9513388

Award Number: 9513388
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Gelfand vgelfand@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513388  Gelfand    The ultimate goal of this study is to understand how
              organelle transport along microtubules is regulated.  To answer this question,
              a cloned immortalized cell line of Xenopus melanophores will be used.  The
              unique properties of these cells make them especially attractive for the
              proposed study.  First, unlike most other systems, where physiological stimuli
              triggering the movement of organelles are poorly understood, movement of
              thousands of pigment granules called melanosomes can easily be manipulated by
              the addition of the appropriate hormones to the culture medium.  Second,
              melanosome proteins represent about 10% of the total cellular protein. 
              Availability of a large number of cells grown in culture and the development of
              a simple protocol for melanosome purification makes it the system of choice for
              purification and characterization of the components involved in the motility
              and for the reconstitution of regulated motility along microtubules in vitro. 
              Third, phosphorylation of specific sets of proteins during pigment aggregation
              and dispersion in melanophores has been documented.  Fourth, Xenopus
              melanophores can be effectively transfected with exogenous DNA.  Thus, using
              cloned genes that encode proteins that are targets for phosphorylation, the
              function role of phosphorylation can be analyzed in transgenic cells.  The
              proposed studies will identify motor proteins that drive anterograde and
              retrograde movement of organelles in melanophores and in a cell-free system. 
              Modifications of the motors or other organelle proteins that are associated
              with the switch in the polarity of these transport processes will be identified
              and the genes for proteins undergoing modification will be cloned and
              sequenced.  The functional role of the modifications will be determined by
              site-directed mutagenesis and the analysis of the phosphorylation state and
              activities of the modified proteins in vitro and in vivo.      The potential
              significance of this project extends well beyond the speci fic question of
              melanosome movement, because similar control mechanisms are likely to operate
              during mitosis, secretion, axoplasmic transport and the beating of cilia and
              flagella.  Thus, understanding the regulation of melanosome movement will
              significantly enhance our knowledge of microtubules work, and will be relevant
              to a broad range of studies of fundamental aspects of cellular function and
              malfunction.  ***
