Title       : Cytokinesis in Aspergillus Nidulans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1996     
File        : a9513489

Award Number: 9513489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Harris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Conn Health Center
	      263 Farmington Ave.
	      Farmington, CT  060302806    860/679-3173

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Harris  9513489  Cytokinesis is a fundamental cellular process subject to both
              spatial and temporal controls.  Specifically, a plane of cell division must be
              specified and the components necessary for cytokinesis recruited to the
              incipient division site.  Furthermore, cytokinesis must be temporally
              co-ordinated with nuclear division.  Progress towards understanding the
              molecular mechanisms underlying cytokinesis has been hampered by the lack of a
              complete inventory of the components required for the process.  The overall
              goal of our research is to help rectify this problem by exploiting the
              genetically tractable filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans to identify and
              characterize proteins required for cytokinesis.  Two such gene products, sepA
              and sepB, were identified as a result of previous genetic screens.  Molecular
              characterization of the genes encoding these proteins has provided valuable
              clues about their functional role in cytokinesis.  In particular, the sepB gene
              product appears to serve as an upstream component of a regulatory system which
              maintains the co-ordination of septum formation and nuclear division, whereas
              the sepA gene product may be a component of a cortically localized complex of
              proteins which directs actin polymerization at the division site.  Our research
              will address these hypotheses by using a variety of approaches to determine the
              sub-cellular location of the sepA and sepB gene products.  In addition, genetic
              screens will be used to enhance our understanding of sepA and sepB function by
              identifying the proteins with which they interact.  A better understanding of
              the basic mechanisms controlling cell division will be achieved as a result of
              this research.  Furthermore, filamentous fungi have a pronounced impact upon
              human affairs.  Thus, learning how fungal cells grow and divide should have
              numerous practical benefits.  For example, it will provide information which
              can be used to combat fungal infection of plants, animals, and humans.  In
              addition, it will allow fu ngi to be utilized more efficiently for the
              production of important food and industrial compounds.
