Title       : Phagocytosis in Dictyostelium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1999     
File        : a9513628

Award Number: 9513628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311395             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine P. Chia cchia@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              95-13628  Chia    A major goal in membrane biology is to understand how
              transmembrane signals trigger rearrangements of the cytoskeleton that effect
              cell movement and changes in cell shape. Phagocytosis, a specialized form of
              receptor-mediated endocytosis, is the dominant host defense mechanism in
              vertebrates and in invertebrates as well as a feeding mechanism in most
              primitive organisms. The long term goals of this project are to understand how
              phagocytosis receptors are linked to the cytoskeleton in Dictyostelium
              discoideum in order to gain insights into the membrane-cytoskeletal
              interactions that occur during phagocytosis. A 150 kilodalton, plasma membrane
              glycoprotein, gp150, is a putative phagocytosis receptor in D. discoideum. When
              cells are grown in the presence of bacteria, gp150 is associated with
              detergent-insoluble cytoskeleton and is found in phagosome vesicles. In
              contrast, in axenically-grown cells, gp150 is largely detergent-soluble. To
              gain insights into the role of gp150 in phagocytosis, the gene that encode for
              gp150 will be cloned and sequenced and molecules that link gp150 to the
              cytoskeleton will be identified. Antibodies directed against gp150 will be
              generated and used to localize gp150 in situ in axenically- and
              bacterially-grown cells. Using established gene disruption techniques, the gene
              encoding gp150 will be disrupted to generate cell lines deficient in gp150. The
              phenotypes of the mutant cells will be characterized. The primary structure of
              gp150 will provide insights into putative functional domains that will guide
              future experiments that will be focused on the signaling mechanisms of
              endocytosis and of phagocytosis. To detect molecules that link gp150 to the
              cytoskeleton, antibodies against gp150 will be used in immunoprecipitation and
              in crosslinking studies with whole cells and with phagosomes isolated from
              cells fed latex beads. These studies will be conducted with axenically- and
              with bacterially-grown cells. These studies should provide insights into the
              role  of gp150 in phagocytosis as well as providing a contribution toward
              understanding the regulation of cytoskeletal-based activities such as cell
              motility, cell-cell adhesion and cell substrate adhesion, activities that are
              fundamental to tissue and organ development.  %%%  A major goal in cell biology
              is to understand how transmembrane signaling events trigger restructuring of
              the cytoskeleton which in turn effect cell movement as well as cell morphology.
              Phagocytosis, a specialized form of receptor-mediated endocytosis, acts as a
              host defense mechanism in vertebrates and in invertebrates as well as a feeding
              mechanism in most primitive organisms. Little is known about how receptors that
              are involved in phagocytosis are linked to the cytoskeleton. This project aims
              at identifying molecules that link plasma membrane receptors to the
              cytoskeleton.  ***
