Title       : An Instrument Combining Computerized 3D Plant Photogrammetry With Automated
               Physiological Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9513549

Award Number: 9513549
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334186             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Welch welchsm@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay M. Ham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan K. Knapp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. B. Kirkham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Naiqian Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              There is an extensive history of measuring plant  photosynthetic processes and
              water relations. However, a  major impediment has been the impossibility of
              actually  determining the light distribution over the entire surface  of a
              particular plant during a physiological experiment;  plant geometry is just too
              complex. While much useful  information has been obtained in spite of this,
              other,  important questions have gone begging. Information of this  type would
              contribute to the understanding of (1) the  partitioning of biomass among plant
              components and its  relationship to photosynthesis; (2) examination of subtle 
              morphological differences between species and subspecies;  (3) influence of
              photobiology on morphology and phenology  (e.g., elongation, heliotropism); (4)
              plant morphological  responses to chemical and environmental factors (e.g.,
              water  stress, temperature, and CO2); and many others.    This project seeks to
              develop a laboratory instrument  capable of measuring transient photosynthetic
              and  transpiration rates of a plant while simultaneously  determining the
              complete 3D structure of its canopy. The  instrument will combine elements of
              machine vision and  stereophotogrammetry with traditional methods of gas 
              exchange monitoring and online sap flow measurement.    The basic design will
              involve a gas tight, transparent  chamber containing the experimental plant
              with connections  to CO2/H2O gas analyzers. Sap flow sensors will be attached 
              to the plant. All outputs will be monitored by  microcomputer. Illumination
              will be controlled and the  plants will be photographed at various angles by a 
              robotically operated camera. Machine vision techniques will  be used to
              separate the plant from the background and then  segment it into leaves, stems,
              etc. Multiple images will be  combined through stereophotogrammetry to obtain a
              solid, 3D  computer model of the plant. The plant surface illumination 
              distribution can then be calculated using standard radiosity  imaging software.
                 Given the num ber of plant scientists who make laboratory  measurements of
              photosynthesis and transpiration, there is a  large potential audience for this
              device. There is also good  reason for confidence that the effort will be
              successful.  One PI has already developed a stereophotogrammetry system  which
              computes and images 3D plant models from manually  digitized photos. The team
              also includes machine vision  expertise and examples of segmenting digital
              plant images  exists in the literature. The physiological techniques are  well
              established and three PI's are versed in their use.  Team members also have
              experience with data acquisition  system design and general engineering.
              Finally, appropriate  radiosity codes are available in the public domain.
