Title       : Ecophysiology and Phylogeny of Diverse Beggiatoa Species, Bacterial Specialists
               of the Sulfide-Oxygen Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1996   
File        : a9513962

Award Number: 9513962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237837             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas C. Nelson dcnelson@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1319,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9513962  Nelson    The  surfaces of a variety of marine sediments are dominated 
              by  colorless  sulfur bacteria of the genera  Thioploca  and  Beggiatoa.  
              Although few of these bacteria have been  grown  in  pure culture, the best
              characterized representatives can  multiply at the oxic-anoxic interface where
              there are  steep  gradients of hydrogen sulfide and oxygen, which can serve as 
              their oxidizable substrate and oxidant, respectively.  There  is   emerging  
              evidence  that  these  bacteria   are   also  autotrophs,  i.e.  they can
              synthesize their  cell  material  starting  with  carbon dioxide as their sole
              carbon  source.  In some environments with little or no available oxygen, the 
              dominant  representatives of these  bacteria  are  extremely  large  and  they 
              contain a membrane-bound central  vacuole,  comprising  roughly 80% of cell
              volume. These are  the  only  bacteria  for  which this structure has been 
              reported.   In  dense  samples  from  three different  locations,  vacuolate 
              Beggiatoa  and Thioploca were very recently demonstrated  to  contain nitrate
              in concentrations 10,000-fold higher than in  their  surrounding habitat.  This
              proposal  postulates  that  these  bacteria  use  this internal nitrate  as  a 
              terminal  electron acceptor facilitating their respiration of  soluble  sulfide
               and/or organic compounds.  Proposed studies include  microelectrode  and
              chemical gradient analysis  of  in  situ  consumption rates of potential
              electron donors (sulfide  and  organics)  and  electron  acceptors  (nitrate 
              and  oxygen).  Assays of diagnostic enzymes and studies using radiolabelled 
              organic  and inorganic carbon compounds will help  elucidate  the  relative
              roles of these compounds in their  metabolism.  Studies  of  the  time-course 
              of  utilization  of  internal  nitrate  and  the resultant products, coupled 
              with  various  enzyme assays, will measure the capacity these bacteria have 
              for  denitrification.  Additionally, using pure cultures  in  spatially 
              structured cultu re media the  relative  rates  by  which  these bacteria use
              organic and inorganic  energy  and  carbon  sources  sill be assessed.
              Vacuolate  Beggiatoa  are  proposed  as  a  model  of  an important  link 
              between  the  vigorous sulfur cycle of eutrophic marine sediments and  the 
              nitrogen  cycle.   If  they  and  Thioploca  prove   to   be  denitrifiers, 
              they  will  be  the  first   example  of   an  ecologically dominant bacterium
              capable of removing combined  nitrogen from a marine ecosystem.
