Title       : Microfabricated Thermoelectric Probes and Probe Arrays for Highly Localized
               Temperature Sensing and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1997     
File        : a9513622

Award Number: 9513622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wanjun Wang wang@me.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael C. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                   Individual  probes  and  arrays  of  probes
               which  take  advantage  of  thermoelectric  principles to measure and modulate
              temperature on the cellular level  will be microfabricated with the LIGA
              process. The LIGA process is a  German-developed process which combines x-ray 
              lithograpy,electrodeposition, and plastic molding. Within the arrays,  probes
              for temperature measurement and temperature modulation will be  interspersed
              according to the requirements for a specific process, and  all probes will be
              individually addressable. The devices will give the  biologist or bioengineer
              highly localized control of the temperature  over large areas, or monitor 
              temperatures at many locations in the same volume. In addition to being 
              independent  instruments for thermal and energetic studies of biological
              systems,  the probes and probe arrays can become basic components in
              instruments  requiring fine thermal control to assist in other investigations. 
                Thermoelectric  probes for temperature measurement  are  based  on  the 
              Seebeck effect, and in the form of thermocouples are common sensor. The  new
              development in this proposal will be the microfabrication of arrays  of 
              thermocouples  at  the cellular level or  over  a  broad  range  of  dimensions
                above  that.  Probes  and  probe  arrays  for  temperature  modulation  based
              on the Peltier effect will also be a new develcpment.  Prior   applications  
              of  thermoelectric  heating   and   cooling   in  microsystems  have been
              limited by material issues.  Materials  with  a  suitable  figure  of merit for
              use in Peltier effect  elements  include  bismuth  and its alloys, which can be
              electrodeposited as one  step  in  the LIGA process, overcoming those
              constraints. By taking advantage  of  the  high  aspect  ratio 
              microfabrication  capabilities  of  the  LIGA  process,  probes  combining 
              Peltier and Seebeck  capabilities  can  be  produced.    The  principal
              investigators and their collaborators are members of the   LSU  Microsystems
              Engineering Team (IlSET), which is one of the leading  groups in LIGA process
              microfabrication in the United States. The  team  has  the use of the
              synchrotron x-ray source at the Center for Advanced  Microstructures  and 
              Devices (CAMD) at LSU,  which  is  currently  the  premiere  x-ray  lithography
              facility in the world.  In  related  work,  IlSET  investigators have produced
              arrays of scanning probe  microscope  (SPM) tips with initial diameters as
              small as 2 micrometers and heights  up  to  15  micrometers. With the LIGA
              microfabrication process  probes  with  extremely high aspect ratios may be
              fabricated with single layers  as  deep  as  one  millimeter.  The  spacing 
              and  arrangement  of  the  thermocouples on a substrate will be a design
              variable open  to  change  with each application.    The proposed instruments
              will give biologists and bioengineers powerful  new  tools  for  studying  and 
              manipulating  cellular  systems.  Three  representative  areas  of  application
               are:  (1  )  Cryobiology,   (2)  Neuroscience, (3) Metabolic studies of
              cellular systems. The  Pls  have  contacted and discussed applications and
              possible collaboration in  the  first   two  areas  with  investigators  in 
              those  fields.  Additional  relationships  will be developed as the design and
              fabrication  of  the  probes progresses.
