Title       : Development of a Field-Portable Omnidirectional Video System to Quantify
               Three-Dimensional Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1998  
File        : a9513651

Award Number: 9513651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Stevenson robert.stevenson@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              To study motion in natural settings, especially out of doors, a  battery-powered
              weather proof two-camera video system and computer  analysis system are
              developed. In the data collection system each  camera is oriented and focused
              by a human operator. The cameras will be  able to pan and zoom so that a
              subject can be easily followed. Other  systems designed to study  biological
              motion require that the orientation of the cameras be fixed,  but here the pan
              and tilt angles measured by two optical shaft encoders  (resolution 0.036
              degrees) and zoom factor (measured by a linear shaft  encoder) are stored at
              video frame rates (30 Hz) on the image in bar  code. The two video images are
              synchronized in time by genlocking the  cameras and mixing the same SMPTE time
              code with each video signal.        The image processing system is consists of
              a RISC workstation  that runs software to decode the pan and tilt angles of the
              cameras and  the time code. In addition, the software can compute the pixel 
              coordinates of the center of mass of multiple objects in each video  frame. The
              object recognition software was designed by Dr. Jack  Sanders-Reed of SVS Inc.
              and was originally used at weapons test  ranges. It features modules for pixel
              processing, background clutter  suppression, object detect and description, and
              frame to frame  tracking.        The camera angles and pixel coordinates of the
              center of mass of  the objects from both cameras are used to compute the
              position of the  objects in three-dimensional space as a function of time. From
              this  basic information other important performance characteristics such as 
              velocity, acceleration and turning radius and the distance between  different
              objects can be computed. The new image analysis techniques  will help automate
              the processing of video images, which if done  manually is a time intensive
              activity.        A series of collaborative experiments with 15 other scientists
              is  designed to test the usefulness and versatility of the system for the 
              study of a nimal locomotion, animal behavior and conservation biology  under
              field conditions. This instrumentation greatly increases our  ability to
              quantify motion and behavior outdoors. It will provide  flexibility in data
              gathering and power for image analysis that no  commercial motion analysis
              system can match.
