Title       : Flow Cytometry: Digital Processing of Molecular Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1996   
File        : a9513602

Award Number: 9513602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Galbraith galbraith@arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey J. Rodriguez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     This project involves the design, implementation, and evaluation  of flow
              cytometric instrumentation and operating procedures for use in  the
              cytoenzymological and histochemical analysis of eukaryotic cells.  It is
              divided into two subprojects. The first involves the development  of a
              second-generation digital data acquisition and pulse processing  system for the
              real-time analysis and sorting of cells based on pulse  shape features. The
              second subproject involves the development of novel  gene expression systems
              for use in the molecular and cellular analysis  in flow of transgenic
              eukaryotic cells. We then intend to employ these  techniques for the selection
              through flow sorting of transformed plant  nuclei according to the level of
              transgene expression, ultimately  directed at the construction of cDNA
              libraries representing the  developmentally-regulated genes of tissues that are
               microscopically-small.       The significance of this work is as follows. In
              the first case, our  previous work has shown that important information about
              eukaryotic  cells is contained within the waveform shapes produced by these
              cells  produced when they are subjected to analysis using flow cytometry. 
              Present flow cytometric instrumentation cannot extract this shape-based 
              information. The capability of the proposed second generation machine  to
              analyze and sort cells based on pulse shape information will provide  important
              knowledge about cellular substructure. This will lead to  improved
              understanding of the basic cellular biology of living cells.  In the second
              case, the ability of scientists to analyze the expression  of genes within
              different cell types is hampered when these cells are  interspersed within
              other cell types. The molecular methods proposed in  this project should
              provide general means for isolation of transcripts  from any desired cell type.
              This should greatly facilitate advances in  the study of developmental- and
              cell type-specific gene expression.
