Title       : Role of DNA Binding Linked Protein-Protein Interactions in Gene Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9513661

Award Number: 9513661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald F. Senear dfsenear@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513661  Senear  Sequence specific binding of regulatory proteins to unique DNA
              sites is the basis for regulation of transcriptional initiation.  These studies
              are involved with the roles of protein-protein interactions in mediating these
              processes.  One aim is to determine how dimer self-assembly and coupled
              interactions mediate DNA binding cooperativity.  Dimers can self-assemble in
              solution to form octamers as the immediate product.  Tetramers, the species
              long believed to mediate pairwise cooperativity, are minor intermediates in a
              concerted reaction.  Therefore, coupled interactions are responsible for
              selecting a minor component of the solution species distribution as a major
              component of the DNA-bound distribution, hence as critical to regulation.  By
              investigating the thermodynamic cycles that couple repressor self-assembly to
              operator binding, one can  determine what solution assembly contributes to
              cooperativity and what protein and DNA mediated coupling contribute.  A second
              aim addresses how protein-protein interactions contribute to differential
              affinity of repressor dimers for the three OR operator sites.  It is now well
              established that the separate subunits that bind the two halves of the
              pseudo-palindromic operators do not interact independently with DNA.  Coupling
              between the individual subunit-half site interactions involves both repressor
              and DNA conformational changes.  Correlating structural and chemical changes
              resulting in the dimer interface with effects on dimer stability and operator
              binding specificity will lead to an understanding of the mechanisms of
              inter-subunit communication and protein structural changes that contribute to
              differential operator affinity.  ***
