Title       : Two-Photon Circular Dichroism Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1996      
File        : a9513707

Award Number: 9513707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64101              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce S. Hudson   (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Alavi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Two-photon circular dichroism (TPCD), the differential absorption of  two left
              circularly polarized photons vs. two right circularly  polarized photons, was
              first discussed theoretically by Tinoco (1975)  and by Power (1975). This
              technique, which is theoretically similar to  Raman optical activity, has not
              yet been demonstrated experimentally  although the related TP-ORD effect has
              been demonstrated (Gedanken &  Tamir, 1987). We propose to construct a TPCD
              spectrometer based on  recently developed commercially available Ti:sapphire
              femtosecond laser  technology using the very sensitive transient thermal
              grating detection  method. Our primary area of interest is the secondary
              structure of  proteins. Given the lack of fluorescence of such proteins, this 
              application dictates a direct absorption or thermally based methodology  for
              detection of the TPCD signal. TPCD offers several potential  advantages as a
              method complimentary to conventional circular dichroism  (CD) for the
              determination of protein secondary structure and detection  of subtle
              conformational changes. These are (1 ) a new, linearly  independent data set is
              provided potentially permitting a unique  determination of secondary structure,
              (2) the TPCD spectrum extending  from 300 to 600 nm covers electronic excited
              states corresponding in  one-photon energy to 150 to 300 nm thus extending the
              range of the  excitations to higher energy and covering the expected higher
              exciton  components of the a-helix, (3) there are three independent TPCD
              spectra  (for two-photons of the same frequency and randomly oriented samples) 
              proving independent information. The spectrometer to be constructed is  based
              on high-repetition rate (1 kHz) femtosecond laser technology. The  detection of
              the two-photon CD signal will be based on the differential  transient thermal
              grating method. This method has been recently shown  to provide a very
              sensitive method for CD measurements and has  previously been shown to be a
              very sensitive method for performing  two-p hoton absorption measurements. Our
              proposal is to combine these  two capabilities to provide new two-photon CD
              information. A detailed  signal to noise calculation based on prior two-photon
              measurements  using this grating method and a reliable estimate of the expected
               differential two-photon cross section shows that excellent signal to  noise
              will be achieved.
