Title       : Mechanism of Flagellar Rotation in Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1997  
File        : a9513486

Award Number: 9513486
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269180             (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Blair blair@bioscience.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9181,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9513486  Blair    Many species of bacteria are propelled by reversible rotary 
              motors that derive the energy for rotation from the proton gradient across the
              cell membrane.  The rotary motor is thus a transducer that converts chemical
              energy into mechanical energy, with very high efficiency.  Among the many
              proteins needed to assemble and operate these motors, only a few have been
              suggest to function directly in torque generation.  These include MotA and
              MotB, which form a proton channel across the cell membrane, and FliG, FliM and
              FliN, whose precise functions are not known.  Recent work has shown that FliG,
              FliM, and FliN form a complex that can be detected in vitro, and that FliG is
              extensively involved in the process of torque generation whereas FliM and FliN
              are not.  Further, a relatively small domain at the C-terminus of FliG was
              shown to function specifically and extensively in torque generation.  Continued
              progress in understanding the mechanism of flagellar rotation in bacteria will
              require that the interactions among the FliG, FliM, and FliN proteins will be
              mapped using linker-scanning mutagenesis coupled with existing binding assays. 
              The FliG C-terminal domain will be characterized by intensive mutational
              studies, and it will be purified and characterized in preparation for
              structural studies.  The locations of these proteins in the flagellum is known
              only approximately.  To locate the proteins and certain protein domains of
              interest more precisely, molecular genetic approaches will be used to
              underexpress the proteins, express subdomains of the proteins, or express forms
              that can be specifically labeled with an electron-dense probe, and the
              resulting flagellar structures will be examined in the electron microscope. 
              The ultimate goal of these studies is to understand, at the molecular level,
              how the flagellar motor converts chemical energy into mechanical energy.  The
              proposed studies will achieve significant progress toward that goal by
              clarifying the arrangement and function of  the key protein components. 
              Understanding mechanisms of energy conversion, particularly those that involve
              proton movements, is a central concern in bioenergetics.  Also,  this example
              of a biomolecular machine may be a useful model for nanofabrication engineering
              of nanoscale motors or switches.  ***
