Title       : The Oxidative Stress Response in Non-Enteric Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1997     
File        : a9513706

Award Number: 9513706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard M. Steinman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva U Albert Einstein
	      500 West 185th Street
	      Bronx, NY  104587809    /   -

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513706  Steinman  In this work the oxidative stress response of two non-enteric
              bacteria will be studied.  Caulobacter. crescentus is adapted to survive in
              nutrient-poor environments and entrance into and out of stationary phase is
              likely an important part of its life cycle. However, little is known about
              stationary phase in this bacterial species. The role of CuZn superoxide
              dismutase and catalase/peroxidase in the stationary phase response will be
              established. The gene for the catalase/peroxidase will be cloned, and a null
              mutant constructed and characterized with respect to oxidative and other
              stresses in various growth stages. Hybridization will be used to determine if
              C. crescentus contains an rpoS homologue. If present, the gene will be cloned
              and a null mutant made and characterized in its stationary phase resistance and
              induction of CuZn SOD and catalase. A strain containing a transcriptional
              fusion between the catalase promoter and lacZ will be constructed and subjected
              to transposon mutagenesis to identify insertions that influence the stationary
              phase induction of catalase. These mutants will be characterized in stationary
              phase response as above and mutations of interest cloned. In addition, the cell
              cycle of all mutants will be studied. Legionella. pneumophila
              catalase/peroxidase gene(s) will be cloned and a null mutant made in wild type
              and CuZn SOD-deficient strains. These mutants will be characterized in their
              response to oxidative stress and ability infect macrophage cell lines and
              monocytes.  %%%  Most cells can protect themselves against damage caused by the
              reactive products of oxygen metabolism by making enzymes that destroy these
              toxic compounds.  In this project  the oxidative stress response will be
              studied in two bacterial species whose ecological niche may create an
              extracellular oxidative threat: Caulobacter crescentus, a dimorphic pond
              bacterium which may be exposed to high levels of external oxygen from
              photosynthetic algae, and the Legionnaire's disease bacterium,  Legionella
              pneumophila, that may confront reactive oxygen species from respiratory burst
              activity in infected animal cells.  Although the response of E. coli to
              oxidative and stationary phase stresses is well characterized, comparatively
              little is known for other bacterial species.  The work will focus on
              catalase/peroxidase enzyme activities that should help protect the bacteria. 
              Mutations will be constructed in the genes for catalase/peroxidase, and the
              effect on bacterial survival during oxidative stress and stationary phase
              stress will be determined.  This will provide new information about how
              desirable bacteria may be maintained and, conversely, how undesirable ones
              might be combated.  ***
