Title       : Protein Turnover in p53 Regulation; Mutagenesis of E6-AP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1998    
File        : a9513527

Award Number: 9513527
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258964             (Estimated)
Investigator: Penelope Duerksen-Hughes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513527  Duerksen-Hughes  The long term goal of  this research is to define on a
              molecular level the regulation of p53, a protein which plays a major role in
              DNA repair, cell cycle regulation and apoptosis. The first goal is to examine
              how the degradation of p53 is regulated. Previous work has shown that the rapid
              turnover of p53 during normal metabolism can be at least partially attributed
              to the ubiquitin-dependent proteolytic system. Following DNA damage, the p53
              protein is stabilized; the mechanism for this stabilization is unknown. This
              work focuses on two conditions which can stabilize p53; damage to the cellular
              DNA, and the expression of adenovirus ElA. Two possible mechanisms for p53
              stabilization will be tested: that the increased stability is a result of
              changes in the activity of components of the ubiquitin-dependent proteolytic
              system, and that the change in stability is a result of modifications made to
              p53 itself. Cells with conditional mutations in the ubiquitin-dependent system
              will be utilized to examine the role of that system in p53 turnover. Protein
              turnover and steady-state levels will be measured by immunoprecipitation and
              Western blot analysis, respectively. The second goal of this work is to develop
              and characterize mutations in one or more of the enzymes likely to participate
              in the turnover of p53, and to test cells expressing these mutations for their
              ability to degrade that protein. One target enzyme is E6-AP, which functions to
              transfer activated ubiquitin to p53 and thus render it a substrate for
              ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis. Also, a strategy for creating random mutations
              in selected cell lines, then screening the resulting mutants in a way which is
              expected to yield temperature-sensitive mutations in one or more of the enzymes
              which participate in p53 degradation has been developed. The results of this
              work will lead to an understanding of whether the ubiquitin-mediated system is
              important in p53 breakdown and how the actual activities of the various enzymes
              ma y shift under different conditions. This should set the stage for further
              studies in how p53 levels are regulated on a molecular level. In addition, cell
              lines conditionally mutant in their ability to degrade p53 will be useful in
              several ways. Not only will they will provide a valuable tool in studying the
              function of p53 under various conditions, but because these mutations are
              expected to be in enzymes associated with the ubiquitin-dependent proteolytic
              system, they will provide specific tools for studies of the functions and
              substrates of that system in general.  %%%  Individuals are constantly exposed
              to a wide variety of natural and man-made substances which can damage DNA in
              the genome, and are therefore called "genotoxins." To protect themselves, all
              organisms possess several mechanisms to prevent or repair DNA damage.   One of
              the most important of these mechanisms uses a protein called "p53." When a
              cell's DNA is damaged, the levels of p53 rise. This causes one of two things to
              happen: the cell may stop dividing until the damage is repaired; or, if the
              damage is too great to repair, the cell may commit "cellular suicide." In
              either case, damaged DNA is not copied, and this helps to prevent mutations. It
              is already known that the reason p53 levels rise when DNA is damaged is not
              because more protein  is made, but because the p53 is degraded more slowly than
              usual. What is not known is how the degradation rate is altered. The first goal
              of this proposal, then, is to look at two situations where p53 is stabilized
              (following DNA damage and when a virus protein called ElA is present) to see if
              the protein lasts longer because the enzymes that degrade it are less active,
              or because the p53 itself has been changed in some way. The second goal also
              concerns degradation of p53. One of the enzymes which can help to break down
              p53 is called E6-AP. A cell line where E6-AP has been mutated will be created
              and characterized. Observing how these cells control p53 will then help
              researchers understand  more about how and when p53 is degraded.
