Title       : RUI: Structure/Function Studies of Alpha 1,3- Fucosyltransferases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1996       
File        : a9513722

Award Number: 9513722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Macher macher@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/469-2141

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9513722  Macher  Human alpha-l,3 fucosyltransferases (alpha-l,3FTs) are
              biologically important enzymes which catalyze the final step in the synthesis
              of adhesion molecules and important antigens. In spite of their important
              functions, very little biochemical information exists on these proteins beyond
              a predicted amino acid sequence and the identification of a limited set of
              naturally occurring mutants. The goal of the proposed research is to obtain
              information on the biochemistry of this class of enzymes, with the ultimate aim
              of identifying amino acids within these proteins that are involved in substrate
              binding and catalysis. This proposal focusses on the features of these proteins
              that lead to the strict acceptor specificity of each individual alpha-l,3FT.
              Preliminary results with FucT III and V demonstrate that truncated forms of
              these proteins, differing at 21/300 amino acids, maintain their unique
              substrate specificities. Domain swapping experiments have been done to obtain a
              better definition of which of the 21 amino acids are involved in defining the
              distinct specificity of these two enzymes. Additional domain swap and
              site-directed mutagenesis experiments are proposed to more precisely define the
              amino acids that are involved in acceptor substrate recognition.  An analysis
              of the disulfide bonding pattern of the FucTs will be done by mass
              spectrometric analysis. These studies will provide information on the spatial
              relationships of different portions of the coding regions of these enzymes. The
              information obtained from the combination of molecular biology, biochemistry
              and protein analysis will provide detailed information on this family of
              glycosyltransferases and this information will generate a model which can be
              utilized to design future studies of these important proteins. It is clear from
              studies of other enzymes (e.g., proteases) that the fundamental biochemical
              information obtained from the proposed experiments in this application is
              necessary to answer basic questions about al pha-l,3FTs and
              glycosyltransferases in general.  %%%  Proteins are one of the many important
              biological molecules that are produced by cells of all organisms. Some proteins
              are important as structural components, whereas others function as biological
              catalysts. In this project the objective is to obtain detailed information
              about a protein that is a member of a class of enzymes involved in the
              synthesis of complex carbohydrate molecules. All enzymes bind substrates, or
              reactants, and increase the rate of a chemical reaction. In addition, enzymes
              provide the information for the specificity of the chemical reaction. A major
              goal of scientific investigation is to understand how proteins bind specific
              compounds and catalyze reactions. This research will use biochemical and
              molecular biological approaches to investigate these aspects of a family of
              enzymes known as alpha-1,3 fucosyltransferases. The results of these studies
              will provide important, new information on these proteins. Since these proteins
              are members of a much larger group (i.e.approximately 100 proteins), the
              information obtained will add to the knowledge base for this entire family of
              enzymes.  ***
