Title       : Transcriptional Activation and Repression in Plant Embryogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9513475

Award Number: 9513475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mauricio M. Bustos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513475  Bustos  The aim of this research is to characterize the function of
              transcriptional activators and repressors that regulate expression of storage
              protein genes during early stages of seed maturation.  A gene, PvALF, encoding
              an acidic transcription activator has been isolated.  In French bean, PvALF
              activates gene expression from PHS( and DLEC2 promoters. Also factors ROM1 and
              ROM2, both basic/leucine-zipper proteins, which act as DNA binding
              site-dependent repressors of PvALF-activated transcription have been isolated. 
              Specific aims will be to investigate the cis-acting DNA signals that mediate
              transactivation by PvALF or transrepression by ROM1 and ROM2.  Additionally,
              the spatial distribution and regulation of ROM1 and ROM2 gene expression in
              plant embryos will be characterized, and a plant transformation procedure will
              be utilized to test whether ROM1 and ROM2 also restrict PHS( and DLEC2
              expression to specialized storage cells of the embryo and cotyledons.  %%% 
              Plants produce storage proteins that are contained within seeds which can be
              used by humans and other animals as food.  This process occurs during seed
              development by the production of specialized gene regulating proteins.  These
              regulatory proteins recognize certain DNA sequences near the genes that code
              for food proteins.  The regulatory proteins activate the rate that the
              enzymatic machinery produces the blueprints or messages for food protein
              production.  This is part of the developmental process of seed production. 
              After the seed proteins are produced there appears another group of specialized
              proteins which bind to DNA sequences near the gene and stop or repress the
              production of food protein messages.  This project will study how both the
              activation and repression proteins interact with DNA in plants to turn on or
              off the synthesis of food storage proteins.  ***
