Title       : VirB Mediated DNA and Protein Transfer from A.tumefaciens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9513662

Award Number: 9513662
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $428676             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew N. Binns abinns@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9251,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513662  Binns    The movement of DNA from Agrobacterium tumefaciens into plant
              cells depends upon the activities of the virulence (vir) genes of the Ti
              plasmid.  Several of the Vir proteins are required for the production of a
              single-stranded DNA-binding protein, VirE2.  This "T-complex" is thought to be
              the transferred intermediate.  VirB proteins are proposed to form a
              membrane-localized apparatus responsible for T-complex transfer.  Consistent
              with this hypothesis, VirB proteins are membrane associated and required for
              virulence.  Others have shown, surprisingly, that a T-DNA containing a mutant
              virE2 (minus) strain could function to deliver its T-DNA to plant cells if,
              just prior to plant infection, it was mixed with a strain carrying wild type
              vir genes (VirE2 donor) but lacking the T-DNA.  This "extracellular
              complementation" suggests that VirE2 can move into plant cells independent of
              T-DNA transfer.  Because VirB genes are required for a bacterium to serve as a
              VirE2 donor, it appears that the VirB complex may also function to transfer
              proteins.  In this project, three aims are designed to further characterize the
              interaction of VirB proteins amongst themselves and with transported
              substrates.  First, continued genetic analysis of the virB operon is required
              in order to understand how the various VirB proteins interact to form a
              membrane bound complex capable of macromolecular transfer.  These studies will
              focus on virB5, 7, 8, 9, and 10.  Data suggest that virB7-10 interact in a
              fashion that is critical for the construction of a transfer complex, and the
              genetic basis of this interaction will be defined; virB5 is of interest because
              it has been proposed to encode a protein that interacts with the transported
              substrate, but has not been extensively characterized.  Second, the phenomenon
              of extracellular complementation indicates that Agrobacterium may be capable of
              transporting proteins into plant cells independent of the T-DNA.  Despite this
              intriguing observation, and the similarity o f the virB operon to genes
              encoding the protein secretion apparati of certain bacteria, there has been
              virtually no genetic or cellular characterization of this process.  A
              quantitative analysis of extracellular complementation at the single plant cell
              level will be carried out, and the genetic and cellular basis of the proposed
              VirE2 movement into plant cells will be characterized.  Methods to monitor the
              presence of VirE2 in plant cells will be developed and used to characterize
              VirE2 transfer after initiation of plant-bacterial interaction, and a genetic
              analysis of the regions of VirE2 necessary for transport will be carried out. 
              Third, the inhibition of macromolecular transfer by the incQ RSF1010 derivative
              plasmid pjW323 will be analyzed.  These experiments will increase our
              understanding of the mechanism whereby DNA is specifically transferred from
              Agrobacterium tumefaciens to plant cells.  Agrobacterium-mediated DNA transfer
              is a significant gene transfer method in agricultural biotechnology.  A better
              understanding of the molecular basis of this process may lead to improved gene
              transfer technologies.  ***
