Title       : Transcriptional Regulation of Porin Genes by OmpR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9513275

Award Number: 9513275
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280319             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda J. Kenney kenneyl@ohsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Health Sciences U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513275  Kenney  All  organisms must communicate effectively with their
              environment and adapt in order to survive.  In both prokaryotes and eukaryotes,
              a paradigm for adaptive responses is the two-component regulatory systems.  A
              two-component system contains a sensor (which is often a membrane protein which
              functions in trans-membrane signaling) and a response regulator (often a DNA
              binding protein which regulates transcription).  Changes in the environment
              result in the phosphorylation of the sensor from intracellular ATP.  The sensor
              then transfers its phosphoryl group to the regulator which alters its output. 
              The sensor (or sometimes another distinct protein) stimulates the
              dephosphorylation of the regulator to re-set the system.  The two-component
              system in E. coli regulates the porin genes by responding to changes in
              osmolarity of the growth medium.  At low osmolarity, ompF is preferentially
              expressed and at high osmolarity, it is repressed and ompC expression is
              switched on. EnvZ, the sensor, transfers its phosphoryl group onto OmpR, a DNA
              binding protein that regulates transcription of the porin genes. Little is
              known about how the OmpR-like proteins interact with DNA; they do not contain
              sequences similar to those of DNA binding domains found in other regulators.  A
              major goal of this work is to precisely determine the region of OmpR which
              contacts DNA and identify the amino acids which make direct contacts.  Studies
              will also address the dual role of OmpR as an activator (of both ompF and ompC)
              and also as a repressor (ompF only). A model arising from genetic studies
              predicts that phospho-OmpR (OmpR-P) binds with high affinity to activate ompF
              and at low affinity to repress ompF and activate ompC.  It also predicts that
              unphosphorylated OmpR plays no role in transcriptional regulation. These
              studies will provide the first direct biochemical evaluation of this
              hypothesis. Measurements of DNA binding using fluorescence anisotropy will
              examine the effect of phospho-OmpR on binding to flu oresceinated promoter
              fragments. In addition, biochemical approaches will be employed to investigate
              the potential regulatory involvement of OmpR-P-induced oligomerization,
              determine the region of OmpR which interacts with the promoters as well as RNA
              polymerase.  ***
