Title       : Subunit Arrangement within a Replicative Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1998       
File        : a9513248

Award Number: 9513248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. McHenry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513248  McHenry  The DNA polymerase III holoenzyme is the replicative complex
              of E. coli, responsible for the synthesis of the majority of the chromosome. 
              The replicative complexes of all cellular systems are closely related.  They
              all  consist of a special replicative polymerase, structurally identical
              sliding clamps with which the polymerase associates and a clamp setting
              apparatus.  In E. coli, these components correspond to the DNA polymerase III
              ((((), the ( "sliding clamp", and the 5-protein DnaX clamp setting apparatus. 
              The holoenzyme contains 10 different subunits, all available in 100 mg
              quantities from overproducing strains.  This replicative complex exhibits many
              properties that distinguish it from simpler polymerases.  These properties
              include a high rate of elongation, the ability to form an ATP-dependent highly
              processive clamp on the DNA template, and the ability to function as an
              asymmetric dimer with distinguishable leading and lagging strand polymerases.  
               Using photoreactive nucleotides placed at unique positions within long
              primers, my laboratory has located the ( catalytic subunit (3'-nucleotides
              1-13), the ( (DnaX)-complex (contact at nucleotide 18) and the  processivity
              factor (nucleotide 22) within the initiation complex.  In this proposal,
              experiments are outlined to extend this analysis in order to identify subunit
              contacts with  the template, particularly in front of the primer and regions
              within the template with short primers of ca. 10 nucleotides such as those used
              to prime DNA replication.  Placement of photoreactive nucleotides at specific
              locations in templates of designed sequence will permit the replicative complex
              to be "walked" into specific positions by the addition of a limited number of
              dNTPs.  This will permit changes in the composition and the contacts within the
              replicative complex to be determined as it progresses from initiation to
              elongation.  The positioning of subunits relative to others within the
              replicative complex will be determined by chem ical protein-protein
              cross-linking.  Initial focus will be on the "zero-length" cross-linker EDC. 
              These carbodiimide-induced intersubunit cross-links will be analyzed at the
              sequence level to permit regions of subunit-subunit contact to be localized. 
              Fluorescence energy transfer will be used to determine the distance between
              subunits.  Primary focus will be on the distances between subunits that do not
              cross-link to one another.  Concurrent determination of the distances of these
              subunits to the primer terminus and  the ( subunit will permit triangulation
              and placement of the studied components within the replicative complex.  These
              experiments are supported by our demonstrated ability to locate the ( subunit
              65 A from the 3'-antepenultimate nucleotide in primers, a position verified by
              photocross-linking.  Additionally, pilot experiments will be conducted
              collaboratively using electron microscopy to examine the structure of the
              replicative complex.  Initial focus will be upon a direct visual test of the
              dimeric polymerase hypothesis.  This proposed work will yield the first
              detailed structure of a prototypical replicative complex at the level of
              subunit organization.  %%%   The 10-protein apparatus that duplicates
              chromosomes prior to cell division is closely conserved between bacterial and
              higher cells. The purpose of this proposed study is to determine the physical
              arrangement and the contacts of the components of a prototypical DNA
              replicative machine.  This will be accomplished by (i) placing analogs of DNA
              bases at specific points in a model chromosome that chemically attach to
              proteins when flashed with light to determine the linear arrangement of the
              replication proteins relative to DNA both in a static and an active elongation
              mode; (ii) direct chemical protein-protein cross-linking to determine which
              proteins touch one another, (iii) fluorescence energy transfer, a technique
              that uses a spectroscopic (light) ruler to determine the distances between the
              components that do not contact  one another and (iv) electron microscopy to
              directly visualize relative positions of proteins and DNA.  These complementary
              methods will permit a description of the geometry of a prototypical replicative
              complex and permit the design of specific experiments to test the function of
              protein subunits implied by their position(s) within the complex.  ***
