Title       : Acquisition of Electrospray LC-MS-MS Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9513204

Award Number: 9513204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Van Breemen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart E. Scheppele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The proposal is for the acquisition of a Field-Emission Gun Scanning  Electron
              Microscope (FEG-SEM) and associated X-ray microanalysis  system. Field emission
              electron sources are very stable even at low  accelerating voltages (1 KeV) and
              their usage in a SEM greatly enhances  the capabilities of a FEG-SEM when
              compared with instruments that use a  thermionic emitter electron source. The
              most significant advantage of a  FEG-SEM is its ability to image specimens that
              are below the limits of  resolution of a conventional SEM. A FEG-SEM can have a
              resolution that  is 1 to 1.5 orders of magnitude greater than a comparable
              conventional  SEM. The fact that a FEG-SEM can operate at low accelerating
              voltages  means that one is often able to examine samples that do not require 
              much additional conductive coating.    Despite the large number of researchers
              at the University of Georgia  who routinely use scanning electron microscopy, a
              SEM of suitable  quality for high resolution/low KeV work is presently not
              available  anywhere on campus. The ability to create SEM images of microscopic 
              specimens is of critical importance to a wide variety of researchers at  the
              University of Georgia. This is especially important when one is  working at
              very high magnifications where the coating itself may be  what is visualized
              and not the object of study. As configured, this  FEG-SEM would also enable
              researchers to conduct elemental analyses  using EDS X-ray at a much higher
              level of precision than is possible  with the Center's present instrument. A
              final advantage that a FEGSEM  has over the Center's present SEM is the ability
              to capture the images  digitally in a high resolution format that can then be
              further  processed or analyzed either on the Center's imaging computers or on 
              any computer linked to the Ethernet.    The Center for Ultrastructural Research
              is the central facility that  provides University of Georgia researchers a
              variety of specialized  equipment and expertise in the area of electron and
              light mic roscopy.  For the past five years the Center has assisted with an
              average of 60  different research laboratories representing 25 different
              departments  or academic units per year. The Center also teaches formal courses
               (Scanning Electron Microscopy, Transmission Electron Microscopy,  Techniques
              in Modern Microscopy) to both graduate and undergraduates  students. The
              addition of a FEG-SEM to the Center would greatly enhance  the research
              capabilities of those working with both biological and  non-biological
              specimens and is seen as a critical acquisition in  ensuring that researchers
              and students have access to state of the art  imaging instruments.
