Title       : In Vivo Localization and Function of Bacterial Cell Cycle Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9513521

Award Number: 9513521
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $353692             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Margolin William.Margolin@uth.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC Houston
	      P.O.Box 20036
	      Houston, TX  772250036    713/500-5847

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9513521  Margolin     A fundamental problem in biology is how a single cell
              divides to become two.  In bacteria, cytokinesis is a differentiation event:
              normal longitudinal growth of the cell wall changes to inward growth at the
              division site, culminating in the separation of daughter cells.  This localized
              wall ingrowth implies that bacterial cells have a cytoplasmic organization and
              a mechanism for directing proteins involved in cytokinesis to the division
              site.  The FtsZ protein has properties expected of a cytoskeletal element:  it
              is probably present in all prokaryotes; it is related to the eukaryotic
              cytoskeletal protein tubulin; purified FtsZ forms polymers in the present of
              GTP; it probably functions as part of a complex with other cell division
              proteins; and it forms a ring-like polymer at the division site during the
              initial stages of cytokinesis and it is present at the leading edge of the
              invaginating wall.  The goal of this project is to combine genetic and
              whole-cell approaches to determine how prokaryotic cell cycle and
              "cytoskeletal" proteins are targeted to specific cellular sites.  Preliminary
              results indicate that localization of FtsZ in living E. coli can be tracked at
              high resolution by tagging it with a small fluorescent reporter protein, GFP
              (green fluorescent protein).  The GFP tag will be used to determine
              localization and structural organization of cell cycle proteins in living
              bacteria.  Specifically, it will be used to define cell cycle protein domains
              important for cellular targeting, to visualize cytoskeletal structures and
              dynamics during the cell cycle, to correlate structure and function among FtsZ
              proteins from diverse species, and to determine whether two other essential
              cell division proteins, FtsA and FtsQ, localize to the division site. 
              Preliminary results show that the fusion product of FtsZ with GFP at the
              C-terminus forms the expected ring structures at the division site in living
              cells, indicating that the GFP tag does not interfere with FtsZ assembly o r
              localization.  Specific FtsZ mutants (deletions, point mutants, and
              interspecies chimeras) will be constructed with GFP reporter tags and assayed
              in vivo in order to identify domains important for FtsZ localization and
              polymerization.  This type of analysis will be extended to FtsA and FtsQ, whose
              function an cellular localization are not yet known.  Localization of FtsQ-GFP
              and FtsA-GFP will be determined in wild type and various cell division mutant
              cells in an effort to define the sequence of events and participants in the
              cell division pathway.     These studies should make a major contribution to
              our understanding of cell division mechanisms, protein targeting, and
              subcellular organization in prokaryotes.  The longer-range goal of the research
              is to understand the mechanism whereby cell cycle proteins become localized to
              specific regions within the prokaryotic cell.  The use of GFP reporter protein
              tags to track protein spatial dynamics  in prokaryotes has the advantage that a
              large number of genetic constructions can be assayed quickly, easily, and with
              high sensitivity, without the need for antibodies, fixation of cells, or
              electron microscopy.  The knowledge acquired from these studies should
              contribute to the basic biology of prokaryotic cell division, as well to
              further applications of fluorescent proteins in visualizing fundamental
              processes in living cells.  ***
