Title       : Structure, Function, and Genetics of the E. Coli Phosphotriesterase Homolog
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2000     
File        : a9513300

Award Number: 9513300
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas S. Scanlan scanlan@cgl.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Enzymes are natural protein molecules that convert one biological substance
              into another. Enzymes often have extraordinary selectivity properties in that
              they are able to recognize and convert a specific substrate molecule from a sea
              of other molecules. Because enzymes are encoded by genes in living organisms,
              their chemical properties of substrate recognition and conversion are optimized
              and refined by evolution. This research project is designed to study the
              evolutionary optimization of an interesting enzyme from soil bacteria that
              mediates the destruction of a family of pesticides and chemical warfare agents
              called phosphotriesters. The enzyme, called Phosphotriesterase, is highly
              efficient at carrying out this task and this is unusual because it's
              phosphotriester substrates are synthetic chemicals that were first prepared
              about forty years ago. This suggests that the evolutionary process for
              optimizing this enzyme happened at an unprecedented rate. We have discovered an
              enzyme from a related bacteria, E. coli, that is highly similar in structure to
              the Phosphotriesterase enzyme, and we believe that the E. coli homolog
              represents a member of a new family of enzymes from which Phosphotriesterase
              arose. Thus, we have the starting point and ending point for a pair of
              evolutionarily related enzymes, and we will carry out experiments designed to
              provide useful structure-function clues to this evolutionary process.          
               Scanlan, Thomas S .             Research Plan      The research plan for this
              proposal focuses on a newly identified open reading frame (ORF) from
              Escherichia coli which appears to have been a starting point for rapid
              evolution of a new enzyme. The well-characterized enzyme Phosphotriesterase
              from soil bacteria catalyzes the hydrolytic cleavage of synthetic
              phosphotriester insecticides and chemical warfare agents in a hlghly efficient
              manner. The enzyme-mediated cleavage reaction occurs at the limit of diffusion
              control, suggesting that Phosphotriesterase has reached its  evolutionary
              endpoint in catalytic optimization. The suggestion that this enzyme has
              achieved evolutionary perfection is amazing considering that its
              phosphotriester substrates were first synthesized in the 1940's and 50's, thus
              providing a fifty year time window for evolution of maximal catalytic power. We
              have recently discovered that a newly identified chromosomal ORF in E. coli has
              high sequence similarity to Phosphotriesterase, and many of the important
              active site residues are conserved between the two enzymes. This E. coli ORF,
              which we have named Phosphotriesterase Homolog Protein (PHP), therefore appears
              to be a member of the subfamily from which Phosphotriesterase evolved, and
              provides the basis for an interesting research project in molecular evolution
              and protein engineering that may have practical value in producing new
              organophosphate detoxification agents. This research proposal describes our
              plans to characterize the biophysical and enzymatic properties of PHP, and
              elucidate the natural function that this enzyme performs in E. coli. In
              addition, we plan structure-guided mutagenesis studies aimed at retracing
              Phosphotriesterase's evolutionary path to catalytic perfection using PHP as a
              starting point. Finally, laboratory evolution experiments are described, with
              the aim of developing new organophosphate detoxification enzymes using the
              principles of natural selection.      Teachin~ Plan      The teaching plan for
              this proposal seizes upon the opportunity of creating a strong graduate
              education program in bioorganic chemistry at UCSF. Several important strategies
              are discussed, including plans to develop new chemistry-based graduate courses,
              methods of integrating students from the various biology-centered departments
              at UCSF into these courses, and plans to introduce minority undergraduate
              students to research opportunities at the chemistry/biology interface. Teaching
              responsibilities anticipated during the award period are discussed, and
              previous accomplishments and awards in tea ching excellence are presented.     
                    NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)    2
