Title       : Teosinte branched and the evolution of development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  1999   
File        : a9513573

Award Number: 9513573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370213             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Doebley   (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Stephen Gantt  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Doebley  9513573   teosinte branchedl (tbl ) is a recessive mutant of maize that
              conditions the plant to have long lateral  branches tipped by tassels at the
              upper nodes and many tillers at the basal nodes. As its name  implies, tbl
              mutant plants show a striking similarity to teosinte, the wild progenitor of
              maize.  Recently, my laboratory determined that tbl was involved in the
              evolution of maize plant  architecture (short lateral branches tipped by ears)
              from teosinte plant architecture (long lateral  branches tipped by tassels).
              Our model for tbl is that it acts as a repressor of axillary branch 
              development such that the maize allele (Tbl +Maize) engenders strong repression
              (short branches)  and the teosinte allele (tbl +teosinte) weak repression
              (normally long branches). This model  further suggests that tbl +teosinte is
              environmentally regulated so that the extent of branch  elongation in teosinte
              is a function of the degree of shading from surrounding vegetation. The 
              evolution of maize would have involved a change in tbl expression from
              environmentally regulated  expression to constitutive expression. Recently, my
              laboratory has molecularly cloned tbl using  the Mutator transposable element
              system. The proposed research will utilize this tbl clone to test  the proposed
              model for tbl and to elucidate the nature of the molecular changes in tbl that
              were  responsible for the evolution of maize from teosinte. First, the
              molecular structure of tbl  including nucleic acid sequence, intron-exon
              borders, and homology to other known genes will be  determined. The sequences
              of 10 maize and 1() teosinte copies of tbl will also be determined. 
              Phylogenetic and visual comparison of this sample of maize and teosinte alleles
              will allow the  identification of sequence motifs that are found only in maize
              and not in teosinte. These motifs will  be candidates for the molecular
              event(s) responsible for the functional difference between  Tbl +Maize and tbl
              +teosinte. Second, the pattern of expression of Tbl  +Maize and tbl +teosinte 
              will be analyzed to determine if and how the expression of these alleles
              differs. Under the  proposed model, the expression of tbl +teosinte should be
              influenced by the degree of shading,  while Tbl +Maize should be strongly
              expressed under all environments. Third, the phenotypic  effects of the
              different tbl alleles will be determined. Tests for epistasis between tbl and
              two other  loci thought to be involved in the evolution of plant architecture
              in maize will be made.    The evolution of development has been identified as a
              focus for developmental biology over the next decade. The proposed research
              will make significant contributions to the understanding of the evolution of
              development by assessing how changes in gene structure and expression alter the
              normal course of plant development leading to the evolution of new adult forms.
              The proposed research will also make contributions to plant developmental
              biology and biotechnology. This research will provide for the cloning and
              structural characterization of an important gene involved in maize development.
              The cloning and characterization of tbl will provide new tools for the analysis
              of meristem fate and apical dominance, processes of long-standing interest in
              plant development. Finally, since increased apical dominance is a common
              feature of plant domestication including all cereals, many tree species and
              herbs such as sunflower, the possibility exists that engineering of tbl will
              enable new advances in crop or tree improvement.    3
