Title       : Effects of Manipulating tRNAs on Protein Synthesis in E. coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1999  
File        : a9513127

Award Number: 9513127
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334886             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emanuel Goldman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Med&Dent of NJ/Newark
	      100 Bergen Street
	      Newark, NJ  071032407    973/972-4400

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513127  Goldman  This research will address the question of what happens at a
              "hungry codon" with limiting charged cognate tRNA.  The main hypothesis to be
              tested is that premature termination of translation occurs at the hungry codon
              possibly generating, in some instances, functional products.  A combination of
              genetic and biochemical approaches utilizing mutant alleles, along with cloned,
              regulatable genes, will be employed for in vivo experiments.  A key goal will
              be to isolate truncated MS2 coat protein in pth mutants which have mutant
              Trp-tRNA (with higher Km).  Factors governing the accuracy and efficiency of
              translation are of fundamental importance, with implications for understanding
              various diseases, differentiation, mechanisms of aging, as well as implications
              for genetic engineering.  This research will contribute to understanding how
              tRNA molecules influence efficiency, accuracy, and regulation of translation. 
              %%%  The accurate transfer of genetic information in cells heavily relies upon
              the faithful translation of mRNA (which reflects the genetic coding for
              proteins) by transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules which serve as the interface between
              the genetic code and protein synthesis.  It is now apparent that the molecular
              rules governing decoding of mRNA by tRNA are complicated and determined in part
              by cellular conditions.  This research will explore what happens under
              conditions in which the appropriate amino acid-bound tRNA (charged cognate
              tRNA) is limiting.  The hypothesis to be tested is that this condition leads to
              premature termination of synthesis at the "hungry codon", giving rise to
              truncated proteins.  Factors governing protein synthesis are of fundamental
              importance, with implications for understanding various diseases,
              differentiation, perhaps aging, as well as for genetic engineering.  The
              experiments to be conducted will contribute to our understanding of the
              efficiency, accuracy, and regulation of protein synthesis, and how tRNA
              molecules influence this processes.  ***         ??
