Title       : Development of Parallel-Aligning Magnetically Orientable Model Membranes for Use
               in NMR Studies of Membrane Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1996      
File        : a9513357

Award Number: 9513357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Sanders, II crs4@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Sanders  9513357  Membrane proteins reside in the thin sheaths which
              encapsulate cells and subcellular compartments throughout all biological
              systems.  These proteins represent an important class of biological molecules
              for which three-dimensional pictorial or "structural" information on the
              molecular level has been very difficult to obtain.  In principle, a physical
              technique known as "oriented sample nuclear magnetic resonance" (OSNMR) is
              capable of yielding experimental data which can lead directly to the structures
              of membrane proteins in a membrane-like environment.  However, one of the
              limitations of current OSNMR technique is the lack of an ideal method for
              uniformly orienting membrane proteins so that all of the proteins in a sample
              are lined up in the same direction.  The work of this project will seek to
              overcome this limitation by carrying out the rational design of a new class of
              membrane-mimicking "model membranes" in which purified membrane proteins can be
              solubilized and oriented for OSNMR studies.  The novel model membrane system
              which is the goal of this proposal must simultaneously satisfy four criteria: 
              (i) Water must be the solvent.  (ii) The liquid crystalline assemblies must be
              soluble, micelle-like discoidal bilayered particles ("bicelles").  (iii) The
              bicelles must exhibit nematic order under the influence of a strong magnetic
              field such that their bilayer normals align in the direction of the applied
              field.  (iv) The liquid crystalline system must not denature membrane proteins
              solubilized in the novel media.  %%%  Various considerations predict that these
              goals will be met by liquid crystals involving a novel series of detergent-like
              molecules:  the "PF-DAPA" surfactants.  These compounds will be synthesized via
              amide condensation of long chain perfluorinated carboxylic acids with the
              3-amino group of 2,3 diaminopropionic acid.  Their liquid crystalline
              properties will be characterized using nuclear magnetic resonance. 
              Compositions which satisfy criteria i-iii above  will be tested for their
              ability to solubilize and magnetically orient membrane proteins in native-like
              conformational states.  ***
