Title       : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Course on the Early Development of Xenopus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9513994

Award Number: 9513994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9513994  Grodzicker      Dramatic progress in the field of developmental
              biology in recent years has resulted from the application of a number of new
              approaches to classical problems, and led to the need for advanced courses to
              train new investigators to study those animal models, such as Xenopus, that
              have been important in making new discoveries in this field. Funds are being
              sought to continue the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory course on Early
              Development of Xenopus laevis, which has now been taught for three years as
              part of an integrated set of courses at Cold Spring Harbor in a number of areas
              of modern biology. This course provides extensive laboratory exposure to the
              biology and manipulation of embryos from the frog Xenopus laevis. Xenopus is a
              vertebrate uniquely suited for studies of early development, since large
              numbers of embryos, from fertilization onward, can easily be obtained.
              Development is rapid and the large size of the embryos facilitates their
              micromanipulation to allow analysis of such important issues as embryonic
              induction that are not feasible in mama embryos. The course is suited both for
              those who have a knowledge of molecular biology and developmental biology, but
              have had no experience with Xenopus, as well as those with some Xenopus
              experience who wish to increase their repertoire of techniques. The specific
              areas that will be covered are listed below:     1. Care and handling of
              Xenopus adults. Induction of ovulation, egg collection, testis  isolation, and
              fertilization.   2. Stages of embryonic development and anatomy.   3. Whole
              mount in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry.   4. Microinjection of
              eggs and oocytes with mRNA and DNA constructs.   5. Micromanipulation of
              embryos, including induction and transplantation assays.   6. Preparation and
              use of cell cycle extracts.    It is anticipated that the basic organization of
              the course and much of the course material will remain unchanged during the
              proposed period of support, though new issues will be  discussed and integrated
              into the laboratory as the field progresses.                                  :
