Title       : 3D Reconstruction of Icosahedral Viruses from X-ray Scattering Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9513594

Award Number: 9513594
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145238             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Doerschuk   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The objective of the proposed research is the development of new  methods
              for determining the structure of small spherical viruses based  on x-ray
              scattering measurements. Research in this area is timely  because synchrotrons
              allow the measurement of qualitatively superior  data and new methods are
              needed in order to fully exploit the data. For  instance, it will be possible
              to study virus dynamics, e.g., maturation  and disassembly, in solution: the
              high intensity of the x-ray beam  allows the recording of a solution scattering
              pattern in roughly 100 ms  and the quality of the data, in terms of the ability
              to make low-angle  scattering measurements and the sensitivity of the
              detectors, is very  high so that a low-resolution structure can be
              reconstructed from a  single 100 ms snap shot and therefore the evolution of
              the structure  can be tracked.       This is an interdisciplinary collaboration
              between the principal  investigator, in the School of Electrical Engineering,
              and Professor  John E. Johnson, in the Department of Biological Sciences. It
              combines  image processing, applied mathematical analysis, and numerical 
              computation expertise from the electrical engineering side with  biological,
              biophysical, and x-ray scattering experimental expertise  from the biological
              sciences side. The major theme that extends through  all of the proposed work
              is the need to exploit the icosahedral  symmetry present in small spherical
              viruses. The principal investigator  has new mathematical results in
              icosahedral harmonics and methodology  based on these results will allow the
              development of reconstruction  methods which exploit the symmetry in a much
              more natural and  computationally attractive fashion than has been possible in
              the past.    Work is proposed in three areas:    Reconstruction of 3D
              low-resolution viral structure from solution x-ray       scattering patterns: A
              model of the virus is proposed which       exactly exhibits the icosahedral
              symmetry. An iterative recon       struction algori thm, which is an
              significant generalization of the       standard electron density modification
              algorithm, is proposed.       Significance: Successful reconstruction would
              allow easy low-cost       surveys of virus structure since no crystallization
              is required;       would provide new starting points for reconstructions of    
                high-resolution structures based on crystal x-ray diffraction       data;
              and, most importantly, would enable the study of virus       maturation and
              disassembly in the natural solution environment.    Nucleic acid packing and
              nucleic acid-protein interactions: Small       spherical viruses provide an
              elegant and relatively simple model       system for studying these problems.
              However, because the bulk; of       the nucleic acid in a virus does not
              exhibit icosahedral symmetry,       the protein is visible at atomic resolution
              in a high-resolution x-       ray diffraction experiment while the nucleic acid
              is not.       Therefore, in order to extract the maximum amount of information 
                   concerning both protein and nucleic acid from the x-ray       diffraction
              experiment, it is necessary to use different models       for the protein and
              nucleic acid. Such models and least-squares       type algorithms for
              estimating the parameters in the models from       low-resolution crystal x-ray
              diffraction data are proposed.       Significance: Successful reconstruction
              will validate the       low-resolution crystal x-ray diffraction data, which is
              difficult       to measure, and provide an alternative view of the nucleic acid
                    distribution and its interaction with the protein capsid based on      
              x-ray diffraction rather than cryo electron microscopy data.    Refinement
              using incomplete crystal x-ray diffraction data sets: In  many cutting-edge
              problems the data set is       incomplete due to a limited amount of virus,
              limited synchrotron  time, or inability to reliably grow       high-quality
              crystals. Because the virus particle has icosahedral  symmetry, it follows that
               the diffraction data       also has icosahedral symmetry which, in the
              simplest case, implies  that the data is 60-fold redundant. Data     that is
              5-fold redundant  is typically sufficient to refine a structure. Therefore,
              large amounts  of the data (e.g.,       80%) can be missing and it should still
              be possible to refine the  structure. However, standard algorithms and      
              software require that a complete set of data be recorded.  Therefore, based on
              the 60-fold redundancy, the       incomplete data set is interpolated to
              generate a complete data  set. However, the current interpolation       methods
              do not exploit the icosahedral symmetry of the data and  are therefore
              inaccurate. We propose to       develop and implement more sophisticated
              interpolation methods  that will exploit the icosahedral symmetry.      
              Significance: Success in this work will allow the solution of new  structures
              from existing previously unusable       data sets.
