Title       : Regulatory Actions of Fatty Acids in Rat Adrenal Cortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1997  
File        : a9513926

Award Number: 9513926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric P. Widmaier widmaier@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9513926  Widmaier    Fatty acids serve numerous functions in living
              organisms. These lipids are building-blocks of cell membranes, and are a vital
              fuel source for most cells of the body.  In addition, fatty acids appear to
              play an important role in cell:cell communication.  In other words, fatty acids
              may have "regulatory" actions in the body that mediate hormonal and nervous
              signals.  Certain fatty acids are more potent in this regard than others.  The
              long-chain, unsaturated stearate are the least active.  When blood levels of
              oleate are high, the function of several endocrine glands is affected, usually
              in a negative way (i.e., inhibited).  One good model of fatty acid-induced
              changes in cell function is the adrenal gland, specifically the region of the
              gland (the cortex) that produces the steroid hormones known as glucocorticoids
              (cortisol in people, corticosterone in rats).  In this grant, the mechanisms by
              which specific fatty acids induce changes in adrenal activity will be
              investigated by a variety of approaches.  These include infusions of fatty
              acids into rats followed by analysis of hormone secretion, and the responses of
              cultured adrenal cells to additions of   various fatty acids.  The results of
              these experiments will significantly increase our understanding of how
              steroidogenic glands like the adrenal glands (and the gonads) are regulated
              under normal and high-fat conditions.  In addition, basic information about
              cell signaling events associated with fatty acids will be obtained.  This is
              important because the array of tissues that are sensitive to fatty acids is
              enormous, including the pancreas, ovary, testis, pituitary, liver, heart,
              muscle and others.  Information gained from these studies may be expected to
              help neurobiologists understand how fatty acids induce changes in muscle
              membrane permeability to electrolytes, molecular biologists understand how
              fatty acids contribute to regulation of insulin secretion.  An appreciation of
              the widespread and potent regulatory action s of these lipids is rapidly
              growing.  This grant will begin the systematic exploration of the mechanisms by
              which these actions are produced.
