Title       : A Multiple Beam Optical Trapping Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1997   
File        : a9513608

Award Number: 9513608
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Block sblock@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9184,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal would fund an advanced optical trapping  microscope facility. The
              recent success of one- and two-beam  optical traps in cell biology has led to
              breakthroughs in  our understanding of how biological motors work, and 
              provided scientists with unprecedented means of  micromanipulation. The time is
              ripe to extend the utility of  optical trapping in interdisciplinary
              directions,  particularly towards the interface of molecular biology and 
              materials science, to address outstanding problems in such  areas as biophysics
              and nanotechnology. The Multiple Beam  Optical Trapping (MBOT) microscope is a
              versatile,  third-generation device, designed ab initio for  micromanipulation
              and micromechanical measurement. It will  be capable of generating several
              simultaneous trapping beams  under computer control, each equipped with
              independent  controls, and will incorporate position sensors to detect 
              displacements of objects down to the subnanometer level. The  beams can be
              alternately configured to grasp, manipulate.  develop tension, determine
              position, image, or, in feedback  mode, to measure force. Aspects of the
              microscope hardware  will be linked to microprocessors that will control the 
              operation, collect data, and perform image processing.. A  set of four
              auxiliary microscopes will constitute an  integral part of the overall
              facility, serving double-duty  as teaching tools and as test beds for
              prototyping and  developing equipment destined for the central microscope, as 
              well as to explore new approaches to imaging and optical  trapping.          A
              key feature of multiple independent traps is that  they permit two or more
              objects to be freely manipulated,  oriented, and juxtaposed in all three
              dimensions, without  necessarily passing laser light directly through the
              objects  themselves, which might not tolerate the exposure. In  addition,
              experimental geometries can be achieved that are  quite impossible with
              conventional, single- or double-beam  optical tweezers. A way to generate
              multiple  traps and avoid  optical interference effects is to time share the
              traps. In  this scheme, all traps are produced by a single laser beam  that is
              scanned rapidly among different positions, pausing  at those locations where
              traps are desired. A prototype for  this concept was developed in the
              Netherlands, where  galvanometer mirrors were used to scan the beam. The MBOT 
              design calls for the use of acousto-optic beam deflectors to  achieve faster
              scan rates with inherently less jitter.          Among the potential uses of
              the MBOT instrument are:  (1) Single-motor motility assays, to measure the tiny
               stepwise displacements and forces produced by individual  mechanoenzymes, such
              as kinesin and myosin, as well as those  produced by processive nucleic acid
              enzymes, such as RNA  polymerase; (2) Picotensiometry, to measure the molecular
               elasticity of biopolymers such as microtubules and actin  filaments, as well
              as the micromechanical properties of  biomimetic and other novel materials; (3)
              Optical force  microscopy (OFM), a promising variation of scanned-probe 
              microscopy that uses an optically-trapped stylus to obtain  images under
              physiological conditions with a resolution  exceeding that possible with the
              conventional light  microscope; (4) Characterization of coupling forces
              involved  in protein receptor-ligand binding, cell-cell and  cell-substrate
              recognition, and RNA/DNA base-pairing; and  (5) Creation of miniature hybrid
              devices consisting of both  biological components (cells, microtubules,
              enzymes) and  synthetic components (glass, silicon, etc.) on  rnicrofabricated
              chips. As proposed, the instrument would be  jointly funded by the .NSF and a
              private foundation, and  housed in the Princeton Materials Institute. It is 
              anticipated that the MBOT facility will serve as a catalyst  to stimulate a
              range of interdisciplinary studies on  rnicrostructures and nanodynamics.
