Title       : Microsequencing Via Continuous Flow Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization
               in an Ion Trap/Reflectron Time-of-Flight Device
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1998    
File        : a9513878

Award Number: 9513878
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Lubman dmlubman@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this work is to develop methodology based on new  instrumentation
              which can be used for detection and structural analysis  of ultralow levels of
              molecules of biological importance, i.e peptides  and  protein digests. In
              particular, this will involve the interface of  capillary separation methods to
              an ion trap storage/reflectron  time-of-flight mass spectrometer detector using
              a continuous flow MALDI  method.  In this  method the chromatographic or
              separation products  will be delivered via a flow probe directly into the ion
              trap where  MALDI is performed from a continuously flowing Liquid directly from
              the  tip of a probe in a manner analogous to continuous flow FAB  experiments.
              The ions generated will be analyzed using an ion trap  storage/reflectron
              time-of-flight device which can provide enhanced  sensitivity and solution in
              the liquid MALDI process via the long teem  storage and cooling effects of the
              ion trap in combination with a  reflectron time-of-flight device. In addition,
              the advantages of trap  operation at high pressure when interfaced to d~ liquid
              flow from  capillary columns will be demonstrated.  The IT/reTOF will be shown
              to  provide structural analysis via the MS/MS capabilities of  the trap.  The
              basic methodology will be applied to enzymatic digests which  generally yield
              fragments that are less than 3000 Da. In addition, the  capabilities of the
              method will also evaluated for chemical digests  which may yield products up to
              8-10 kDa in some cases. This method will  be directly compared to on-line
              capillary analysis using an  electrospray source interfaced to the  IT/reTOF
              also being developed in  our lab. The specific advantages of the CF MALDI for
              digest analysis in  terms of identification, sensitivity and for its ability to
              perform in  the presence of interfering salts and buffers will be evaluated.
