Title       : Biosynthetic Folding of Bacterial Luciferase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1998     
File        : a9513429

Award Number: 9513429
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas O. Baldwin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexey Fedorov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Agricul Exp Sta
	      The Agriculture Program
	      College Station, TX  778432147    979/845-4761

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513429  Baldwin  An understanding of the processes of protein folding is
              crucial to full realization of the potential of modern biotechnology.  In spite
              of intense efforts over the past ca.  30 years, many questions remain.  Of
              central concern today is the role of chaperones in the folding process. 
              Current dogma holds that the native structure of a protein is the most stable
              structure possible, but the existence of chaperones raises the possibility that
              chaperones might allow proteins to assume conformations that do not form fast
              enough in their absence to be of biological significance.  We propose to use
              bacterial luciferase to probe the roles of chaperones in determining the rates
              of formation of native and nonnative structures.  Luciferase is an excellent
              model system for such studies for numerous reasons, including the ease and
              sensitivity of the assay (the enzyme emits light) and the dimeric structure of
              the enzyme.  Since the enzyme is composed of two nonidentical subunits, ( and
              (,  it is possible to investigate the folding of each subunit in isolation, and
              to investigate the assembly of the enzyme in the absence of more complicating
              folding processes.  We expect that, through these studies, we will be able to
              ascertain the extent to which the chaperones interact with and guide the
              folding of thepolypeptide chain during biosynthesis on the ribosome.  %%%  The
              objective of this project is to understand the biosynthetic folding pathway of
              the ( subunit of bacterial luciferase and the role(s) played by molecular
              chaperones in this process.  "Biosynthetic folding" refers to the processes
              associated with folding during synthesis of the polypeptide on a ribosome.  The
              cell free protein synthesis strategies serve as  a model for protein synthesis
              and folding within the living cell.  Bacterial luciferase is a cytoplasmic
              heterodimer capable of unassisted spontaneous refolding from the denatured
              state.  It has been shown that the ( subunits folds cotranslationally,
              contributing to the fast acqui sition of native structure.  Structural features
              of the ribosome-bound nascent ( subunit will be probed by limited proteolysis. 
              A fragment of the ( subunit corresponding to the nascent polypeptide
              immediately  prior to release,  i.e., without the C-terminal region which is
              sheltered by the ribosome, will be isolated and probed by limited proteolysis,
              circular dichroism  and fluorescence.  This large fragment and a fragment
              representing the C-terminal portion of ( will be used to analyze the kinetics
              of folding and assembly of bacterial luciferase.  These experiments will permit
              development of a more complete model of biosynthetic folding/assembly with
              purified components.  The nature of the ( subunit species capable of
              association with the ( subunit following release from the ribosome will be
              analyzed and compared with the heterodimerization-competent (   species formed
              during refolding, to understand apparent differences in the rates of formation
              of luciferase during biosynthesis of ( and refolding of (.  It has been shown
              that ( subunit can interact with chaperones, and that certain chaperones are
              able to accelerate formation of enzymatically active heterodimer.  The 
              mechanism of this phenomenon and its relation to biosynthetic folding will be
              studied.  During refolding of the pure protein, the ( subunit acquires
              alternative conformations which cannot interact with (.  The effect of
              chaperones on the distribution of ( subunit between these alternative
              conformations will be examined.  I
