Title       : Structure and Function of Fertilization Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1998    
File        : a9513421

Award Number: 9513421
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. D. Stout dave@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513421  Stout  The goal of this project is to apply methods of molecular 
              biology and x-ray crystallography in concert to understand  molecular events
              controlling and occurring during  fertilization. A dual approach is being
              taken:  to study in  depth structure function relationships in sperm lysin, for
               which two high resolution crystal structures, an expression  system and a
              quantitative biological assay are all  available; and to initiate and carry out
              structure  determinations of three additional sperm and egg proteins.  To
              understand key steps during fertilization it is necessary  to solve the crystal
              structures of the molecules involved.  The proteins under investigation are
              involved in critical  steps of fertilization.  The only crystal structures of a
               fertilization protein available are of the monomer and dimer  of sperm lysin. 
              Recently, an expression system has been  developed which yields milligrams of
              very pure and  biologically active material.  An outstanding opportunity  now
              exists to understand the function of this fertilization  protein.  These
              crystallographic experiments will enable  cell biologists to visualize and
              understand fertilization at  the molecular level.    Four proteins are under
              investigation: 16K and 18K sperm  lysins, ADP-ribosyl cyclase and sperm protein
              56 (sp56).  sp56 mediates specific sperm-egg interaction in the mouse.  Abalone
              sperm 16K lysin dissolves a hole in the egg  vitelline envelope (VE) permitting
              the sperm to penetrate  the VE.  Fusion of the sperm and egg cytoplasmic
              membranes  is promoted by 18K lysin.  Cyclase from Aplysia ovotestis 
              synthesizes cyclic ADP-ribose (cADPR) from NAD.  cADPR  regulates the release
              of intracellular Ca2+ and induction of  the cortical reaction, resulting in the
              formation of the  fertilization envelope.  A model has been developed for the 
              mechanism of VE dissolution by lysin.  It proposes specific  functions for the
              novel surface features of the protein both  in the monomeric state, as it binds
              to the VE, and in t he  dimeric state, as it exists in solution and within the 
              acrosomal granule.  All aspects of the hypothesis for the  mechanism of VE
              dissolution can be tested with site-directed  mutagenesis.  Mutant proteins
              will be assayed for biological  activity and their crystal structures solved. 
              These  experiments promise to define for the first time the  activity of a
              fertilization protein at the level of  individual amino acids.  Diffraction
              quality crystals have  been obtained of ADP-ribosyl cyclase.  Crystallographic 
              analysis of ADP-ribosyl  cyclase will provide the first  insight into
              cADPR-receptor interaction and provide a basis  for modeling the catalytic
              mechanism of the enzyme. Crystals  have been obtained of green abalone 18K
              lysin, and  recombinant sp56 will be used for crystallization  experiments. 
              ***
