Title       : Molecular and Developmental Analysis of a Proteoglycan Cadherin Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1998        
File        : a9513325

Award Number: 9513325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack E. Lilien jlilien@biology.biosci.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Cadherin adhesion molecules play a central role in the cell-cell interactions
              that occur during embryogenesis. Regulation of the temporal and special
              distribution of functional cadherins is required from the earliest cellular
              interactions between blastomeres and are maintained throughout the life of an
              organism. The regulated temporal and special morphogenic patterns in embryos
              may be brought about by controlling either cadherin expression or its function.
              This proposal is describes experiments that examines one mechanism through
              which cadherin adhesion molecule function is regulated though interactions with
              two extracellular matrix molecules present in embryonic tissues. The first ECM
              molecule is a proteoglycan (250kD PG), and the second, is a cell surface
              glycosyltransferase (GalNAcPTase). Previous work has suggested that the
              proteoglycan is a co-ligand for the cell surface GalNAcPTase; thus, it is
              thought that GalNAcPTase acts as a cell surface receptor for the proteoglycan.
              It is also known that the interaction of these two molecules initiates a signal
              cascade culminating in the loss of cadherin function and thus cell adhesion.
              The interaction of the 250kD PG ligand with the GalNAcPTase may therefore serve
              as a regulatory switch controlling key events during embryocenesis.    The long
              term goal of this research is to understand the developmental significance of
              the 250kD PG/GalNAcPTase interactive pair. This includes: 1. Defining the
              molecular characteristics of the 250kD PG and the GalNAcPTase and the basis for
              their interaction. 2. Determining the components of the signaling pathway and
              how their interaction leads to cadherin inactivation. 3. Characterizing the
              temporal and spatial localization of the pair throughout development, and
              determining the physiological and developmental significance of the interactive
              pair. This work will establish a link between cell-ECM interactions that
              regulate loss of cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesions. Such feedback adhesive
              mechanis ms have long been postulated but never before describe in molecular
              terms.
