Title       : Isotope Enriched Active Site Structure of EF-Tu by Endor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1998  
File        : a9513538

Award Number: 9513538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin W. Makinen makinen@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shan Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mathias Sprinzl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513538  Makinen  A new approach combining angle selected electron nuclear
              double resonance (ENDOR) spectroscopy with molecular biological techniques to
              selectively enrich proteins biosynthetically with isotopes will be applied to
              determine the catalytically competent active site structure of the bacterial
              elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu) in GTP hydrolysis.  EF-Tu will be isolated from E.
              coli JM109 into which the tufB gene of Thermus thermophilus has been cloned to
              overproduce the thermostable protein.  The perdeuterated protein will be
              isolated from bacteria grown on deuterated algal hydrolyzate as the culture
              medium.  Auxotrophic strains also suitably engineered to overproduce
              thermostable EF-Tu will be used for growth on deuterated medium to incorporate
              site specifically isotopically enriched amino acids. Since there is only one
              tyrosine, one lysine, one cysteine, one valine, and one proline within an 8 
              angstrom radius of the metal ion site in the protein, auxotropic strains
              specific for these amino acids will be chosen.  Although other sites in the
              protein will be also isotopically enriched for each amino acid according to its
              primary sequence, they are too distant from the metal ion to have prominent
              spectral contributions.  In preliminary studies we have already determined that
              the vanadyl (VO2+) ion specifically substitutes for Mg2+ and supports
              hydrolysis of GTP catalyzed by EF-Tu.  This cation will be employed as the
              paramagnetic probe for angle selected ENDOR to determine metal-to-nucleus
              distances by ENDOR and to assign positions of ENDOR active nuclei with respect
              to magnetic axes defined by the g tensor of VO2+).  The catalytically competent
              structure of the EF-Tu:VO2+:GTP complex in solution will be generated by rapid
              freeze-quenching of the solution for structural characteriztion by ENDOR
              spectroscopy.   The active site structure of other ternary complexes, namely
              the EF-Tu:VO2+:GDP, EF-Tu:VO2+:GDPCP  and the EF-Tu:VO2+GDPCP complexes, where
              the latter two nucleotides represent the  nonhydrolyzable (,( -imido and
              (,(-methylene analogs of GTP, respectively, will be also determined.  The
              methods will be also extended to determine active site structure of
              EF-Tu:VO2+:GTP complexed to amino acyl-tRNA.  %%%  The bacterial elongation
              factor Tu(EF-Tu) is an essential component in the biosynthesis of proteins and
              shows amino acid sequence homology with a variety of G-proteins in cells of
              higher organisms.  In order to carry out its function, EF-Tu binds and
              hydrolyzes GTP.  The structure of the catalytically active form of EF-Tu with
              GTP in the active site is not known. Determination of the structure of the
              protein-GTP complex will be accomplished by a series of electron nuclear double
              resonance (ENDOR) studies designed to measure interatomic distances between a
              catalytically active metal ion and magnetic nuclei on side-chains of nearby
              amino acid residues.  The structural information will be applicable to
              understanding structure-function relationships of a wide variety of other
              homologous G-proteins.   ***
