Title       : Photoperception and Chromatic Adaptation in Cyanobacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1998     
File        : a9513660

Award Number: 9513660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306006             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Schaefer schaeferm@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513660  Schaefer  Light is a critical environmental factor for photosynthetic
              organisms. In addition to driving photosynthesis, it provides the information
              necessary for acclimation and development in response to changes in ambient
              conditions. Most photosynthetic organisms can modulate their photosynthetic
              capacity to accommodate fluctuations in light availability. In many cases, the
              genes that encode components of the photosynthetic apparatus are under the
              control of wavelength-specific photoreceptors that initiate light-responsive
              signal transduction pathways. However, although photoperception and
              photoregulation of gene expression are well documented for different
              prokaryotic and eukaryotic phototrophs, the molecular mechanisms by which
              photoreceptors communicate with the gene regulatory machinery of cells are not.
              This research seeks to define a photoregulatory mechanism by focusing on
              photoperception and signal transduction involved in complementary chromatic
              adaptation by the filamentous cyanobacterium Fremyella diplosiphon.
              Complementary chromatic adaptation is the process by which this organism senses
              changes in light quality and responds by altering the phycobiliprotein
              composition of the light-harvesting phycobilisome. This acclimation response
              involves a signaling mechanism that links the activity of a photoreceptor to
              regulated expression of specific phycobiliprotein genes. Two molecular genetic
              approaches are being used to identify and isolate genes involved in
              complementary chromatic adaptation. Both approaches are based on a collection
              of pigment mutants characterized by aberrant chromatic adaptation (regulatory
              mutants) or altered phycobilisome structure (structural mutants). The first
              approach involves complementation of different classes of chromatic adaptation
              regulatory mutants. A complementation library of wild-type genomic DNA will be
              constructed and introduced into mutant cells by conjugation. For each
              complemented exconjugant, the complementing plasmid will be rescued an d
              analyzed to identify the responsible gene(s). The second approach is based on a
              recently developed system for identifying chromatic adaptation genes by
              transposon-tagging with endogenous transposon Tn5469. Select pigment mutants in
              which replicative transposition of Tn5469 was the probable mutagenic event have
              been identified and will be used to isolate the affected gene. A correlation
              between Tn5469 transposition and the mutant phenotype will be confirmed by
              complementation with a corresponding wild-type genomic DNA fragment. By
              characterizing the isolated genes, a molecular frarnework for the chromatic
              adaptation photosensory and signaling mechanisms can be established. This work
              offers a unique opportunity to dissect the signaling circuitry by which a
              photoreceptor communicates with the genes it regulates and will provide a new
              window into the molecular basis of biological phototransduction.  ***  =?
