Title       : Signal Transduction in Arabidopsis Root Gravitropism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9513991

Award Number: 9513991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243909             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon Gilroy sxg12@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Gravity is a fundamental signal that regulates plant growth and form. Despite
              its importance to plant success, the cellular and molecular events whereby
              higher plants sense and respond to the gravity signal are essentially unknown. 
              It is thought that in the root gravity is perceived in cap cells and that this
              signal is converted to asymmetrical growth through a mechanism involving
              asymmetrical auxin and Ca2+ distribution.  Much of the debate can be traced to
              our relative ignorance of the interacting signaling systems that tranduce,
              coordinate and integrate these tropic responses.  The goal of this research is
              therefore to define these critical gravetropic signaling systems and how they
              interact, to the cellular level, using the roots of Arabidopsis thaliana as a
              model system.  Experiments are proposed using laser ablation to define the
              graviperceptive cells of the root cap with single cell resolution. 
              Fluorescence tagging of single cell walls will then be used to map the temporal
              and spatial components of individual cellular growth response in the elongating
              region of the root.  Confocal and ratio fluorescent imaging will be applied to
              the intact root to visualize Ca2+- and pH-dependent signaling responses as the
              root responds to gravity.  Signal related changes in these second messengers
              will then be mimicked or blocked by microinjecting the defined perceptive and
              responsive cells with Ca2+ and pH-related signaling molecules and their
              antagonists.  Finally, experiments will be performed to generate defined
              gradients of auxin, Ca2+ and pH in root tissue in intact plants using localized
              release of caged forms of these putative regulators.  These experiments will
              directly test the hypothesis that asymmetries in these regulators are involved
              in coordinating the tropic growth along the intact root.  Results from the
              research will extend our understanding of gravity responses in roots
              specifically, and help define the interactions that integrate the growth
              responses of plant organs to environmental signals in general.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
