Title       : Genetics of Chromosome Structure and Segregation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1997   
File        : a9513382

Award Number: 9513382
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory S. May   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      One Baylor Plaza
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/798-6970

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9513382  May  The identification of conditional mutations that disrupt
              mitosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, and Aspergillus
              nidulans has allowed the scientific community  to begin to understand the
              events of this fundamental genetic process at a molecular level. Conditional
              mutations in the A. nidulans gene bimD lead to an aberrant mitotic spindle with
              one-third the normal number of microtubules. Strains carrying such bimD
              mutations undergo an abortive mitosis during which the chromosomes fail to
              attach to the remaining spindle microtubules and do not migrate to the poles.
              In addition, at permissive temperature, mutations in bimD confer sensitivity to
              DNA damaging agents: following mutagen treatment, bimD mutants enter mitosis
              and die. The investigator has cloned and sequenced bimD, which encodes a novel
              polypeptide with a predicted structure suggesting  a DNA-binding protein with
              properties of the bzip class of transcription factors.  Attempting to identify
              other molecular components of the chromosome segregation process, the
              investigator also has discovered several mutations that suppress the
              heat-sensitive mitotic defect of the bimD6 mutation. He has cloned and
              sequenced one of these extragenic suppressor genes and determined that its gene
              product is a member of the widely distributed family of DA-box proteins.
              Members of this family include the yeast SMCl and SMC2 gene products, the S.
              pombe cut3+ and cutl4+ gene products, the Caenorhabditis elegans dpy-27 gene
              product, and the Xenopus laevis XCAP-C and XCAP-E chromosomal proteins. These
              products have roles in such processes as chromosome segregation, gene dosage
              compensation, and X chromosome-specific repression of transcription.  Thus the
              investigator's identification of the suppressor gene as a DA-box protein gene
              supports his hypothesis that these genes function in chromosome segregation. 
              The initial focus of the current study will be the identification of the other
              genes whose products participate in this  pathway by cloning the remaining
              extragenic suppressors of bimD6. Understanding how these products function 
              will lead to new insights into mitosis at a molecular level.  %%%  Mitosis is
              the process by which eukaryotic cells equally divide their genetic information
              following its replication. Mitosis must occur in a precise and orderly manner
              for the survival of the cell and/or organism. While the major events of mitosis
              have been known for a long time, the detailed molecular mechanisms underlying
              many of them remain a mystery.  Through the  analysis of (1) fungal strains in
              which the process is disrupted by mutation and (2) strains (derived from one of
              the original disrupted strains) which carry compensating mutations, the
              principal investigator will broaden our understanding of the molecular details
              of this fundamental process.  ***
