Title       : Gradients and the Control of Pattern Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1997  
File        : a9513550

Award Number: 9513550
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Small small@is3.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             ,                    C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               =   >   ?   @   A   B   C   D   E   F   G                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 ((((                                                                        
                :ll:   <flffl   xhh```    llllf   xh00hx     >hl  =P   u      P  Z   Bookman
              Old Style (Light)  (TT) BriemScript  (TT) Playbill  (TT) Book Antiqua  (TT)
              Braggadocio  (TT) Peignot Medium (Medium)  (TT) Arial Narrow  (TT) Bookman Old
              Style (DemiBold Italic)  (TT) Parade  (TT) Times Bell MT  (TT) Onyx  (TT 
              9513550 Small  A central question in modern biology is how genetic information
              establishes body form in higher eukaryotes. In Drosophila, the establishment of
              the body plan involves the coordinate activities of a hierarchy of segmentation
              genes, which establish a template of reiterated segments along the
              anterior-posterior axis, and homeotic genes, which  specify the identity of
              each segment. At every step in the segmentation hierarchy, there are
              significant refinements in patterns of gene expression that culminate in the
              expression of the segment polarity genes in patterns of fourteen transverse
              rows of single cells  that will give rise to the future border cells of the
              segments. The most dramatic example of such a refinement is seen in the
              transition from the broad expression domains of the gap genes to the metameric
              striped patterns of the pair-rule genes. Recent molecular analyses suggest that
              this transition involves direct DNA binding of the protein products encoded by
              the gap genes to the cis regulatory regions (enhancers) of the pair-rule genes.
               Although much effort has been expended eluc idating the structure of the
              enhancers involved in these interactions, relatively little is known about the
              trans control of the patterns. However, it has been hypothesized that gap
              proteins may act as graded morphogens to control pair-rule gene activity in a
              concentration dependent manner. The gap genes also play a crucial role in
              establishing the positions of expression of the homeotic genes, which are
              important for specifying the identity of individual segments later in
              development. This proposal outlines a series of experiments designed to
              directly test the gradient model of morphogenesis for gap genes during
              segmentation, and the role of the homeotic genes in segmental specification. In
              these studies, a combination of  genetic analyses and indirect misexpression
              techniques will be performed to precisely alter gap and homeotic gene
              expression patterns in the blastoderm. The misexpression experiments will use
              the well characterized stripe 2 enhancer from the even-skipped gene to control
              the position and timing of ectopic expression. By manipulating known binding
              sites in this enhancer, the shape and level of ectopic expression can be
              changed in a very precise way. Preliminary results suggest that misexpressing
              the gap gene, knirps causes disruptions in segmentation expression patterns
              that are consistent with a gradient mechanism of morphogenesis. Surprisingly,
              the disruptions do not cause lethality during embryogenesis, with many
              individual mutants surviving to late stages of puparium formation. Therefore,
              the experiments proposed here will not only permit the analysis of how
              embryonic genes interact to form more refined expression patterns, but also how
              these patterns control cell fate decisions important for the formation of the
              larval and adult body form. ***                         ;                      
                              Oh     +'  0                                       $       H   
                 l                                               D       h                   
                                              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                  
                S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                           (              
                                                  <                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  9513550                    
                      eozsaruh                            eozsaruh                    @     @
                                          @                                   @     @        
                                                                                             
                          @    F #                                    Microsoft Word 6.0     
                                                              2                              
                                                                      ;         e =       e  
                          a                       a                                       j  
                  j   j       j       j       j       j                                      
                                              4   1                                          
                                                                                             
              e   T       +   4                       j                                      
                                                4               j       j                    
                                                                j               j            
                                        ~               j       j       j       j            
                            .                                                                
                                                9513550 Small  A central question in modern
              biology is how
