Title       : Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1996   
File        : a9513004

Award Number: 9513004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220809             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Murray murray@anat3d1.anatomy.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean M. Sanger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph W. Sanger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth A. Bucher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Our knowledge of the functional architecture of normal  tissue is gained slowly
              because tools for studying cell  structure have been either very tedious to use
              (electron  microscopy) or ineffective in cells of normal thickness 
              (conventional light microscopy). The aim of this proposal is  to acquire a
              system for studying the 3D functional  architecture of cells based on the
              revolutionary new  techniques of confocal light microscopy. This system will be
               utilized by a core user group of cell, developmental, and  neuro-biologists
              who are engaged in the following major  areas of research.      1) a mutational
              analysis of morphogenetic mutants of C.  elegans;    2) the distribution of
              integrins in developing skeletal  muscle membranes;    3) examining the changes
              of distribution of proteins and       membranes involved in excitation
              contraction coupling       resulting from targeted mutations in the ryanodine  
                  receptor;    4) correlative light and EM studies of the structure and      
              arrangement of microtubules and MAPS in the mitotic       spindle;    S) the
              attachment of actin filaments to the cleavage furrow       membrane of dividing
              cells;    6) studying the recruitment of cytoskeletal proteins by the      
              intracellular bacteria Listeria    monocytogenes;    7) the microcircuitry of
              retinal ganglion cell  interconnections.          The subjects studied by this
              core user group are  diverse. However, we share the need for a rapid way of 
              studying cell architecture in the 0.1 to 1.0  resolution  range, a way that is
              not rendered useless by tissue  thickness in the range 0.1-0.5 mm. We have
              jointly used a  previous generation laser scanning confocal microscope very 
              productively in our research, and have demonstrated that an  up-to-date
              instrument would open up exciting new  possibilities for all of us.
