Title       : U.S.-Mexico Workshop: Collaborative Long-term Research Across North American
               Biomes, May 1996
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1996     
File        : a9513041

Award Number: 9513041
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27180              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Yates tyates@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer K. Frey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
Program Ref : 0000,5922,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9513041  Yates    This Americas Program award will fund travel and related 
              expenses for eight U.S. scientists to participate in a  workshop on
              International Ecology and  Biodiversity.  The  workshop will consist of two
              meetings, one in Puerto  Vallarta, Mexico and the second one in the U.S. at the
               Sevilleta Long-Term Ecological Research site at the  Sevilleta National
              Wildlife Refuge in New Mexico.  The  primary objectives are to establish new
              collaborations  between researchers from the U.S. and Mexico and to open new 
              directions for international research.  Holding meetings at  the two sites will
              allow the participants to gain a much  better understanding of the ecological
              diversity represented  across the North American continent.  The second meeting
               will be held a few months after the first to provide time  for consideration
              of discussions from the first meeting, and  facilitate better and more rapid
              proposal development at the  second meeting.    Variation and diversity are
              essential elements in the  maintenance of population, species, communities,
              ecosystems  and the entire biosphere.   Biological systems serve as a  buffer
              against dramatic change, and  are critical to  ecosystem maintenance, but
              despite this important function,  species are being lost and ecosystems altered
              at an ever  increasing rate. Much of the observed changes on local  scales are
              the results of larger scale problems, such as  global change. The solutions to
              these problems will require  international cooperation and research on multiple
              scales.  This project will contribute to the development of an  international
              network of scientists interested  in  researching these problems in the North
              American continent.  ***
