Title       : Proteasomes in the Methanogenic Archea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1997     
File        : a9513863

Award Number: 9513863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Ferry jgf3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513863  Ferry  Proteasomes are prevalent in the Eucarya domain where they have
              at least three distinct endopeptidase activities which catalyze hydrolysis of
              peptide bonds on the carboxyl side of hydrophobic, basic, and acidic amino acid
              residues. It is proposed that the eukaryotic proteasome is the "catalytic core"
              in a larger complex that degrades proteins labeled with ubiquitin in an
              ATP-dependent process. A earlier survey of species from the Bacteria and
              Archaea domains led to the suggestion that Thermoplasma species are the only
              prokaryotes containing proteasomes. Recent documentation of proteasomes in
              phylogenetically and physiologically diverse species of methanogenic microbes,
              the largest group in the Archaea, demonstrates that proteasomes are more
              widespread among prokaryotes than previously known. The overall focus of this
              work is an investigating into the physiology, biochemistry and molecular
              biology of protein turnover in this large group of anaerobic microbes. The
              specific aims of this project are: (1) biochemically characterize the
              Methanosarcina thermophila proteasome, and (2) address its physiological
              function by ascertaining the factors influencing the regulation of proteasome
              synthesis and activity, and determining the roles for the proteasome and
              ubiquitin in protein turnover. The results are expected to: (1) expand the
              fundamental knowledge of the evolution, mechanism and function of ubiquitin and
              proteasomes in all of nature, (2) provide a broader understanding of the
              biochemistry, genetics and physiology of M. thermophila and the methanogenic
              Archaea, and (3) help to further define the evolutionary relationships between
              the Archaea and Eucarya domains.  %%%  Proteasomes are complex enzyme
              aggregates that mediate protein breakdown in eukaryotic cells.  Recently,
              proteasomes have been identified in archaebacteria, one of the two major groups
              of prokaryotes.  In this project, the molecular structure of proteasomes from a
              methane-producing bacterium, Methanosarcina thermophila  will be studied.  In
              addition, the function of these structures will be investigated.  The results
              will provide evidence about evolutionary relationships among major groups of
              organisms as well as information about how archaebacteria regulate degradation
              of their proteins, an unexplored area.  ***
