Title       : Mechanisms of Enzymatic Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9513398

Award Number: 9513398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey F. Fisher hfisher@kumc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Med Center
	      39TH & Rainbow Boulevard
	      Kansas City, KS  66103    913/588-1207

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513398  Fisher  The long term goal of this laboratory is to understand enzymes
              as functioning biological machines.  We hope to learn the chemistry of their
              mechanisms, how their structural features initiate and control that chemistry,
              and how the energetics of their operation is related to the chemical and
              structural events that occur  in their  reaction  time course of the mammalian
              glutamate dehydrogenase catalyzed reaction; and 2.  To resolve the time course
              of that reaction into a series  precisely  defined "open" and "closed" phases. 
              This proposal is focused on the chemical mechanism of bovine liver glutamate
              dehydrogenase.  In our previous work we have identified and characterized most
              of the important enzyme complexes involved and have established the locations
              of many of them in the reaction  time course.  Our recent progress has resulted
              in the discovery of a new prehydride transfer charge-transfer complex;  the
              preliminary  identification of the final required post hydride complex (a
              carbinolamine form); the finding that an  obligatory proton release step which
              occurs prior to hydride transfer in the mammalian enzyme is shifted to a much
              later phase in a corresponding bacterial enzyme form whose chemistry and
              active-site architecture appear to be otherwise identical.  We have also
              developed some new investigative tools, including a new theory of transient
              state kinetic isotope effects (whose application we have demonstrated
              experimentally).   We propose now to apply these methods and some new
              experimental approaches to solve two specific objectives.  These new methods
              include the use of a very simple mass-law based kinetic approach to integrate
              the component-concentration time courses we can now produce using a recently
              acquired apparatus into a completely defined scheme.  We w ill also apply and
              continue to develop our new transient-state kinetic isotope effect theory.  The
              second objective will be pursued using a variety of multimixing "kinetic-jump"
              experiments to determine the co nformational state of the intermediate
              complexes.  Molecular engineering, the ability to alter proteins to meet man's
              needs is a well defined national goal.  The information required to fulfill
              this need is in the form of understanding a series of structure-function
              relationships at a detailed level.  The current approach in the field is the
              combination of protein crystal structure information  and site directed
              mutagenesis of those structures.  However, without a more detailed knowledge of
               the mechanisms of action of these biological machines, we cannot formulate the
              proper questions.  The work proposed here is intended to provide just such
              knowledge.  %%%  The long  term goal of this laboratory is to understand
              enzymes as functioning biological machines.  We hope to learn the chemistry of
              their mechanisms, how their structural features initiate and control that
              chemistry, and how the energetics of their operations is related to the
              chemical and structural events that occur in their reaction sequences.  Our
              immediate objectives are: 1. To complete the kinetic resolution of the reaction
              time course of the mammalian glutamate dehydrogenase catalyzed reaction; and 2,
              To resolve the time course of that reaction into a series of precisely defined
              "open" an "closed" phases.  This proposal is focused on the chemical mechanism
              of bovine liver glutamate dehydrogenase.  We have developed two important new
              tool which we will apply to enable us to understand the mechanism of enzymatic
              catalysis at a deeper level: 1. a very simple mass-law based kinetic  approach
              to integrate the component-concentration time courses we can now produce using
              a recently acquired apparatus into a completely defined scheme; and 2, a new
              transient-state kinetic isotope effect theory.  Molecular engineering, the
              ability to alter proteins to meet man's needs, is a well  defined national
              goal.  The work proposed here is intended to provide just such knowledge.  ***
