Title       : Violent Behavior: Individual, Situational and Community Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a9513040

Award Number: 9513040
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9865804            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred Blumstein ab0q@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              BLUMSTEIN  SBR-9513040  This award provides support for a National Consortium on
              Violence Research located at Carnegie Mellon University.  The Consortium will
              develop a comprehensive and focused program of research on the causes and
              consequences of violence.  It is designed to bring the fullest range of
              insights and perspectives to improve our understanding and ability to
              effectively deal with the growing problems of interpersonal violence.  The
              Consortium will  coordinate empirical and theoretical research
              multidisciplinary research and research training across a broad range of
              individual and societal aspects related to the subject of interpersonal
              violence.     The Consortium is comprised of a team of  prominent researchers
              with a significant variety of disciplinary backgrounds (i.g. biology,
              criminology, economics geography, operations research, political science,
              psychology, public health, public policy, sociology, statistics) and  extensive
              research experience and methodological expertise that will be applied to the
              study of violence.  This multidisciplinary, multi-institutional research team
              consists of 39 individuals at 24 institutions in 11 states and 4 countries.  
              The Consortium will focus on increasing knowledge about the dynamics of 
              violence at three levels of violence:  (1) Individual Development Level--how
              and why people develop into violent individuals, and how and why they cease to
              be violent; (2) Situational Dynamics Level--how and why some conflict
              situations escalate into actual violent encounters, while others do not; and
              (3) Community Dynamics Level, how and why some communities, including
              public-housing communities in particular, develop high levels of violence.   
              As an integral part of its extensive research agenda, the Consortium is
              strongly committed to training the next generation of scholars in research on
              violence.  This will be accomplished through a post-doctoral program that
              emphasizes strong technical and research skills; a decentralized pre-doctoral
              program; re cruitment of undergraduates to do research with consortium members;
              and recruitment as research collaborators faculty members from institutions
              with large minority populations.  External communications, especially with
              practitioners and policy-makers, will also be an important activity.     
              Spurred  by the extremely high levels of violence in the United States compared
              to other industrial nations, and by the dramatic rise in violence among young
              people in recent years, interpersonal violence has emerged as a highly salient
              matter of public concern that urgently needs major concerted scientific
              attention.  The search for effective public policy and intervention strategies
              has made it clear that much more intense effort is needed to develop
              sophisticated and comprehensive scientific approaches to generate valid and
              applicable knowledge about the many facets of violence.  In supporting this
              National Consortium, the National Science Foundation seeks to create a vehicle
              to advance fundamental knowledge on violence and to serve a catalytic and
              leadership role in stimulating new scientific connections on this issue.  ***
