Title       : US-Czech Research on Plant Taphonomic Character of Intermontane Carboniferous
               Floras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1998     
File        : a9513189

Award Number: 9513189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23563              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Gastaldo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5930,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              INT 9513189  Gastaldo        This U.S.-Czech paleobotanical research project
              between Robert Gastaldo of Auburn University and Zbynek Simunek of the Czech
              Geological Survey will examine Carboniferous plants of the Bohemian Massif as
              represented in geologic deposits of three intermontane basins of the Czech
              Republic.  The intent is to compare the characteristics of these deposition
              environments with lowland coastal floras of peat swamps and clastic substrate
              plant assemblages found in the Mississippian-Pennslyvanian stratotype section
              of the Appalachians which are well known to the U.S. participants.  The
              comparative work will draw heavily upon a large fossil plant collection
              extracted from boreholes over past decades by the Czech Geological Survey.  The
              intent is to interpret these data sets within dispositional context.        
              Results of this cooperative study should contribute to our knowledge of the
              taphonomic conditions of Carboniferous floras in the intermontane basins of the
              United States.  This is significant because most Euramerican strata were
              subjected to wide-scale fluctuations in eustatic sea level.  In contrast,
              samples from the Bohemian Massif offer examples of continuous disposition
              within intermontane basins.  A comparative understanding of the
              sedimentological and floras aspects in these basins is expected to yield
              valuable new information on paleoclimate change and vegetational responses
              during an area spanning the Namurian (Late Mississippian) into the Autunian
              (Late Pennsylvanian-Early Permian).  This will provide an opportunity to assess
              Carboniferous vegetation change over this geological interval in a setting
              outside coastal influences.  Additionally, results may provide practical
              insights concerning the origin of sulfur and ash in coal beds as well as coal
              bed methane potential in intermontane basins, in general.    This project in
              paleobotany and paleoenvironmental research fulfills the program objective of
              advancing basic scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts  in the United
              States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool research
              resources in areas of mutual interest and competence.           ??
