Title       : Mechanisms of Chromosome Partitioning in Caulobacter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1998       
File        : a9513222

Award Number: 9513222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Gober gober@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Gober  95-13222  The bacterium Caulobacter crescentus expresses polarity during
              its cell cycle that is generated by a simple developmental program. Cell
              division yields two dissimilar daughter cells: a motile swarmer cell and a
              sessile stalked cell. These two cell types differ in their relative programs of
              gene expression and DNA replication. The progeny stalked cell reinitiates DNA
              replication immediately after cell division, whereas replication is silenced
              for a defined period of time in the swarmer cell. The Caulobacter developmental
              cycle allows the experimental analysis of the basic mechanisms underlying cell
              cycle controlled gene expression, the regulation of DNA replication and the
              molecular basis of positional information. The objectives of this research are
              to genetically and biochemically determine the molecular basis of chromosomal
              partitioning and the coupling of this event to cell division in Caulobacter.
              The ease at which synchronized populations can be obtained plus, the intrinsic
              asymmetry of the Caulobacter predivisional cell make it an ideal system for
              tracking the subcellular location of newly replicated chromosomes and the
              proteins that direct them during the partitioning process. Specifically, the
              role of the cellular homologues of plasmid partitioning gene products (parA and
              parB) in chromosomal partitioning will be determined.  In bacterial cells the
              newly replicated chromosomes efficiently partition to the poles of the
              predivisonal cell, ensuring that each daughter cell inherits its own copy of
              the chromosome Partitioning of unit- or low-copy number plasmids may provide an
              experimental framework with which to dissect chromosome partitioning. Plasmid
              partitiomng is accomplished in part, through the action of, ParA and ParB, two
              plasmid-specific gene products. Both ParA and ParB are necessary for efficient
              plasmid partitioning. ParB functions as a DNA binding protein and specifically
              binds the plasmid centromere, which is often located immediately downstream of
              the parB cod ing sequence. ParA is homologous to a large family of ATPases and
              plays an undefined role in partitioning. In several species of bacteria, the
              chromosomal homologues of parA and parB have been identified. The parA and parB
              homologues of Caulobacter have been cloned and sequenced. These two genes are
              expressed as an operon and immediately following the parB coding region lies a
              DNA sequence containing a number of inverted and direct repeats that could
              serve as the centromere during partitioning. Genetic experiments indicate that
              parA is essential for cell viability and parB is required for efficient
              partitioning of chromosomal DNA. The parAB operon is expressed under cell cycle
              control, with peal~ expression occurring at the latter stages of DNA
              replication. Furthermore, ParA is concentrated at the poles of the Caulobacter
              cell. ParA and ParB may have several possible roles in chromosome partitioning.
              First, they may directly participate in chromosome movement by functioning to
              tether or direct the chromosomes to the locomotor apparatus. Alternatively,
              they may function in regulating a cell cycle checkpoint that coordinates
              chromosome partitioning and cell division.  In order to dissect the roles of
              ParA and ParB in chromosome partitioning in Caulobacter, the following
              experimental approaches are being taken: (1) Genetic analysis of the
              Caulobacter parA and parB genes will be performed to determine their role in
              chromosome partitioning and cell division. In addition, the proteins that
              specifically interact with ParA and ParB during cell division and chromosome
              partitioning will be identlfied using a genetic suppressor analysis and a
              two-hybrid screen. Par protein interactions will also be assayed utilizing in
              vitro techniques including co-immunoprecipitation (2) The function of ParB DNA
              binding activity and its role in chromosome partitioning will be determined.
              (3) The mechanisms responsible for the cell cycle regulation of parA andparB
              expression and the subcellular location of ParA and ParB du ring the cell
              division cycle will be defined. To determine whether ParA or ParB function in a
              cell cycle checkpoint, the effect of conditional parA and parB mutations on the
              coordination of cell division, the timing of initiation of DNA replication and
              the expression of developmentally regulated genes will be tested.  This
              research will contribute to a basic understanding of an importnt component of
              bacterial reproduction.
