Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Optimal Generation of Elastic Waves in
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1999     
File        : a9513935

Award Number: 9513935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fu-Kuo Chang fkchang@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1038,5936,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Fu-Kuo Chang and three graduate students from
              Stanford University to collaborate in mechanical engineering research with
              Professor Peter Hagedorn and his colleagues and students of the Mechanics
              Institute of the Technische Hochschule of Darmstadt, Germany.  They are
              studying ultrasonic elastic wave propagation in a structure, where the waves
              are generated by piezoelectrics (PZT) built into the structure.  The U.S. team
              uses PZT-generated waves to detect damage in functioning structures made of
              composite materials.  The German team is particularly interested in the
              propagation of such waves as an aspect of the design of advanced ultrasound
              motors.  The cooperating groups will be involved both in experiments using
              surface-mounted and embedded piezoceramics and in developing the analytical
              models of these systems.  Because of the complementarity of their interests and
              approaches, both groups should benefit from this coordinated joint research. 
              Early detection of service-induced damage in structures such as airplanes and
              bridges plays an essential role in prolonging the lifespan of the structures
              and in providing safe use of the structures.  Clearly  damage detection
              techniques must be non-destructive and ideally they should be convenient to
              perform on-site during routine maintenance. Ultrasonic wave generation is a
              promising new approach to this diagnostic process.  The results of the proposed
              cooperative  research will improve fundamental understanding of piezo-induced
              ultrasound propagation, and it will provide the basis for tailoring the
              production of ultrasonic waves for specific applications by means of
              controlling the piezo electrics.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
