Title       : Rapid Mechanochemical Screening of Biologically Ligands Using Submicrogram
               Amounts of Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1996    
File        : a9513571

Award Number: 9513571
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144810             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor N. Morozov   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tamara Y. Morozova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We have developed a mechanochemical method of assay (MCA) to rapidly  test the
              binding ability of proteins or other macromolecules for  substances with low
              (no more than 1 kD) mol. weight. A characteristic  feature of this method
              consists in monitoring of ligand binding by  measuring changes in the isometric
              tension or elastic modulus of  cross-linked films of biomacromolecules which
              result from changes in  the conformation and/or mechanical properties of the
              macromolecules.  The method has been evaluated on samples of 17 different
              proteins, and  found to be a general and reliable probe of specific binding,
              capable  of determining the scale of ligand-induced conformational changes, 
              quantitative ligand affinities, and distinguishing specific from  nonspecific
              binding. MCA effectively complements other methods of  protein bioassays, which
              can fail to detect binding of small ligands,  especially in cases where the
              binding site does not contain any  reporter group(s) or when there are no 
              known ligands binding the protein.    A laboratory version of the
              mechanochemical device uses samples  containing only 100 ng of protein. Thus,
              in principle, even proteins  that are available in small quantities, such as
              receptors, can be  tested by this method. However, much larger amounts of
              protein (more  than 0.3-0.5 mg) are presently needed to prepare samples from
              protein  films. The present method of sample preparation also requires 
              micromanipulations with special instruments. These two drawbacks  present a
              barrier to wide applicability of this method. For this  reason, the main
              objective of this project consists in improving the  technology of sample
              preparation from microgram amounts of proteins  without micromanipulation.     
              The electrospray (ES) technology which has been developed to  introduce protein
              ions into mass spectrometers will be adapted to  fabricating protein
              microsamples. The ES technology project has the  following objectives:  (i)
              design and construction of a device that will allow ES of  protein      
              solutions under controlled conditions of humidity, temperature,      
              composition of atmosphere and other parameters that affect the       quality of
              deposited samples,  (ii) study of ES of protein solutions to identify ES
              conditions that       retain native properties of protein molecules (effects of
                    humidity, path of flight, temperature, pH, protecting agents,      
              etc.),  (iii) investigation of ES conditions ( optimal configuration of      
              electrostatic field, distance to substrate, form of masks, etc.)       to
              precisely deposit a protein sample onto a substrate,  (iv) studies on the
              dependence of internal structure of protein films       upon ES regimes, to
              make the MCA applicable to ligands with mol.       wt. larger, than 1 kD and 
              (v) elaboration of special substrates and procedures for easy       detachment
              of protein sample from an intermediate holder and its       transfer to the
              measuring device without micromanipulation.      The improved MCA should have
              broad applications in biochemistry, for  investigating the specificity of newly
              discovered proteins or proteins  available in small quantities, since a single
              sample, containing only  100 ng of protein can be used repeatedly in tests with
              different  ligands, provided the binding is reversible. It should also become 
              possible to use the MCA on receptor proteins. The quantity of protein 
              available from analytical electrophoresis will be enough to allow  screening of
              its possible specific inhibitors, allosteric effectors  etc. Since the MCA and
              the device based on it makes it possible to  detect specific binding and
              evaluate the concentration of a bound  ligand, they can be used also as
              universal biosensors with replaceable  sensitive elements and as detectors
              allowing easy recognition of  analytes in chromatography.
