Title       : Structural, Association, and Kinetic Properties of Dehydrogenases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9513613

Award Number: 9513613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard O. Spivey ospivey@biochem.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9513613  Anomalous kinetics for the coupled reactions of
              dehydrogenases (DeHs) of opposite chiral specificity have been well documented
              since 1940. The only simple explanation of the anomalies is that the complex of
              donor enzyme with NADH (El NADH) can directly transfer NADH to an acceptor
              enzyme E2 so that NADH doesn't significantly equilibrate with the bulk aqueous
              phase. That is:  NADH is a competent substrate for E2. The potential metabolic
              consequences of this "channeling" are far greater than commonly realized. For
              example, 1) channeling permits enzyme reactions to proceed independently of
              bulk phase substrate concentrations, 2) channeling isolates metabolites from
              competing reactions, 3) enzyme bound substrates avoid the inadequate solvation
              capacity of the cell, 4) the desolvated state of substrates bound to enzymes
              may be a major factor in enzyme rate enhancement, 5) channeling permits larger
              degree of control by the enzymes according to recently extended metabolic
              control theory, and 6) channeling systems are subject to regulation by
              modulators that affect enzyme associations. Most of these consequences result
              from the microcompartmentation of metabolites that is inherent in this
              mechanism. A puzzling aspect of NADH channeling among the DeHs, however, was
              the difficulty in observing the El NADH E2 complex in vitro. Peticolas et al.
              appear to have resolved this problem by demonstrating that association of the
              two enzymes depends critically on the NADH concentration. Their experiments
              were limited to the a-glycerol-P (aGPD) & lactate (LDH) DeH enzyme pair (plus a
              negative control with two A chiral specific DeHs), two NADH concentrations, and
              a single experimental method. Because of the potential significance of this
              process in metabolism, we propose the following overlapping objectives. 1)
              Characterize the NADH modulation of the association of dehydrogenases to: a)
              more definitively establish the properties of the LDH-aGPD system, and b) test
              the generality of this NADH modulat ion among other enzyme pairs. 2) Correlate
              these enzyme associations with the efficiencies of substrate channeling among
              different enzyme pairs, and 3) Correlate these association and channeling
              properties with the molecular structures of the donor and acceptor enzymes.
              Enzyme associations will be studied by fluorescence polarization, agarose gel
              electrophoresis, Hummel-Dreyer size exclusion chromatography, analytical
              ultracentrifugation, and differential thermal titration methods. In addition,
              the possibility that the association of E1 with E2 occurs only during the
              steady-state of the E2 catalyzed reaction will be tested by computer
              simulations. NADH channeling will be characterized by the "enzyme buffering
              method" and metabolic control theory and experiments. These functional
              properties will be correlated with enzyme structures using molecular graphics
              and related programs to deduce the common determinants among the nearly 15 DeH
              enzymes with known crystal structures. The fact that only A-B pairs of DeHs
              channel NADH provides us an excellent opportunity to achieve these objectives.
              In a highly related study, the channeling of metabolites in situ will also be
              tested using permeabilized PC12 cells.  %%%  Enzymes are responsible for all
              basic metabolic reactions as well as other reactions, e.g., those replicating
              and translating the genetic information of cells and the signaling processes of
              cells. The classical model of the cell assumes that most of the enzymes (and
              consequently also their metabolic products) of the major metabolic pathways are
              randomly distributed within their cell compartments. Furthermore, our
              understanding of the regulation of metabolism is significantly dependent on
              this simplifying assumption. Very strong evidence has accumulated, however,
              that instead, many of these enzymes are associated with the next enzyme in the
              metabolic sequence. This permits the direct transfer of metabolic products from
              one enzyme to the next without their random distribution within the cell comp
              artment. If this occurs, metabolic properties will be significantly different
              from those that we currently assume to exist. Consequently, we plan to test for
              the presence of these enzyme associations among an important class of enzymes
              and to also determine the consequences of these associations on the metabolic
              reactions that these enzymes catalyze. For technical reasons, these enzyme
              associations are much smaller outside the cell than within. Thus special
              methods are required to detect the associations outside the cell and
              measurements of channeling in situ will also be attempted. In addition, the
              molecular structures of many of these enzymes are now known from x-ray studies.
              Thus we shall correlate these molecular structures with the enzyme association
              and metabolic properties.  ***  ??
