Title       : Characterization of a Translational Regulatory Particle fromXenopus Oocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1998   
File        : a9513751

Award Number: 9513751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary T. Murray mmurray@cmb.biosci.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513751  Murray  Nontranslated mRNAs are packaged by protein particles into
              messenger ribonucleoprotein particles (mRNPs) in male and female germ cells.
              Both the storage of these mRNAs and their correct temporal mobilization to
              polyribosomes are required for germ cell differentiation and the earliest
              stages of embryogenesis. This research will study the evolutionarily conserved
              protein components of translationally regulated mRNPs. Translational regulation
              of maternal and paternal mRNPs is likely to involve both general mRNP proteins
              and, in some cases, sequence-specific mRNA-binding proteins dedicated to
              specific mRNAs. The goal of this research project is to characterize the
              general mRNP component and the mechanism by which it regulates translation of
              maternal mRNAs in Xenopus laevis.  This research will identify Xenopus oocyte
              protein particles that inhibit in vitro translation of particle-bound mRNA. The
              translational regulatory particle (TRP) will be purified, and its composition
              and activities characterized. Its mechanism of translational inhibition will be
              determined by analyzing TRP-mRNA interactions, and how this effects
              translational initiation. We will also evaluate possible involvement of TRP in
              the translational mobilization process. This analysis of Xenopus oocyte TRP
              will lead to an understanding of an evolutionarily conserved process that is
              essential for germ cell differentiation, fertility and early embryogenesis of
              many species, including human.  %%%  Nontranslated mRNAs are inactive templates
              for protein synthesis that are packaged by protein particles into messenger
              ribonucleoprotein particles (mRNPs) in male and female germ cells, the
              precursors to sperm and egg. Both the storage of these mRNAs and their correct
              temporal mobilization to polyribosomes when they become active templates for
              protein synthesis are required for development of the fertilized egg. The frog
              Xenopus laevis is best suited for this analysis because of its reproductive
              strategy of releasing thousands of  eggs, and the high degree of evolutionary
              conservation of some previously studied mRNP proteins to the mammalian
              proteins.  Xenopus oocyte (egg) protein particles that inhibit in vitro
              translation of particle-bound mRNA will be identified, the translational
              regulatory particle (TRP) purified, and its composition and activities
              characterized. Its mechanism of inhibition of protein synthesis will be
              determined by analyzing TRP-mRNA interactions, and how this effects
              translational initiation. We will also evaluate possible involvement of TRP in
              the translational mobilization process. This analysis of Xenopus oocyte TRP
              will lead to an understanding of an evolutionarily conserved process that is
              essential for germ cell differentiation, fertility and early embryo development
              of many species, including human.  ***
