Title       : Genetic Analysis of Membrane Traffic in Mammalian Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2000     
File        : a9513244

Award Number: 9513244
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308526             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rockford K. Draper draper@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              95-13244  Draper    Eukaryotic cells consist of various endomembranous
              structures, each with a unique complement of proteins and lipids. Despite a
              dynamic membrane traffic involving transfer of membrane components from one
              compartment to another, the membranes maintain their distinct composition. This
              dynamic membrane traffic is presumed to occur by membrane vesicles that
              originate at donor membranes, migrate to acceptor membranes, and fuse to the
              acceptor compartment. The mechanisms by which vesicles are formed and by which
              vesicles identify and fuse to the acceptor compartment are poorly understood.
              This proposal is concerned with gaining insights into the molecular events in
              membrane trafficking. Dr. Draper has isolated temperature-sensitive mutants of
              CHO cells that comprise five complementation groups, End1 through End5, that
              are defective in certain aspects of membrane trafficking. The focus of this
              proposal is to gain insights into the nature of the mutants of the End4
              complementation group and to isolate new mutants. Mutants of the End4 group
              have a block at the non-permissive temperature in endoplasmic reticulum to
              Golgi transport that correlates with a dissipation of the latter. The
              objectives of the proposal are to establish an in vitro system to biochemically
              analyze the End4 mutants, to clone the affected gene by complementation, and to
              isolate and characterize mutants that are resistant to protein toxins and are
              also defective in membrane trafficking.  %%%  Eukaryotic cells consist of
              various endomembranous structures, each with a unique complementation of
              proteins and lipids. Despite a dynamic membrane traffic involving transfer of
              membrane components from one compartment to another, the compartments maintain
              their distinct membrane composition. This dynamic membrane traffic is presumed
              to occur by the formation of membrane vesicles at the donor compartment,
              migration of these to the acceptor compartment, and fusion to the acceptor
              compartment. The mechanisms by which vesicles are  formed, by which vesicles
              identify and fuse to the acceptor compartment are poorly understood. This
              proposal is concerned with gaining insights into the molecular events of
              membrane trafficking.  ***
