Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research: Microstructure and Alloying Effects on the
               Reliability of Conductor Lines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9513887

Award Number: 9513887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Nix bill.nix@forsythe.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1771,5936,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professors William Nix and John Bravman, plus two graduate
              students, all from Stanford University, to collaborate in studies of failures
              in electronic materials with Professor Eduard Arzt and his research group of
              the Institute for Metallurgy of the University of Stuttgart, Germany. 
              Professor Arzt and his students have pioneered the study of `interface
              controlled` deformation processes, and they have developed a new technique for
              studying electromigration failure.  The U.S. group led by Professor Nix has
              developed models to describe the flow and accumulation of ions in conductor
              lines and the initial stages of void formation.  They also have specialized
              equipment for studying the formation and propagation of voids in metal lines. 
              Advances in  miniaturization of integrated circuits have exposed the metallic
              conductor lines to increasingly severe operating conditions.  The aim of this
              research collaboration is to develop a better understanding of the
              microstructural and alloying effects that control the reliability of conductor
              lines in integrated circuits.  These lines typically carry very high current
              densities which causes atoms to migrate from one place to another creating
              damage sites.  This leads to the formation of voids and cracks in the
              surrounding materials, which is the cause of major reliability problems for
              miniaturized electronic devices.  Joining the complementary expertise of these
              U.S. and German research groups will accelerate progress in understanding such
              critical electromigration phenomena in conductor lines.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
