Title       : Comparative Studies of Vocal Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1998   
File        : a9513821

Award Number: 9513821
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109909             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas A. Nelson Nelson.228@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 1305,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9513821  Nelson  Vocal learning in song birds is a complex motor skill in which
              young males memorize the songs of adults, and then use their memory to control
              their own song output.  One consequence of vocal learning in birds is the
              formation of vocal dialects in which males at one locality sing similar songs
              that differ from those of males at other localities.  Until recently, it has
              been assumed that a single process is involved in the formation of dialects:
              the young bird imitates one or more adults at the time and place the youngster
              settles upon a breeding territory.  Recent evidence suggests that an
              independent process of selective attrition of songs from a large repertoire
              acquired in whole or in part at a different time and place can also lead to
              song sharing between neighbors.    The proposed research will examine the role
              of song overproduction and selective attrition in the formation of local song
              dialects.  The PI will take a comparative approach by studying different
              subspecies of the white-crowned sparrow (Zonotrichia leucophrys).  Field
              observations, and laboratory and field experiments will be conducted to compare
              processess of vocal development in one subspecies that does form local dialects
              (Z. l. oriantha or Z. l. leucophrys) with another that does not (Z. l.
              gambelii).  In the field, the PI will observe vocal interactions between males
              as they settle upon territories, and determine the sizes of their song
              production repertoire early in Spring, and compare whether they selectively
              retain or reject songs that match their neighbors.  This will test the
              hypothesis that developmental pathways are conserved during evolutionary
              diversification, and that changes often are made to terminal stages.  The PI
              will then conduct field and laboratory playback tests contrasting the song
              matching behavior of males of two subspecies.  These experiments are designed
              to reveal differences in the perceptural categorization of songs, and to
              identify possible genetically-based differences in song pe rception.  The PI
              will also employ a new method for measuring song learning that is independent
              of the production of imitations to examine how songs are memorized during the
              sensitive phase and during the subsequent storage interval.  Finally, the PI
              will conduct a song learning experiment to assess whether live tutors modiy or
              extend the early sensitive phase for song acquisition, as compared with tape
              tutoring.
