Title       : Conference: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Conference on The Cell Cycle, May,
               1996
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9513243

Award Number: 9513243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              95-13243  Grodzicker    Since 1992, Cold Spring Harbor has held bi-annual
              meetings  on the Cell Cycle. These meetings have been enormously  successful
              and have become one of the most important  international forums for discussing
              and critiquing progress  in the cell cycle field. These meetings are timely, 
              occurring when major advances in the cell cycle field needed  to be
              communicated to other researchers in this and related  fields. For instance,
              the 1991 Symposium contained reports  of the first insights into the
              relationships between cell  cycle control mechanisms and tumorigenesis, the
              role of  checkpoint pathways in genomic stability, the interaction  between
              cell cycle proteins and tumor suppressor proteins;  The 1994 meetings contained
              reports of the importance of the  CdK inhibitory proteins in the cell cycle.
              Current research  in the cell cycle field is beginning to provide insights 
              into mechanisms that control cellular differentiation,  apoptosis, senescence,
              tumorigenesis, and transcription.  These advancements as well as other
              biological processes  will be one focus of the 1996 meeting. Other areas of 
              interest will include cell cycle initiation, S phase  regulation, mitotic
              control, regulated protein proteolysis,  cell cycle transcription, and cell
              cycle checkpoints.  Platform presentations will be selected from submitted 
              abstracts, emphasis will be placed on graduate students and  post-doctoral
              fellows participation.  %%%  Since 1992, Cold Spring Harbor has held bi-annual
              meetings  on the Cell Cycle. The meetings have been enormously  successful and
              have become one of the most important  international forums for discussing and
              critiquing progress  in the cell cycle field. Past meetings were timely, 
              occurring when major advances in the cell cycle field needed  to be
              disseminated to other researchers in this and in  related fields. This meeting
              will be no exception. Topics to  be covered include understanding mechanisms
              that control  cellular differentiation, apoptosis, senescenc e,  tumorigenesis,
              transcription, cell cycle initiation, S phase  regulation, mitotic control, and
              other related biological  processes. Platform presentations will be selected
              entirely  from submitted abstracts, and strong emphasis will be placed  upon
              participation by graduate students and post-doctoral  fellows.  ***
