Title       : Meiotic Crossing-Over: How it Ensures Disjunction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1998  
File        : a9513231

Award Number: 9513231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean Dawson ddawson@opal.tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9513231  Dawson  Haploid cells (e.g., eggs and sperm) are formed from
              diploid cells by two rounds of chromosome distribution called meiosis.  In the
              first round,  the two members of each homologous chromosome pair are drawn to
              opposite poles.  For each haploid cell to receive all the genetic information
              in the proper number of copies, it is essential that this segregation of
              homologs be accurate.  In most eukaryotic organisms, meiotic exchange between
              homologous chromosomes is required for this segregation to be successful.
              Mutants with defects in meiotic recombination are frequently sterile or exhibit
              reduced fertility. Meiotic crossovers serve to physically link homologs, and in
              conjunction with an activity referred to as chiasma binder activity, hold the
              homologs stably together until they are properly attached to the meiotic
              spindle and migrate away from each other at anaphase I. Despite the importance
              of crossovers in enhancing the fidelity of meiotic chromosome segregation,
              little is known about the factors that influence the ability of crossovers to
              perform their meiotic role.  %%%  The long term goal of the investigator's 
              laboratory is to contribute to a comprehensive understanding of the apparatus
              which utilizes crossovers and other factors to keep homologs joined until
              anaphase I, thus ensuring meiotic disjunction.  These experiments will utilized
              the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a research organism.    The objective of
              this project is to determine the characteristics of recombination events which
              do and so not ensure the disjunction of YLps.  Experiments will be performed to
              determine the characteristics of crossovers with different abilities to enhance
              disjunction.  The chromosomal location of recombination eventq, t he sequences
              in which crossovers occur, and the relationship of meiotic DSBs to the
              generation of crossovers which ensure disjunction will be explored.  The
              experiments are designed to test four models that describe why crossovers are
              not equally able to ensure  disjunction.  These models follow:  1.  The ability
              of a crossover to enhance segregation is influenced by its distance from the
              telomere, or 2. by its distance from the centromere.  3.  Some sequence
              environments allow nearby crossovers to ensure disjunction while others do not.
               4.  The ability of a crossover to ensure disjunction is related to the manner
              in which the crossover is initiated.  ***
