Title       : Identification of Intra-Cellular Enzymes which Contain Disulfide Bonds in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9513498

Award Number: 9513498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61014              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louise E. Anderson louise@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513498  Anderson  This project seeks to identify additional redox-sensitive and
              light-modulated enzymes in photosynthetic and chemosynthetic species. A survey
              of plant enzymes indicates that a surprising number contain potentially
              oxidizable (or oxidized) cysteine residues. The activity of some of these
              enzymes is probably regulated by light-dependent reduction. In others,
              disulfides may simply act to stabilize structure. Homology modeling will be
              used to locate potentially oxidizable or oxidized cysteine residues in the
              simulated three-dimensional structures of those plant enzymes for which both
              sequence information and a model protein structure is available. The effect of
              oxidizing and reducing agents on the activity of the enzymes in crude extracts
              will be tested where redox-sensitivity is suggested. Redox-sensitive enzymes in
              animals and non-oxygenic microbes are rare, and in fact the plant cytosol
              appears to be much more oxidizing (or at least somewhat more oxidizing) than
              animal or microbial cytosol. It is expected that these experiments will
              demonstrate that disulfides are not unusual in plants and that many of these
              disulfides are stabilizing rather than regulatory.  %%%  Reductive light
              modulation is important in plants and cyanobacteria. If plants are to be
              engineered for the production of technologically important compounds,  more
              information about their peculiar redox biochemistry is needed. The proposed
              experiments aim to identify potentially oxidizable Cys residues and to test
              their importance by assaying the effect of oxidizing and reducing agents on the
              activity of the respective enzymes.  In some cases introduction of
              disulfide-forming Cys residues could be useful either for stabilization or for
              control (i.e. turning specifia reactions or pathways off when ATP or NADPH are
              not being photosynthetically generated). The proposed experiments will give
              important insight into enzyme mechanisms, the action of the enzymes which are
              subject to light modulation, interdomain movements in  enzyme function, and the
              potential for the design of  light (and redox) modulatable enzymes for
              commercial use.  ***
