Title       : RUI: X-chromosome Meiosis in Caenorhabditis elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9513273

Award Number: 9513273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261914             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip M. Meneely pmeneely@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513273  Meneely  Recessive mutations in at least two autosomal genes, him-5 and
              him-8, cause high rates of  non-disjunction of the X chromosome. Previous work
              has shown that him-5 also affects the autosomes, although at a much lower
              frequency, whereas him-8 affects the X chromosome exclusively. Very few of the
              known meiotic genes affect only one chromosome, although there is indirect
              evidence for chromosome-specific meiotic regulation in many organisms including
              humans. Mutations in both him-S and him-8 alter both the number and the
              distribution of exchanges on the X chromosome. Thus, by genetic tests, these
              genes appear to be necessary for the stable synapsis of the X chromosome but
              not for the initiation of pairing. Both genes have been cloned. The him-8 gene
              will be characterized in detail by sequencing of wild-type and mutant alleles.
              The expression of the gene will be examined by RT-PCR at different
              developmental stages, in both sexes, and in various mutant strains affecting
              meiosis, germ-line development or both.  %%%  Meiosis is the process by which
              eukaryotic organisms reduce their chromosome number in half during gamete
              formation. Early in meiosis, homologous chromosomes pair stably along their
              length. This synapsis precedes and is necessary for genetic exchange between
              the homologues. Failure to synapse or exchange leads to chromosome
              non-disjunction and loss. Mutations that ease non-disjunction are known in many
              organisms, including the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. One goal of this
              project will be to identify many new mutations affecting X chromosome and
              autosome disjunction in C. elegans, and to characterize these genetically and
              cytologically. Among the properties characterized will be which chromosomes,
              germ-line, and meiotic division are affected. This work will be carried out by
              senior biology majors working for academic credit. A third  project Will use
              strain polymorphisms and multiplex PCR to quantitate all of the crossovers that
              occur on the X chromosome during oogenesis  in both wild-type and mutant
              animals. Genetic data and the preliminary data from this analysis indicate that
              most of the X chromosome exhibits complete interference, such that there is
              exactly one crossover on the X chromosome during oogenesis. This will be
              confirmed.  ***
