Title       : Structure, Function, and Regulation of the Carboxysome: A Prokaryotic Organelle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9513481

Award Number: 9513481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320753             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jessup M. Shively gmshively@mindspring.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Shively  9513481  During carbon limitation, many bacteria are able to enhance
              CO2 fixation by sequestering ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase
              (RuBisCO) into carboxysomes. This research addresses the mechanisms by which
              the carboxvsome aids C02 fixation. The research is divided into three areas. 
              The first area involves the isolation and analysis of genes encoding  s1 three
              additional carboxysome peptides. Presumably, these genes will be located in the
              putative carboxysome operon of Thiobacillus neapolitanus and/or Thiobacillus
              intermedius. The putative operon of T. neapolitanus has been totally sequenced
              (9.75 kbp). Already identified genes include four shell genes and the genes for
              the large and small subunits of RuBisCO. Three other open reading frames are
              present in the operon, but are yet to be identified. Also, some peptides appear
              to be coded for by over-lapping genes. The additional new genes will be
              isolated by the technique of reverse genetics, sequenced, and expressed in
              Escherichia coli. Their identity will be confirmed by comparing the amino acid
              and DNA sequences. Insertion mutants of the new genes will be created and their
              phenotypes (growth, cell structure, RuBisCO activity, proteins, transcription,
              etc.) carefully analyzed in comparison to the wild type.  The second area will
              be the assay for the presence of carbonic anhydrase and the determination of
              the specificity factor for RuBisCO in highly purified carboxysomes. Carbonic
              anhydrase has been hypothesized to be the component in the carboxysome which is
              responsible for the enhancement of CO2 fixation by RuBisCO, however all of the
              assays thus far have been accomplished with grossly contaminated cyanobacterial
              carboxyxomes. Highly purified carboxysomes of T. neapolitanus will be analyzed
              by membrane inlet-mass spectrometry for carbonic anhydrase. The specificity
              factor is a measure of the ability of RuBisCO to discriminate between CO2 and
              O2 It is hypothesized that the carboxysome via some unknown mechanism is able
              to i ncrease the specificity factor. The factor will be determined for purified
              RuBisCO and for the RuBisCO in the purified carboxysome by simultaneous assay
              of both carboxylase and oxygenase activities according to standard procedures. 
              The third area will be to begin the examination of what role, if any, cbbR, a
              transcriptional regulatory gene of the LysR family, might play in the
              expression of the putative carboxysome operon. CbbR, a positive transcriptional
              regulator has been shown to play a significant role in the expression of Calvin
              cycle operons in a variety of bacteria. The organization of the cbbL and cbbS
              of RuBisCO with carboxysome genes and the coordinated transcriptional
              regulation of RuBisCO and the carboxysome in T. neapolitanus and T. intennedius
              suggest that they might be controlled by the same regulatory protein, perhaps
              CbbR. A cbbR gene has been detected in both of these thiobacilli by
              heterologous hybridization using a cbbR from Thiobacillus denitrificans as the
              probe.  The gene will be isolated, sequenced, expressed, mutagenized, and the
              mutants analyzed phenotypically as accomplished with the carboxysome genes.  It
              is anticipated that the information gained from this project will contribute
              substantially to our knowledge of the carboxysome, the overall process of
              bacterial CO2 fixation, and how bacteria can adapt to changing environmental
              conditions.  ***
