Title       : RUI: Mutagenesis Studies to Probe Function of the Large Extrinsic Loop of the
               CP-43 Apoprotein of Photosystem II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1996  
File        : a9513795

Award Number: 9513795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cindy Putnam-Evans evansc@mail.ecu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Carolina University
	      East Fifth Street
	      Greenville, NC  278584353    252/328-6452

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9513795  Putnam-Evans  This project describes the production and
              characterization of mutants containing random and site-directed lesions in the
              large extrinsic loop region of the Photosystem II (PSII) protein CP43. CP43 is
              an integral thylakoid protein and component of the photosynthetic apparatus of
              higher plants, algae and cyanobacteria. These mutants will be constructed in
              the cyanobacterium Synechocystis 6803, a widely used model system for higher
              plant photosynthesis. CP43 appears to be required for the stable assembly of
              the PSII complex, and also appears to play a role in photosynthetic oxygen
              evolution. The goal of this project is to determine the function of the large,
              lumenally-oriented extrinsic loop of CP43. Deletion of long segments of the
              loop results in mutants incapable of evolving oxygen. Therefore, it is probable
              that this region interacts directly with other PSII proteins and inorganic
              cofactors (manganese, chloride and calcium) that are necessary for oxygen
              evolution. In addition, CP43 functions as a chlorophyll-a antenna for PSII. The
              large extrinsic loop may thus interact with other PSII antenna proteins or
              proteins comprising the PSII reaction center. Mutations will be introduced into
              the psbC gene encoding CP43 by both random and oligonucleotide-mediated
              mutagenesis. Mutations will be re-introduced into Synechocystis 6803 along with
              a closely-linked antibiotic resistance marker. Putative mutants will be
              screened initially for antibiotic resistance and possible loss of
              photoautotrophic growth. This will be followed by an in-depth characterization
              of photosynthetic characteristics including measurements of steady state rates
              of oxygen evolution, electron transport capability, PSII polypeptide
              composition, manganese and calcium content and chloride requirement.  %%%  The
              Photosystem II (PSII~ complex forms part ofthe photosynthetic apparatus of
              higher plants, algae and cyanobacteria. This complex catalyzes the light-driven
              oxidation of water and the reduction of plastoquinon e. Oxygen is given off as
              a by-product of the PSII reaction. CP43 is one of the protein components of
              PSII and appears to be required for the stable assembly ofthe PSII complex. It
              also appears to play a role in both photosynthetic oxygen evolution and the
              harvesting of light energy. This membrane-bound protein is unusual in that it
              contains a large, hydrophilic loop which protrudes from the membrane in which
              is it embedded. Deletion of short stretches of amino acids in the large
              extrinsic loop result in mutants that cannot evolve oxygen.  The goal of  this
              project is to identify specific amino acids involved in the function of the
              large, lumenally-oriented extrinsic loop of CP43 to further test the hypothesis
              that this region is necessary for normal PSII activity. This will be
              accomplished by 1) introducing mutations into the gene encoding CP43 in vitro
              using the techniques of both random and site-specific mutagenesis, 2)
              exchanging these mutated genes for their normal counterparts in the blue-green
              algae Synechocystis 6803 and 3) evaluating the resulting mutant organisms for
              their ability to assemble a normal PSII complex, evolve oxygen and carry out
              electron transport.  ***    ??
