Title       : Control of Heme Enzyme Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1998    
File        : a9513047

Award Number: 9513047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Erman jerman@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lidia B. Vitello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513047  Erman  The long-term goal of this research is to elucidate the
              structural features which control heme protein reactivity and determine heme
              protein function. The research will compare proteins from two different
              functional classes: (1) the heme enzymes and (2) the oxygen transport/storage
              proteins. Of particular interest is the chemical reactivity of the Fe(III)
              state of heme proteins. The properties of CcP will be compared with those of
              the Fe(III) state of two oxygen transport/storage proteins, mammalian
              metmyoglobin (MetMb) and Glycera dibranchiata methemoglobin (metGHb) in an
              effort to understand the structural features which are responsible for the
              reactivity differences in these two classes of heme proteins. The first aspect
              of Fe(III) heme protein reactivity to be investigated is the reaction which
              characterizes the peroxidases, the reaction between the Fe(III) protein and
              H2O2 to form an oxidized enzyme intermediate called Compound I. Initial
              studies, using site-directed mutagenesis to alter protein structure, indicate
              that two amino acid residues in CcP are critical in the formation of Compound
              I, the distal histidine His-52 and a distal arginine (Arg-48). Arg-48
              facilitates oxygen-oxygen bond cleavage while His-52 promotes peroxide binding
              to the heme iron.  Elucidation of the differences in the properties of the
              distal histidine in the peroxidases and the oxygen transport/storage heme
              proteins is one of the specific objectives of this proposal.  A key question
              concerning the reactivity of the Fe(III) state of heme proteins is access of
              small reactants and ligands to the distal heme pocket. Active-site access will
              be probed by investigating the rates of binding of small ligands such as
              fluoride, cyanide, and nitric oxide to the iron in CcP, metMb, metGHb and their
              mutants. Discrimination between the neutral and charged forms of the ligands
              will be determined. Steric constraints, acid-base behavior, and the polarity of
              the heme pocket will be investigated through site-directed  mutagenesis. The
              studies outlined in this proposal will provide a more sophisticated level of
              understanding of heme protein reactivity and function. It will provide a basis
              for rational protein design. The proposal includes plans to convert metGHb into
              an efficient peroxidase and more importantly, to convert CcP into a versatile
              hydroxylase, utilizing H2O2 rather than O2.  %%%  Heme proteins perform many
              important functions in living organisms including the transport of oxygen to
              its site of utilization and the protection of the organism from reactive oxygen
              species. (Reactive oxygen species such as superoxide, hydrogen peroxide, and
              the hydroxyl radical are thought to accelerate the aging process.) The goal of
              the research proposed in this project is to determine how the structure of
              various heme proteins govern their biological function. Two heme proteins, with
              different functions, will be extensively investigated by systematic
              manipulation of their structures. Observation of the biological reactivity of
              the altered proteins will allow correlations to be made concerning structure
              and function. The studies will provide a sophisticated level of understanding
              of heme protein reactivity and function. These studies will also provide a
              basis for the rational design of heme proteins to carry out processes which may
              have important commercial applications.  ***
