Title       : A Compact Laser Excited Coherent X-ray Source for Macromolecular Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1996     
File        : a9513266

Award Number: 9513266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Andreas Schroeder andreas@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles K. Rhodes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Longworth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal outlines a three year program to develop a  compact coherent X-ray
              source that is suitable for  three-dimensional imaging of living organisms,
              tissue and  cells with macromolecular resolution. The imaging is to be 
              accomplished using X-ray rnicroholographic techniques. The  X-rays will be
              produced by exciting atornic clusters or  molecules with an intense ultrashort
              (femtosecond) laser  pulse in the ultraviolet (UV). The resulting multiphoton 
              ionization of the atoms in the clusters produces an  electron-ion plasma which
              interacts strongly with the  oscillating radiative field of the laser pulse.
              The  collective motion of the electrons, due to the field-induced 
              ponderomotive force, gives the electrons sufficient energy  to collisionally
              eject an inner-shell electron from an ion  in the cluster. A X-ray photon is
              emitted when an outer  shell electron fills the vacant inner shell state in the
               "hollow" atom. Previous investigations have shown that the  efficiency of this
              nonlinear X-ray generation process is  increased if the interacting laser pulse
              is both intense  (i.e. short and energetic) and coherent (i.e. phase 
              controlled).    We describe an all solid-state, high-power UV femtosecond 
              laser system that is designed to be optimally suited for the  excitation of
              atomic clusters for the production of X-rays.  The laser system will be based
              on the new solid-state UV  laser material Ce doped LiSrAlF6 which operates
              between 280  and 320nm, and will employ femtosecond laser technology that  is
              already well established at wavelengths in the near  infrared (~ 800nm). In
              addition to its use in the X-ray  generation process, we expect this source of
              coherent UV  femtosecond pulses to find many applications in  spectroscopic
              biological research, e.g. the temporal  resolution of the water solvation
              dynamics in enzyme  reactions and other protein complexes.    We intend to use
              the coherent X-ray source produced using  the UV laser system to image
              chromosome dynamics during  mitosis and meio sis. The microholographic
              techniques that  have already been developed in our laboratories will enable 
              three dimensional images to be reconstructed, in contrast to  any other imaging
              technology available today with comparable  marcomolecular resolution. Using
              X-rays with a wavelength of  -l, this holographic technique should also allow
              the  structure of biological molecules to be visualized in three  dimensions
              without the need for crystallization. We propose  to explore this possibility
              by investigating the  avidin-biotin complex. The development of this
              laser-based  technology has the potential to replace expensive  synchrotron
              X-ray sources for imaging in the biological  sciences.
