Title       : RUI: Conformation Analysis of Proteinaceous Bioadhesives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9513390

Award Number: 9513390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146142             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marion P. Olivieri oliviemp@dyc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : D'Youville College
	      320 Porter Avenue
	      Buffalo, NY  142011032    716/881-3200

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9117,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9513390  Olivieri  This study seeks to elucidate the molecular structure(s)
              associated with the physical-chemical mechanism(s) whereby proteins bind to
              solid surfaces.  To achieve the specific aim of the current proposal it is
              necessary to obtain data that will assist in the calculation of the three
              dimensional structures of known bioadhesives.  Specifically, MAP extracted from
              the Blue Sea Mussel, (Mytilus edulis) will provide the model compounds.  MAP is
              composed of  75(85 repeating decapeptide units with the primary sequence
              NH2-A-K-P-S-Y-HYP-HYP-T-DOPA-K-COOH (Waite et al., 1985).  Since MAP is active
              at interfaces, it is therefore important to study its behavior while adsorbed
              to a surface.  Solid-state techniques, such as multiple attenuated internal
              reflectance infrared (MAIR-IR) spectroscopy, ellipsometry, contact angle
              analysis, and solution-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy,
              already have given some structural information about these peptides' abilities,
              but have not been used to their fullest potential.  These techniques, in
              addition to crystallization efforts, will be employed to study the decameric
              repeat unit in addition to other MAP protein fragments (e.g.,
              +NH3-proline-serine-tyrosine-hydroxyproline-hydroxyproline-thereonine-tyrosine-lysine-alanine-lysine-proline-serine-tryosine-hydroxyproline-COOH, and +NH3-proline-serine-tyrosine-hydroxyproline-hydroxyproline-threonine-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine-lysine-alanine-lysine-proline-serine-tyrosine-hydroxyproline-COOH).  Data will be collected for the MAP peptides in both the solid-and solution-states, with the information compiled to create molecular models of the peptides.  The first step of structure elucidation will be to use NMR data to create solution-state models.  The variety of solid-state techniques would then be used to characterize the molecular changes that are responsible for the bioadhesion process.  %%%  The PI has worked to combine research with teaching.  She takes her teaching responsibilities very s eriously, and is dedicated toward providing a learning environment for students that is thorough, yet inviting.  The variety of courses the PI has taught at D'YC reflects her multi-disciplinary background (Introduction to Computers, Statistics, Biochemistry, General Chemistry I-II, Student Research I-II, and Chemistry for the Health Sciences II).  She has prepared a 80+ page hand-out of lecture notes for the biochemistry class has co-authored a manual for the Chemistry for Health Sciences Laboratory and is working on a manual for the Biochemistry laboratory.  To increase availability to the students, she conducts study sessions and distributes her home telephone number.  Some students have attributed some of success to hand-outs distributed, graded homework and oral presentation assignments.  A Biomaterials course will be developed that introduces implantology and describes the methods for choosing and characterizing materials for specific biological applications.  The PI has already developed several new laboratory exercises for her biochemistry laboratory course and will prepare additional exercises that combine science disciplines.  ***
