Title       : Renal Function in Vertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1998    
File        : a9513892

Award Number: 9513892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220225             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Dantzler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9513892  Dantzler      This project involves comparative studies of kidney
              function in vertebrates. The studies emphasize the general area of transport by
              the kidney tubules (the primary functioning units in the kidney), particularly
              of organic substances, and the regulation of excretion of ions and water.
              Within these broad areas, the investigations will involve continuations of
              studies on: 1) the mechanisms and regulation of kidney tubular transport of
              negatively charged organic substances (organic anions), primarily
              p-aminohippurate (PAH), fluorescein, and urate, and positively charged organic
              substances (organic cations), primarily tetraethylammonium (TEA); 2) the
              regulation of intracellular pH (pHi), especially as it relates to the transport
              of organic anions and cations; and 3) the mechanisms and regulation of the
              kidney tubular reabsorption of filtered fluid. These studies concentrate on
              reptilian kidneys, with their simple renal tubule structure, and on avian
              kidneys, with their kidney tubules ranging from simple, superficial
              reptilian-like ones to deep, complex mammalian-like ones. The kidney tubular
              transport of organic substances plays a particularly important role in
              eliminating urate (the major excretory end product of nitrogen metabolism in
              birds and most reptiles) and many toxic exogenous substances and in regulating
              the concentrations of important endogenous substances. The cellular steps in
              transport and the tubular sites of transport of these organic substances show
              considerable variation in reptiles and birds and may relate to the types of
              renal tubules and their function in the transport of other organic substances
              and ions and water. The regulation of intracellular pH, which may be quite
              different in reptilian and avian renal tubules, may play an important role in
              determining the transport of these organic substances. The regulation of net
              tubular reabsorption of filtered fluid is essential to maintaining normal fluid
              balance. It appears to show variations in the different t ubule populations in
              the avian kidney and this may relate to differences in filtration rate and its
              regulation. The coupling of fluid reabsorption to solute reabsorption may
              differ significantly between reptilian and avian kidney tubules and among
              populations of avian kidney tubules and this coupling may relate to changes in
              filtration rate as well as the elimination of organic substances. The approach
              to these studies will involve work primarily with isolated perfused and
              nonperfused renal tubules and will take advantage of quantitative optical
              techniques as well as isotopic techniques to evaluate rates of transport,
              intracellular transport steps, and intracellular pH. Evaluation of the process
              of fluid reabsorption will involve direct qualitative and quantitative
              measurements of the fluid being reabsorbed. The results should supply
              significant information on the mechanisms and regulation of kidney tubule
              transport of organic molecules and the reabsorption of fluid and how these
              processes relate to structural and other functional differences in reptilian
              and avian kidneys. The information obtained will help in understanding how
              these species survive in hostile environments and the ways in which their
              kidneys help them deal with current and potential environmental toxins.  ***
