Title       : Increased Translation Initiation at Non AUG Codons by eIF-4E
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1998     
File        : a9513756

Award Number: 9513756
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299912             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arrigo De Benedetti adeben@lsumc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LSU Health Scs Cntr-Shreve
	      1501 Kings Highway
	      Shreveport, LA  71130    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              DeBenedetti  9513756  Our laboratory studies the mechanism of translation
              initiation and the role of  eIF-4 factors (particularly 4E) in this process. 
              The premise of this proposal emerged from studies of two important growth
              control genes: c-myc and FGF-2, in which translation can begin from either the
              first AUG, or from CUG codons located upstream and in-frame with the AUG codon.
               The resulting amino-terminal  extension alters the properties of these
              regulatory proteins and particularly their intracellular distribution.  For
              instance, FGF-2 is a powerful cytokine, but it is not normally secreted; we
              found that the CUG1-initiated isoform is exported, making it a more potent
              mitogen.  Elevating the level of eIF-4E results in overexpression of c-myc and
              FGF-2, but it also enhances synthesis of the  larger, CUG-initiated isoforms. A
              few additional important mRNAs have similar  translation features (Oskar,
              L-myc, lyl-1, pim-1, int-2 and Mod5).  We anticipate that this work will: i)
              elucidate the role of eIF-4E in enhancing translation of weak mRNAs; ii)
              improve our understanding of the synthesis of the larger forms of c-Myc and
              FGF-2; iii) improve our understanding of the mechanism of translation
              initiation and selection of start codon(s); and iv) elucidate the mechanism of
              recognition of translation start codons.    %%%  The mechanism of translation
              initiation and the role of certain factors in this process are not well
              understood.  It is proposed to study two important growth control genes: c-myc
              and FGF-2, in which translation can begin from either the first initiation
              codon (AUG), or from other (CUG) codons located upstream and in-frame with the
              AUG codon.  The resulting amino-terminal  extension alters the properties of
              these regulatory proteins and particularly their intracellular distribution. 
              For instance, FGF-2 is a powerful cytokine, but it is not normally secreted. 
              We found that the CUG1-initiated isoform is exported, making it a more potent
              mitogen.  Elevating the level of the transcr iption factor eIF-4E results in
              overexpression of c-myc and FGF-2, but it also enhances synthesis of the
              larger, CUG-initiated isoforms.  We  anticipate that this work will: i)
              elucidate the role of eIF-4E in enhancing translation of weak mRNAs; ii)
              improve our understanding of the synthesis of the larger forms of c-Myc and
              FGF-2; iii) improve our understanding of the mechanism of translation
              initiation and selection of start codon(s); and iv) elucidate the mechanism of
              recognition of translation start codons.  ***
