Title       : The Role of Calcium in Phospholipase C-y1 Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9513535

Award Number: 9513535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gwenith A. Jones gaj5m@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,9136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513523  Murphy  Knowledge of  the contribution of various interactions, such as
              hydrogen bonding, the hydrophobic effect, configurational entropy, etc., is
              crucial to understanding important biological processes such as protein folding
              and binding.  Precise knowledge of the contributions of structural features to
              the energetics of these processes will permit the design of new proteins and
              pharmaceuticals based on structural information garnered from x-ray
              crystallography of multidimensional NMR.  Unfortunately, the complexity of
              biological macromolecules makes it exceedingly difficult to untangle the
              contributions of these various interactions to structural stability based
              solely on the study of these molecules.  The transfer of simple amino acid
              compounds from the crystal into water (dissolution) is analogous to the
              unfolding of a protein or to the dissociation of a protein-protein complex, but
              the simplicity of these compounds allows for a detailed structural
              interpretation of the energetics.  To date only a few such compounds have been
              studied, but these data have been particularly useful in developing
              semi-empirical methods for calculating thermodynamic quantities from structural
              information.  This project will undertake the study of the dissolution of
              additional cyclic dipeptides (diketopiperazines) and a correlation of their
              dissolution energetics with specific structural features.  In particular, the
              role of hydrogen bonding, aromatic-aromatic interactions, and ionizable side
              chains will be studied in order to complement previous data on the contribution
              of aliphatic side chains.  The effects of co-solvents such as urea, guanidinium
              chloride, and trifluoroethanol, on the dissolution energetics will also be
              investigated as a means of better understanding how these compounds perturb
              protein structures.  The studies require the determination of the changes in
              free energy, (G( enthalpy , (H (, entropy,  and  (S (,  and heat capacity,  (Cp
              , which describe the temperature dependence of  the d issolution process. 
              These quantities will be determined by a combination of  techniques.  The (G(, 
              is given  from the solubility which will be measured using a differential
              refractive index technique.  The heat of dissolution,  (H (, will be directly
              measured using calorimetry, and the (Cp,  will be obtained by performing the
              calorimetry over a range of temperatures.  These studies will also be done in
              various types and concentrations of co-solvents to assess their effects on the
              energetics.  Structures of new compounds also will be determined by small
              molecule x-ray crystallography.  %%%  The goal of this work is to understand
              the molecular forces responsible for protein folding and the binding of
              proteins to each other.  This information can be used in the design of new
              proteins and pharmaceuticals based on atomic-level structural information. 
              Because of the complexity of protein structures it is difficult to obtain this
              information from studying actual proteins.  Alternatively, one can study simple
              model compounds which contain amino acids, the building blocks of proteins,
              which are held together by the same forces.  In this the energetics of work
              transferring cyclic dipeptides (composed of two amino acid residues) from the
              crystal into aqueous solution will be studies calorimetrically as a function of
              temperature.  This process is analogous to the transfer of amino acid residues
              from the protein interior into water which occurs upon unfolding of a protein. 
              The crystal structures of these compounds will also be determined.  The
              energetics will be interpreted in terms of the crystal structures in order to
              determine the contributions of different forces to the dissolution process and,
              by analogy to stabilizing protein structures and complexes.  The effect of
              different co-solvents (e.g. urea, alcohols, guanidinium chloride) of the
              dissolution energetics will also be studied in order to understand how these
              compounds perturb various forces and thus affect protein stability.  ***
