Title       : RUI: Arrows of Time in Infancy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1998     
File        : a9513881

Award Number: 9513881
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93386              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Friedman friedman@oberlin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oberlin College
	      
	      Oberlin, OH  44074    440/775-8461

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9513881  FRIEDMAN    This research is concerned with early development of
              temporal  knowledge in normal human infants.  The findings will tell us how 
              children come to adapt to an important feature of their  environment, its
              temporal regularities.  The results will  complement recent discoveries about
              infants' knowledge of other  fundamental domains, such as space, gravity, the
              continued  existence of objects when they are hidden, and causality.  As  part
              of a broader program of research on the developmental  psychology of time, this
              work can help us better understand the  growth of temporal knowledge in
              children.  Along with research on  the psychology of time in adults, this
              research will help us  understand how humans abstract a sense of time from the
              flow of  experience.  Knowledge of how children adapt to the temporal  features
              of their world will be useful to practitioners who  design preschool curricula
              and early childhood intervention  programs.  It will also provide comparative
              information about  normal development that can be used by clinicians who work
              with  children with disabilities.      The focus of this research is on humans'
              sensitivity to temporal  order in simple event sequences.  Adults are highly
              attuned to  forward vs. backward presentations of transformations that can 
              only happen in one temporal direction: A film of liquid pouring,  when viewed
              in reverse, is strikingly anomalous.  Adults must  have internalized,
              temporally-organized representations of how  thousands of such transformations
              normally unfold.  However, very  little is known about the origins and nature
              of this sensitivity.   Preliminary work has suggested that expectations about
              the  temporal direction of several transformations, such as pouring a  liquid
              or breaking an object, develop between 4 and 12 months of  age.  These
              experiments will add to these findings in a number of  ways.  All of the
              studies involve comparisons of infants' visual  attention to videotapes of
              temporally normal and reversed or  mi s-ordered events.  A first experiment is
              designed to illuminate  the role that learning plays in the development of
              temporal  expectations by teaching infants specific, novel transformations.  
              Two other studies will test the limits of competence in  4-month-olds, a group
              which has failed to show directional  preferences in some studies.  A fourth
              study will sample new  transformations in order to shed light on the breadth of
               8-month-olds' knowledge and on the specific features of the films  that are
              responsible for their looking preferences.  A final  experiment will test
              whether 1-year-old infants have developed  expectations of the temporal order
              of familiar event sequences  made up of discrete actions. This evidence can
              reveal whether  infants in the first year of life have developed
              representations  of lengthier time patterns than have been tested to date.   
              ***
