Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Studies of the Physical Properties of Galaxies
               with the Sloan Digital Sky Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9513094

Award Number: 9513094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Strauss strauss@astro.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9513094  Strauss    This award supports a three-year cooperative research 
              project between Dr. Michael Strauss (Princeton University)  and collaborators
              at Princeton, the Johns Hopkins  University, and the University of Washington,
              and Dr.  Masataka Fukugita (University of Kyoto) and collaborators in  Kyoto
              and Tokyo. They plan to use data from the Sloan  Digital Sky Survey to carry
              out a number of investigations  of the physical nature of galaxies. The Sloan
              Digital Sky  Survey, with accurate, well-calibrated, digital images in  five
              broad optical bands covering 1/4 of the sky, together  with high-quality
              spectroscopic information on the million  brightest galaxies, promises to allow
              statistical studies of  the optical properties of galaxies at a level of 
              sophistication and detail that is currently impossible with  existing data. 
              These include detailing the multivariate  distribution of galaxies in
              magnitude, color, diameter, and  morphological properties; searches for
              ultra-low surface  brightness galaxies; the definition and study of large, 
              complete samples of active galaxies; studies of the relative  clustering of
              galaxies of different physical types, and  stellar population studies from the
              galaxy spectra.  This  proposal will support travel between the Japanese and US
               astronomers to enhance collaborations. Therefore, this  proposal fulfills the
              objectives of the Program in its  exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge
              through an  international collaboration.  ***
