Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Generation and Characterization of
               Layered Microparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9513433

Award Number: 9513433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13956              (Estimated)
Investigator: Asit K. Ray akray@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 5936,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Asit Ray and a U.S. graduate student from the
              University of Kentucky to collaborate in chemical engineering research with
              Professor Gustav Schweiger and others from the Faculty of Mechanical
              Engineering at the Ruhr University of Bochum, Germany.  The objectives of their
              joint research are to develop techniques for generation of layered particles of
              precise composition, and to develop techniques for in situ physical and
              chemical characterization of layered spheres.  In particular, they will focus
              on techniques involving elastic and inelastic (Raman) scattering of light with
              the goal of developing a technique that combines the two simultaneously for
              complete quantitative characterization of layered microparticles. The challenge
              here is the complexity of scattering introduced by the small size of the
              particles.  Progress will require a computational approach based on light
              scattering theory and controlled experimentation.  The success of the effort
              relies heavily on the complementary expertise of Dr. Ray in elastic scattering
              techniques and of his German colleague, Dr. Schweiger, in Raman spectroscopy of
              microparticles.  They will also make use of unusual facilities including the
              specialized Aerosol Laboratory at the University of Kentucky and the
              state-of-the-art laser spectroscopy laboratory of Dr. Schweiger in Bochum. 
              Better understanding of the formation and behavior of microparticles will have
              immediate and important applications in many technologies and processes.  These
              include the manufacture of high purity ceramics and thin films, separation
              technologies related to pollution control and remediation, chemical reaction
              processes in many industries, and even atmospheric processes and the generation
              of artificial rain.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
