Title       : Assessment of Landuse and Land Cover Change Using Remote Sensing and Artificial
               Neural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1998      
File        : a9513889

Award Number: 9513889
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192516             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sucharita Gopal suchi@crsa.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Curtis E. Woodcock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9513889    The research funded by this award will test the utility of
              artificial neural networks (ANN) in detecting changes in remotely sensed
              images.  The ability to detect and monitor changes in conditions at the Earth's
              surface is fundamental to an understanding of human impacts on the environment
              and to the assessment of the sustainability of development.  Ground based
              measurements are severely limited by logistical constraints, particularly in
              the research and assessment of global change.  Therefore, remote sensing
              provides the potential for frequent assessment of surface conditions and their
              change over large areas.  Currently, the greatest success in change detection
              via remotely sensed data is for situations of dramatic change.  The goal of the
              research funded by this award is to test the utility of ANN in assessing less
              dramatic change.    The expectation that ANN will allow significant
              improvements in change detection is based on two factors:  ANN have proven more
              effective than conventional statistics-based methods for classification of
              remote sensing imagery, and the investigators have had some success in a
              preliminary effort to use ANN in this way.  The testing entails several
              components:  exploring alternative ANN architectures, interpreting the internal
              structure of the ANN to analyze the changes signal in the remotely sensed data,
              evaluating the performance of the ANN relative to conventional methods for
              change detection, developing measures to interpret ANN output signals for
              quantifying change, and estimating the robustness of  trained ANN outside of
              the training domain.  The investigators will use existing data sets containing
              remotely sensed and ground measurements for all these tests, allowing rapid
              progress at minimal cost.    The research has both theoretical and applied
              implications.  It will lead to a greater conceptual understanding of the
              spectral and temporal signals contained in remotely sensed images resulting
              from land surface change.  It should help determine  what analytic methods are
              better suited to measuring change in different contexts.  The research will
              lead to an improved understanding of the use if neural networks in a
              data-analytic framework, and thus enhance the appropriate is of ANN in
              geographic research.
