Title       : X-ray Diffraction Facility for Macromolecular Crystallography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1995  
File        : a9513025

Award Number: 9513025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155424             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramakrishnan Venkatraman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher P. Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wesley I. Sundquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal requests funds for the purchase of an area-detector  facility
              for macromolecular crystallography. Requested equipment  includes an
              image-plate area detector and associated computer for data  collection, an
              X-ray generator, a heat exchanger, focusing mirrors, and  cryogenic equipment
              for low temperature (100 K) data collection.       This proposal is part of a
              major effort by the University of Utah  to move from a single-investigator
              laboratory in the area of  macromolecular crystallography to a multi-user
              facility. An important  first step in this effort was the hiring of Dr.
              Ramakrishnan (P.I.) as  a senior faculty member. The University also recently
              created a  Research Assistant Professorship, currently held by Dr. Bancroft,
              whose  duties include maintaining and upgrading X-ray equipment and associated 
              computing. The expanded facility will be used to solve structures of 
              macromolecules related to a wide variety of research at the University  of
              Utah, including: HIV-1 structure and assembly, ribosome structure  and
              function, chromatin structure, protein-RNA recognition,  transcriptional
              regulation, ubiquitin biochemistry, protein turnover,  isoprene biochemistry,
              and hypertension.       Macromolecular crystallography at the University of
              Utah is  currently being performed by Dr. Hill (co-P.I.). The Hill laboratory 
              maintains and operates an R-axis II image-plate area-detector. A large  number
              of projects, originating both within the Hill laboratory and in  collaboration
              with others, have saturated the existing equipment.  Indeed, many projects
              already languish for lack of available detector  time. With the arrival of Dr.
              Ramakrishnan in September 1995, this  already large demand will increase
              dramatically. Furthermore, the  thriving biomedical research community at the
              University of Utah is  increasingly focused on biological problems with
              essential structural  components and this new emphasis will place increased
              demand upon the  X-ray data collection facility in the near  future. Finally, a
              number of  new structural projects are expected to emerge with the recent
              opening  of the Huntsman Cancer Center (est. 40 new faculty positions) and a
              new  Genome Sequencing Center (focused on extreme thermophilic bacteria).  Thus
              the purchase of a second data collection facility is essential  and, indeed,
              the anticipated growth is expected to more than saturate  even the expanded
              facility.       The University of Utah will provide matching funds for 50% of
              the  instrumentation requested in this proposal. A second significant 
              University contribution to the expansion of macromolecular  crystallography at
              Utah is the remodeling of space to provide the  infrastructure necessary for an
              efficient, multiuser crystallographic  facility. Following proposed remodeling,
              the major structural groups  will occupy greater than 10,000 sq. ft. of
              contiguous space with  extensive shared facilities including X-ray data
              collection and  computer graphics suites, biophysical instrumentation
              laboratories,  constant-temperature crystallization rooms, and preparative 
              laboratories and cold rooms.       In summary, the University has made a major
              commitment to create  an expanded macromolecular crystallography facility that
              will both  complement and serve a vital biomedical research community. The 
              purchase of the new area detector facility described in this proposal  is an
              essential step in realizing that goal.
