Title       : Time-Resolved FTIR System for Biological Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9513715

Award Number: 9513715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur Kowalsky                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Rothschild kjr@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The central goal of this project is the development of  advanced time-resolved
              FTIR instrumentation which will allow  for the first time the investigation of
              a wide variety of  biological systems at the sub-nanosecond to millisecond 
              range. The proposed instrument will incorporate novel  features which will
              address the major short-comings of  current time-resolved FTIR instruments. The
              project will be  supported by the newly formed Center for Photonics Research 
              at Boston University and Bruker Instruments, Inc., a leader  in time-resolved
              FTIR instrumentation    In recent years it has been demonstrated that Fourier 
              transform infrared (FTIR) difference spectroscopy can  provide detailed
              information about dynamic changes in the  protonation state, local environment
              and orientation of  specific amino acid residues in proteins. This ability is 
              enhanced by the recent development of powerful new methods  for band
              assignments by the introduction of site-directed  isotope labels (SDIL) into
              proteins. However, the current  generation of FTIR instruments have fallen
              short of their  promise for probing rapid conformational changes in 
              biomolecular systems. Existing limitations are related to  the lack of
              sufficiently powerful broad-band infrared  sources, the relatively slow
              cycle-time or irreversible  response of most biological systems upon
              activation, the  prevalence of biological systems activated by mechanisms 
              other than light, and the need to simultaneously monitor  changes in the
              infrared and UV-visible absorption of a  sample.    We propose to develop a
              unique step-scan FTIR system with  the ability to record simultaneous
              sub-nanosecond to  millisecond infrared and W-visible absorption changes in 
              biomolecular systems. The instrument will be based on recent  breakthroughs in
              technology for ultra-high intensity  broad-band continuous (CW) and pulsed IR
              sources, rapid  sub-nanosecond transient recorders and infrared detectors  and
              step-scan interferometers. The development of a novel  synchronized  sample
              step translator (SSST) will make it  possible to shorten dramatically
              measurement times and open  the door to the investigation of dynamic processes
              in a wide  variety of biomolecular systems under physiological  conditions,
              including systems not activated by light,  systems with very slow cycle times
              and systems with  irreversible processes. By combining this proposed FTIR 
              instrumentation with the recently developed method of SDIL  and site-directed
              non-native amino acid replacement (SNAAR),  breakthroughs are expected in the
              fields of protein folding,  enzyme mechanism, ion transport and signal
              reception.  Transfer of the developed technology for future commercial  use
              will be facilitated by the close interaction during the  project with Bruker
              Instruments and through the Center for  Photonics Research
