Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Single, Double, and Triple Photoionization and
               Photoexcitation in Alkali Metals, Rare Gases, and Negative Ions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a9513091

Award Number: 9513091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivan A. Sellin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon C. Levin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joachim E. Burgdorfer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9513091  Sellin  This award supports a three-year cooperative research  project
              between Prof. Ivan A. Sellin of the University of  Tennessee at Knoxville, and
              Prof. Yoshiro Azuma of the  Photon Factory, KEK National Laboratory for High
              Energy  Physics, Tsukuba, Japan.  The collaborators assembled also  include
              other faculty, postdocs, and graduate students from  the University of
              Tennessee as well as from the Photon  Factory, the University of Tokyo, and
              Meisei University.  Initially, the joint research will concentrate on 
              interpreting new data on the properties of multiply excited,  "hollow" atomic
              states of lithium and other simple atoms  resonantly excited by synchrotron
              radiation at the Photon  Factory, the first among which was obtained just
              before the  submission of the present proposal.  Subsequently, studies  of the
              corresponding photoelectron production and their  energy and angular
              distributions will be undertaken,  utilizing new time-of-flight spectrometers
              and a cylindrical  mirror analyzer equipped with position-sensitive detection 
              electronics and associated software newly developed at the  University of
              Tennessee. As it is anticipated that a  significant fraction of the proposed
              studies will be carried  out at the Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, and Argonne 
              National Laboratories in the US in addition to further work  at the Photon
              Factory utilizing dye laser equipment recently  acquired there for use in joint
              laser- and synchrotron-  radiation excitation experiments, the objectives of
              the US-  Japan program in facilitating the exchange and transfer of  scientific
              knowledge through genuinely bilateral  international collaboration are likely. 
              ***
