Title       : A Video-Based Motion Analysis Facility for Neuroethological Research on Insects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9513002

Award Number: 9513002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69307              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Willis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard B. Levine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
               The aim of this proposal is to establish a multi-user instrumentation  facility
              for the fine-scale analysis of video-recorded orientation and  locomotory
              movements of insects, and the simultaneously recorded  underlying electrical
              activity of groups of neurons and muscles. The  entire facility will comprise
              the Peak Performance Technologies Inc.  2D/3D software, two 486 desk-top
              computers, color and low-light video  recording equipment (for recording
              behavior in 3 dimensions), the Peak  Performance Technologies Inc. automatic
              point tracking software, and a  video recorder and camera which has been
              modified by Peak Performance  Technologies Inc. for high-speed (120 frames/sec)
              recording.  Simultaneously recorded electrophysiological data will be precisely
               synchronized with the video record using the Peak Performance  Technologies
              Inc. electronic synchronization unit. The  electrophysiological data will be
              played back with an 8-channel Vetter  PCM data recorder, and analyzed using Run
              Technologies Inc. Data Pac II  wave form analysis software. The ultimate goal
              of these  neuroethological studies is to understand the sensorimotor mechanisms
               underlying complex movement patterns. These studies, using insects as  model
              organisms, will specifically address questions of, how the  development of
              circuits of identified neurons affect behavior,  associative learning and
              memory, specific brain structures and their  role in spatial learning and
              memory, integration of multimodal sensory  inputs and control of motor output,
              and plant-insect interactions and  their role in crop protection.      The
              major users of this equipment facility will be performing  fine-scaled analyses
              of the movements of animals with respect to their  environments, and the
              movements of the segments of the body and limbs  with respect to each other, in
              both 2 and 3 dimensions. These projects  involve the study of body postures and
              movements, and the neural and  muscular activity underlying them in: (1) moths
              flying freely (closed-  l oop conditions) in a laboratory wind tunnel and
              natural field  conditions, (2) in moths during tethered flight  open-loop
              conditions   activated by various sensory stimuli (pulse trains of pheromone 
              compounds, visual flow fields, mechanosensory inputs) or endogenously,  (3) and
              walking in different successive developmental stages (e.g.,  caterpillars and
              moths) of the moth Manduca sexta. Projects proposed by  minor users include:
              (1) quantification of the movement patterns of  freely walking insects as they
              interact with the chemical environment  on the surfaces of leaves, (2)
              high-speed video analysis correlating  the effects of changes in the
              intracellularly recorded firing patterns  of identified neurons on the head and
              neck movements of flies in  tethered flight, (3) orientation and movement of
              body segments during  visually guided learning in freely walking animals, and
              its associated  neural activity, (4) analysis of movement patterns used by 
              plant-feeding insects to locate their host plant, and the strategies  utilized
              by parasitic insects to locate their insect herbivore prey. An  additional use,
              yet to be explored, may be to analyze the growth and  development of single
              neurons growing in culture, video recorded  through a compound microscope.    
              The most important components of this facility are the Peak  Performance
              Technologies Inc. motion analysis software and the video  and computer
              equipment that interact with this software. This motion  analysis system has
              been designed to perform sophisticated analysis of  animals moving with respect
              to their environment and of separate  segments of the body or limbs with
              respect to each other. The motion  analysis software is also designed to
              interact with the  electrophysiological analysis software produced by Run
              Technologies  Inc., enabling the researchers to analyze the behavior of
              interest and  easily and precisely correlate it with appropriately synchronized
               recordings from the muscles and nerves involved in the generation and  contro
              l of that behavior. Our current video recording and analysis  capabilities does
              not provide the level of spatial and temporal  resolution necessary to test
              existing hypotheses or formulate and test  new ones. Without the interactive
              components of the Peak system, the  work proposed can only be performed with a
              prohibitively large  investment in time and investigator effort.        A-1
