Title       : An Automated DNA Sequencer for Use in Population Biology, Phylogeny,
               Neurobiology and Immunology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9513029

Award Number: 9513029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56383              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Graves graves@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret S. Saha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene M. Burreson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Emmett Duffy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen L. Kaattari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7334

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Funding is requested for the purchase of a Li-Cor 4000LS automated 
              deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequencer. This equipment is to be used by  no
              fewer than 5 separate project groups involving a diverse range of  research
              disciplines at the College of William and Mary. Four of five  principal
              investigators are faculty at the Virginia Institute of Marine  Science (VIMS),
              the School of Marine Science campus of the College  located in Gloucester
              Point, VA. Research project groups at VIMS are  conducting studies on 1) the
              population genetics, biogeography and  taxonomy of selected marine organisms
              with emphasis on pelagic fishes,  2) the biology of the phylum Haplosporidia
              and the phylogenetic  relationship of these protists to other eukaryotes, 3)
              the  phylogenetics and systematics of the Clitellata including leeches, 
              oligochaetes and branchiobdellidans, 4) the association of major 
              histocompatibility complex II  gene alleles in trout with immune 
              responsiveness, and 5) the origin and maintenance of biodiversity in  marine
              invertebrate taxa. In addition to the VIMS project groups,  studies in the
              Department of Biology of the College involve screening  genes that can be used
              as dorsal-ventral markers in Xenopus to examine  the tissue interactions
              leading to the determination of the  dorsal-ventral axis in vertebrates.       
              The collective need for an automated sequencer has been directed by 3 
              principal criteria: 1) data throughput and efficiency, 2) radiation  safety and
              3) centralization. The purchase of the Li-Cor 4000LS  automated sequencer
              offers considerable advantages to throughput and  efficiency over manual
              methods currently available at the College of  William and Mary. These
              advantages include increased base  identification accuracy, increased
              read-length from a single primer,  and greatly reduced time investment. The use
              of an automated sequencer  will also eliminate radioactive waste and will
              reduce the risk of  environmental exposure. Currently, sequencing reactions at
              the College  ar e run in the presence of 35S labeling. The use of radioactive 
              material entails the risk of exposure both to the experimenter and to  those
              working in the same facilities and severely curtails the  opportunities for
              students, especially undergraduates, to gain  experience with DNA sequencing.
              In addition, waste disposal is a  problem. The single radioactive waste
              disposal site available for  eastern Virginia will close on December 31, 1995
              and a substitute  facility is not scheduled to be available until the year
              2000. In the  interim, all radioactive waste generated at the College must be
              stored  on site. The laser-detection of infrared excitation in an automated 
              sequencer does not involve the use of radioactive labeling methods and  thus
              circumvents impending limitations imposed by accumulating  radioactive waste
              and experimenter exposure. Moreover, the  non-radioactive detection method
              makes the technology freely available  and safe for teaching purposes at any
              level. Centralization of all  sequencing operations will enhance existing
              interactions among all  project groups.
