Title       : Ontogenetic Changes in Defensive and Nutritional Characteristics of Juvenile
               Kelps and their Effects on Community Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1997       
File        : a9513988

Award Number: 9513988
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127714             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn L. Van Alstyne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kenyon College
	      
	      Gambier, OH  43022    614/427-2244

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9513988  Van Alstyne      Kelp forests are habitats that are important nursery
              grounds for many commercially important species of fish and shellfish.  The
              kelps that make up these forests serve as food and shelter from predators for a
              variety of marine animals.  Large numbers of kelps within kelp forests die each
              year creating open patches that can be colonized by juvenile kelps. In order to
              understand how kelp forests are sustained, it is necessary to know how juvenile
              kelps become established in open areas and how environmental factors affect
              their establishment.   Like many marine organisms, kelps produce large numbers
              of offspring but only a few survive to become adults.  Many kelp offspring die
              within a few weeks after they settle to the bottom because they are consumed by
              snails and sea urchins.  When they first settle, juvenile kelps are very small
              relative to their predators and their tissues are thin and easily consumed. 
              However, some species of kelps are less likely to be consumed than others and
              these species often become the dominant species in kelp beds.  Little is
              currently known about why these species are less likely to be consumed by
              grazers, but preliminary data suggest their survival may be due to high
              concentrations of chemical defenses in their tissues.  Previous research has
              shown that seaweed chemical defenses are distasteful to snails and sea urchins,
              and that many grazers will avoid chemically defended seaweed individulas.     
              This study will use field and laboratory experiments to examine the biochemical
              and structural features of juvenile kelps that affect grazing by herbivores. 
              The following questions will be addressed (1)  Do juvenile kelps invest greater
              amounts of resources in defending themselves against attacks by herbivores than
              adult kelps, or do they preferentially allocate resources for growth rather
              than defense?; (2) Do kelps at different locations use different strategies in
              allocating resources towards defense versus growth?  If so, is the strategy use
              d at a particular location determined by environmental features of the site?;
              (3).  Are the polyphenolic defensive compounds that are produced by kelps
              effective against all types of herbivores?; and (4)  Are juvenile kelps that do
              not invest heavily in defenses better competitors because they have more
              resources to invest in growth?.    The results of this study will provide
              insights into the mechanisms by which these important habitats are sustained. 
              They will also serve as a basis for determining the effects of changes in the
              environment on interactions between predators and their prey.
