Title       : Analysis of the Yeast C-Type Cyclin Gene UME3
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9513479

Award Number: 9513479
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randy Strich r_strich@fccc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Cancer Research
	      7701 Burholme Avenue, Fox Chase
	      Philadelphia, PA  191112412    215/728-2490

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Strich  9513479  Cyclins are a conserved gene family that activate specific
              protein kinases (termed CDK's for cyclin dependent kinases).  Initially,
              cyclins were identified as factors required for oocyte maturation and mitotic
              cell cycle progression.  As indicated by their name, the levels of these
              proteins were found to oscillate during the cell cycle peaking when their
              activity was required.  However, a rapidly emerging subclass of cyclin proteins
              (C-type) has been described that differs from the original groups in one
              important aspect.  Although these proteins still activate protein kinases,
              their transcript levels do not vary with respect to the cell cycle.  This
              project will investigate the yeast gene UME3, the newest member of the C-type
              cyclin subfamily.  UME3 is required for the full repression of several meiotic
              genes and member of the Hsp70 heat shock super family of proteins.  Since these
              genes are regulated in response to external stimuli, these results suggest a
              role for Ume3P in the adaptive response to changing environmental conditions. 
              Consistent this hypothesis, the protein encoded UME3 (Ume3p) is rapidly
              destroyed when cells are exposed to heat shock, nutrient deprivation and during
              meiotic development.  The destruction of Ume3p in response to adverse
              environment conditions or developmental cues represents a novel mechanism for
              cyclin regulation and, combined with the genetic analysis, suggest that Ume3p
              links the pathway that transmits exogenous signals and the transcription
              machinery.  If correct, this system would provide the cell a rapid, flexible
              response to changing environmental or intracellular signals through
              post-translational regulation of Ume3p-dependent protein kinase activity.  This
              study will investigate the pathway that regulates Ume3p and further elucidate
              the role this cyclin plays in the normal cellular response to stress. 
              Specifically, the following questions will be addressed:  1.  What are the cis
              and trans factors that mediate Ume3p regulation?  2.  Wha t role does Ume3p
              play in the cellular response to stress?  The long term goal of this study is
              to understand the underlying mechanisms by which cells translate environmental
              stimuli into altered gene expression programs.  One critical component of this
              process is the connection between the signaling pathway that transmits a
              particular stimulus and the transcription machinery that facilitates gene
              expression.  Such an activity would be predicted to be a regulatory molecule
              that can modulate gene expression directly and, itself, be regulated by
              external stimuli.  Several findings are consistent with yeast gene Ume3p
              performing such a role.  First, UME3 encodes a C-type cyclin.  Cyclins are a
              conserved family of proteins that serve as molecular switches through the
              activation a specific protein kinases.  Second, genetic analyses have revealed
              a role for Ume3p in negatively regulating genes involved in meiotic development
              or the adaptive response to stress.  Third, this cyclin directly interacts with
              the transcriptional apparatus.  Finally, Ume3p is rapidly destroyed in response
              to a subset of stress or differentiation signals, a novel regulatory mechanism
              for cyclins.  These results point to the existence of a rapid, flexible system
              that alters gene expression in response to changing environmental signals
              through post-translational regulation of Ume3p-dependent protein kinase
              activity.  This project is directed toward elucidating the pathway that
              regulates Ume3p and investigating the role this cyclin plays in modulating gene
              expression.  ***
