Title       : Biomimetic Models of "Acidic" Biomineralization Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1997   
File        : a9513250

Award Number: 9513250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317777             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Evans jse@dave-edmunds.dental.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9513250  Evans  Within biomineralized structures, there exists a group of
              macromolecules whose primary function is the nucleation of inorganic crystals
              and the regulation of their growth.  These molecules are referred to as
              "acidic" template macromolecules.  According to the paradigm of molecular
              complementarity, an effective template macromolecule must organize its ligand
              atoms in a compact array, such that this array complements the corresponding
              metal atom array on a crystal motif (Mann, 1993).   The question is, how is
              this "organization" of the template macromolecule achieved?  In the case of
              protein template macromolecules, such as the "acidic" proteins found in mollusc
              shell, tooth dentine, and bone, the problem of attaining this organization
              becomes a problem in protein folding.  Hence, if we can determine how "acidic"
              proteins fold in the presence of divalent cations and/or mineral crystal
              surfaces, we can (1) learn how these complex proteins work, and (2) eventually
              apply this information towards the design of inorganic motif-recognition
              polymers that can be utilized as components in the fabrication of novel
              composite materials.  Based on pioneering NMR protein-folding studies of an
              "acidic" template phosphoprotein, phosphophoryn, I have determined that an
              "acidic" template protein undergoes pH- and cation-induced global folding
              transitions, and that these folding transitions are mediated by hinge or
              intervening domains that are flanked on either side by the metal-binding
              polyelectrolyte domains.  I hypothesize that this hinge-mediated folding
              process may represent a possible mechanism for creating organized template
              molecular surfaces that will complement certain crystal motifs.  In this CAREER
              research proposal, I will refine our knowledge of the polyelectrolyte-hinge
              folding process by using the following strategy:  Explore hinge function the 
              cation-induced folding process by utilizing synthetic
              polyelectrolyte-hinge-polyelectrolyte (PHP) peptidomimetics, NMR spectroscopy,
              and mo lecular modeling.  %%%  Biomineralized tissues, such as bone, teeth, sea
              shells, and plankton, represent a naturally-occuring composite material: 
              Proteins and polysaccharides combine with inorganic mineral crystals to form
              highly structured, well-defined materials which have existed for millions of
              years.  Can we, as scientists, learn anything about these structures that might
              help us in our quest for new bio- and eco-compatible materials?  The answer is
              yes, since we are now beginning to understand that certain proteins can bind to
              minerals via a specific folding pathway, which, in turn, can affect the
              dimension and size of mineral crystals on a microscopic level.  This proposal
              plans to study the amino acid sequences of certain biomineralization proteins,
              and, determine how metal ions affect the shape or "folding" of the protein. 
              Our methods will include nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and computer
              modeling.  This information will give us some idea of how the proteins
              themselves regulate the formation of mineral crystal sizes, and ultimately, the
              formation of composite structures.  My teaching proposal will emphasize
              teacher-student programs which will help to change the learning process at the
              undergraduate and graduate level at NYU, and, prepare high school and
              elementary school students for what science skills they will need to develop in
              their college years.  ***
