Title       : Structure-function Analysis of the KSS1 MAP Kinase in S. cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1998     
File        : a9513713

Award Number: 9513713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317604             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Courchesne wec@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Welch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513713  Courchesne    A mutational analysis of Kssl was begun in an effort to 
              genetically separate its dual functions. Site-directed  mutagenesis of the KSS1
              gene was used to create single amino  acid substitutions in the protein.  These
              mutants were then  analyzed for Gl-arrest, mating, desensitizing, and in vitro 
              kinase activities. Using this approach, two novel classes of  mutant Kssl
              kinases were generated.  Mutants of the first  class allow Gl arrest but are
              defective for desensitization,  while mutants of the second class promote
              desensitization but  do not allow Gl arrest.  Surprisingly, desensitization 
              occurred in the absence of kinase catalytic activity,  suggesting that
              protein-protein interaction, rather than  protein phosphorylation, is required
              for desensitization.  These mutations provide insight into the nature of Kssl
              's  dual physiological activities, and may define domains  important for
              interaction with substrates, regulatory  proteins, or proteins required for
              proper localization.  This  research utilizes molecular genetic, biochemical,
              and  molecular modeling approaches to elucidate the molecular  mechanisms that
              allow Kssl to control both arrest and  activation of cell proliferation.  These
              studies will be  continued by pursuit of the following aims:  1. Mutational and
              functional analysis of Kssl.  The Gl arrest,  mating, desensitizing, and in
              vitro kinase activities of  mutant Kssl kinases will be determined following
              site-directed  mutagenesis of the gene using the "Charged-to-alanine"  approach
              within two regions that preliminary studies suggest  may regulate either Gl
              arrest, desensitization or  localization.  2. Identification of genes encoding
              Kssl-interacting proteins.  Kssl-interacting proteins will be sought by two
              distinct  methods, first, isolation of "suppressor" genes which can,  when
              mutated, compensate for mutant Kssls that are defective  for either Gl
              cell-cycle arrest or desensitizing activities.  (Such suppressor genes should
              encode either substrates o f Kssl  or proteins that regulate Kssl activity or
              proper cellular  localization.)  Second, the ability of the mutant Kssls to 
              interact with known components of the pheromone-response  pathway will be
              tested.  3. Biochemical/structural analyses of Kssl.  Kssl will be  analyzed
              biochemically and physically, including purification  of the wild type and
              mutant kinases, and development of an  alternative in vitro kinase assay.  A
              molecular model of the  wild type Kssl will be completed, including
              incorporating into  it the amino acid substitutions that have already been
              created  or will be created as described in the first aim above.  The 
              functional results of each mutant will be correlated with  those predicted by
              the model.    Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAP kinases) play important 
              roles in myriad signal transduction pathways controlling  proliferation and
              differentiation.  Because of their critical  roles, it is essential to
              understand their biochemical and  physiological activities, and identify their
              substrates and  regulators.  The KSS1 gene encodes one of two MAP kinases 
              (Kssl) that are required for pheromone-signal transduction.  Pheromones are
              negative growth factors that promote Gl  cell-cycle arrest.  Kssl has two
              distinct biological  activities.  Kssl can promote Gl arrest in response to 
              pheromones.  Kssl also promotes a return to proliferation of  Gl-arrested
              cells, a phenomenon called desensitization.  Although inconclusive, some data
              suggest that MAP kinases in  higher eucaryotes exert a feedback control on
              their pathways  by          phosphorylating upstream protein kinases; however,
              none have  as yet been shown to have the clearly defined role in 
              desensitization described for Kssl.  A detailed understanding  of how Kssl can
              both turn off and turn on cell proliferation  is important in understanding
              control of proliferation in all  eukaryotes.  ***
