Title       : A Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope for Cellular and Molecular Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1997  
File        : a9513065

Award Number: 9513065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118857             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nina S. Allen nina_allen@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds for a confocal laser scanning microscope  system
              based on an infmity corrected Zeiss Axiovert microscope with  both differential
              interference and fluorescence capabilities for high  resolution imaging. The
              confocal microscope will have a Krypton/Argon  laser, three photomultiplier
              tubes (PMT) and a motorized transmitted  light PMT. This microscope will be
              used to image a variety of cellular  and molecular structures in both dynamic
              and still specimens at high  resolution and in 3-dimensional detail. Different
              recording devices  are requested. An optical disc and a CD-ROM unit will store
              images  digitally and a hard copy color printer will allow quick retrieval of 
              images. Dynamic structures will be recorded by a Panasonic Optical  Memory Disc
              Recorder    This proposal comes from 19 scientists from 9 different Departments
               and three Colleges at North Carolina State University and one  Department at
              Wake Forest University. To our knowledge there is no  other confocal laser
              scanning microscope for precise high resolution  imaging available on either
              campus. Most of the seven project leaders  are plant biologists investigating
              basic cellular, developmental and  molecular processes using a combinatorial
              approach involving genetic,  molecular, biochemical, and cell biological
              techniques and all have a  very real need of confocal microscopy. The projects
              include  investigations of the relationships between cytoskeleton and cell 
              signaling (especially Calcium ions) as it influences plant development  (Boss,
              Allen, Davies, Muday), of the targeting of storage proteins in  maize (Boston)
              of viral pathogenesis and transport (Robertson and  Lommel), of nematode
              pathogenesis and root specific gene expression  (Conkling), and of ferredoxin
              localization as well as nuclear scaffold  attachment regions in plant cells
              (Thompson). In addition, Peretti  will study plasmid transfer in biofilms.
              Another group of  investigators, who initially will be minor users, include the
               following: Thr ee members of Zoology will study various aspects of cell 
              signaling in epithelial cells (Black), neurons and glia (Grossfeld)  and from
              pituitary glands of fish (Borski). Mahaffey (Genetics) will  study segmentation
              in Drosophila larvae and Weissinger will  investigate fungal pathogenesis in
              transgenic plants. Foegeding (Food  Science) will study biorheological
              properties of biopolymer gels and  Laster (Microbiology) will investigate tumor
              induced apoptosis. Muday  will study auxin transport in plants. Finally in
              Botany, Burkholder  will study dinoflagellate life cycles. It is essential for
              many of  these studies that fluorescent molecules or structures be precisely 
              localized and resolved. The unique ability of the confocal microscope  to make
              very thin optical sections at high resolution has opened new  frontiers in cell
              biology in the last ten years, and this group of  scientists has realized the
              opportunities available to greatly enhance  their research efforts by applying
              the newer methods of molecular  staining with confocal imaging and image
              analysis and quantification.    North Carolina State University and the
              Department of Botany have made  a very real commitment to strengthen cell
              biology and cellular  imaging. This interest in imaging was driven in part by a
              need of the  biotechnology and molecular biology oriented faculty to
              incorporate  advanced imaging in their work. For example, it is now possible to
              use  molecular biology techniques to express transgenically fluorescent  probes
              such as Green Fluorescent Protein in plants. Several cell  biologists have
              recently been hired in Botany and Zoology. A Cellular,  Molecular and
              Developmental Biology Program is in development and will  include faculty from
              many diverse Departments. Nina Allen will direct  the Cellular and Molecular
              Imaging Center (CMIC) to be housed in the  Botany Department in the area being
              renovated for Allen and Davies.  Several high resolution video microscopes have
              been purchased with  set-up money provided by NCSU  to Allen. Wendy Boss has
              obtained funds  to purchase a cooled-CCD imaging system that will be housed in
              CMIC.  These microscopes in combination with the confocal microscope will 
              allow great flexibility in imaging capabilities available in the  Center and
              should greatly strengthen many areas of research at the  University.
