Title       : The Emergence of a Sign Language in Nicaragua
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1998       
File        : a9513762

Award Number: 9513762
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366856             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy Kegl   (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard Poizner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Nicaraguan Sign Language arose fifteen years ago when  hundreds of
              previously isolated deaf individuals were brought  together in schools for the
              first time as the result of an  educational reform movement dedicated to
              providing literacy  training and a fourth-grade education to everyone. For
              virtually  the first time, it became possible to directly observe the 
              emergence of a new language. This case is particularly  interesting because
              this language arose not as the result of  language contact or the creolization
              of previously existing  languages, but rather from the merging of idiosyncratic
              gesture  systems, called "home signs" that were used for communication  within
              the immediate family by the first generation of deaf  children to enter the
              schools. Home signers quickly began to  share their idiosyncratic system
              imparting to the communication  system more and more conventionality. In one
              generation, young  children exposed to a mix of gesturing began to produce a 
              communication form radically different from their input. The new  form was more
              fluid, more complex and wholly language-like. With  no co-existing signed
              languages and limited access to Spanish as  a result of low literacy and
              inability to hear, the only source  from which this highly complex linguistic
              structure could have  come was the human brains of those very young first
              language  learners. This constitutes the cleanest case to date in support  of
              the proposal that humans are innately endowed with the  capacity to acquire
              language--even when the input is non-optimal.         This project will explore
              the rich source of evidence for  innate language capacity offered by the
              Nicaraguan case. It  begins with a systematic archiving, transcription and
              analysis of  the language data collected over the past ten years including 
              vocabulary, sentence structure, free conversation and controlled  narratives
              elicited via 1.5 minute nonverbal cartoons. These  cartoons are the stimuli for
              a population study that will  document the signi ng of the entire population of
              signers in  Nicaragua. The research involves several components: 1. the 
              population study where a variety of factors conditioning sign  fluency are
              considered including age, chronological year, and  amount of exposure to
              signing; 2. the issue of critical mass  (i.e., "How many gesturers does it take
              to make a language?); 3.  the process by which a language emerges.  While
              addressing issues  of critical period, critical mass and the innate
              contribution of  the human brain to language, the project will also produce a 
              systematic linguistic analysis of Nicaraguan Sign Language. The  areas of focus
              include the "phonetics" of this new language, an  indepth analysis of its
              classifier and coreference systems, and  the coding and analysis of the use of
              nonmanual gestures and  facial expressions marking questions, topics, and a
              host of other  grammatical functions.
