Title       : Controlled Environment Space for Ecological Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1996   
File        : a9513057

Award Number: 9513057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65168              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Tonsor tonsor+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Kalisz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter P. Carson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tia-Lynn Ashman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              We propose to establish controlled environment space at the Pymatuning 
              Laboratory of Ecology, a center for ecological studies administered by the 
              Department of Biological Sciences of the University of Pittsburgh. With  four
              new appointments in Ecology, plans for additional appointments in the  near
              future, a five-year program of research land purchases, the  construction of
              new research and residential buildings discussions of new  programmatic
              initiatives in Environmental Science, and generous funding  packages for the
              four new ecology faculty since 1993, the University has  demonstrated a
              long-term commitment to building the Pymatuning Laboratory  of Ecology into a
              superb ecological research and education center.  Controlled environment space
              at the Pymatuning Laboratory of Ecology will  fill a critical need in the
              growing program. The active and growing group  of scientists and educators at
              PLE will ensure ample use and productivity  from this investment.    The
              controlled environment space will consist of three 15 ft2 controlled 
              environment chambers, capable of providing a wide range of temperatures.  light
              levels and humidifies; a germination/incubation chamber, and a  control system
              which allows remote monitoring and programming of the  environmental control
              systems. Matching, funds from the University of  Pittsburgh will provide
              partial coverage of the cost of chamber purchase.  preparation space.
              modifications of the building climate control system and  electrical system,
              purchase of the computer and communications hardware for  interfacing with the
              remote programming and monitoring system and purchase  and installation of a
              water purification system.    Five user groups propose specific research for
              controlled environment  space. This research includes 1 Propagation of distinct
              allocation  genotypes in Plantago ianceolata for examination of the role of
              genetic  variation in carbon and nitrogen :allocation patterns for fitness
              variation  under elevated atmospheric carbon concentration . 2 Controlled
              matings of  field-collected Arabis Ivrata for use in studies of the genetic 
              architecture of local evolution. 3. Estimates of mating, systems for four 
              populations of Collinsia verna to determine the evolutionary liability of 
              mating system parameters in natural populations.  4. Studies of seed bank 
              demography in natural populations of Collinsia verna to understand the 
              population genetic and demographic consequences of near-extinction in  natural
              populations. 5. Manipulation of phenological state in  wild-collected Fragaria
              virginiana plants to examine genetic variation in  gender expression and floral
              display and its fitness consequences.. 6.  Production and diapause manipulation
              of phytophagous insects for  dose-response curves of herbivory on competitive
              ability in field  populations of plants. 7. Clonal propagation of
              wild-collected genotypes  Solidago altissima differing in allocational patterns
              for use in field  studies of selection on allocation as a proximal  mechanism
              for selection  on competitive ability. In addition to these major user groups.
              ;l  substantial number of researchers from small colleges in the surrounding 
              area have a commitment to work ~ Phymatuning and would make occasional use  of
              controlled environments. The requested controlled environment space  would also
              be a strong asset to Phymatuning Laboratory s successful  teaching program   
              Tonsor the new director of the Phymatuning Laboratory of Ecology, will be 
              responsible for the administration of the controlled environment space. A 
              committee will be established, initially consisting of the heads of the  listed
              use, groups. to make policy and space assignment decisions. The cost  of
              maintenance will be recovered from bench fees charged for use of PLE, 
              laboratory fees for courses using the space, grant overhead return funds,  and
              new increment to the general operating budget of the Phymatuning,  Laboratory
              of Ecology.
