Title       : The Biology of Heat Shock Proteins and Molecular Chaperones: Meeting to be held
               May 1-5, 1996 at Cold Spring Harbor, NY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1996     
File        : a9513670

Award Number: 9513670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              951370  Grodzicker  This proposal is a request for partial financial support for
              a meting on Molecular Chaperones and the Heat Shock response to be held from
              May 1-5, 1996 at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory.  There has been a significant
              amount of new information on the role of heat shock proteins synthesis, protein
              folding, transport and secretion.  In addition, there has been substantial
              progress on the biochemical properties of these heat shock proteins and
              chaperones, on the regulation of the genes that encode these proteins, and on
              the role, regulation and function of heat shock proteins in a wide range of
              human diseases.  the field of heat shock proteins and molecular chaperones has
              gown rapidly and draws interest from a number of traditional scientific
              disciplines in the basic sciences and has  embraced numerous areas of
              biomedical research including infectious diseases, cancer, heart disease and
              neurodegenerative disease.  This meeting, in the tradition of Cold Spring
              Harbor meetings, will emphasize new discoveries in these areas.  The meeting
              will include seven lecture and three poster sessions.  The proposed sessions
              include: I-Biochemical and biophysical aspects of chaperone-dependent protein
              folding, II-Import and folding of precursor proteins into organelles and
              secretion into the extracellular space, III-The protein folding, IV-The role of
              chaperones in recognition of the protein degradative machinery, V-The 
              transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of genes encoding
              chaperones, VI-Stress tolerance: Protection of  critical cellular targets
              against protein damage, and VII-The Stress Response in Disease.  Each session
              will be chaired by an invited speaker and have eight to nine oral presentations
              of which only 3-4 talks per session will be pre-invited speakers.  The
              remaining speakers for each session will be selected from submitted abstracts
              to reflect diverse participation and to recognize new investigators. 
              Particular attention will be paid to encourage participation in  the lecture or
              poster sessions by graduate students, postdctoral fellows, and new
              investigators in addition to attendance and presentations by leading scientists
              in the field.  ***
