Title       : Characterization of the Genetic Diversity of Cold-Active Enzymes from
               Psychrophilic Microorganisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1996       
File        : a9513236

Award Number: 9513236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean E. Brenchley jeb7@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Brenchley  9513236  More than ninety percent of the Microbial Diversity observed
              in nature goes unstudied or used because the organisms can not be isolated or
              maintained.  Of special value is the study of psychrophilic microorganisms and
              their cold-active enzymes that have been overlooked by the emphasis on strains
              growing at higher temperatures.  A wide assortment of physiologically diverse
              psychrophiles exists because cold temperatures dominate the earth and its
              oceans.  These organisms may make cold-active enzymes with uses in
              biotechnology for low-temperature chemical conversion, for food processing at
              low temperature to prevent spoilage, for bioremediation in cold climates, for
              use in cold-water cleaners, etc.  This project is a new approach for gaining
              access to genetic diversity and cold-active enzymes while not being able to
              isolate and maintain all existing strains.  The objective is to establish the
              basic protocols for discovering and studying genes encoding novel cold-active
              enzymes existing microorganisms that have never been isolated.  The specific
              aim is to develop methods for extracting DNA directly from combinations of
              microorganisms or cold-environment samples that has the size and purity
              required for recombinant DNA experiments.  The techniques will be tested by
              cloning genes into expression vectors and detecting transformants producing
              model enzyme activities in a new host.  The development of these methods will
              help investigators discover, study and use new genes from physiologically
              diverse microorganisms.  Microorganisms have provided many life-saving
              antibiotics and useful enzymes.  Unfortunately, full use of these microbial
              products has gone untapped because the organisms have never been isolated. 
              This project will help make use of the genetic potential carried in
              microorganisms.  Since the ideal of isolating all microorganisms is not
              possible, then an alternative is to seize the genetic diversity directly by
              extracting the DNA from environmental materials.  The extracti on of total DNA
              would yield genes never seen before because it would collect DNA from all
              microorganisms in the community.  The DNA could be preserved as miniature
              Noah's Arks of psychrophilic genetic diversity ready for cloning of new genes
              of future interest.  The development of methods for extracting DNA from soil,
              water, and other samples would give researchers access to genes encoding
              industrially useful enzymes and would provide proteins with unusual features
              for comparison with other protein structures.  ***
