Title       : Acquisition of an Electronic Particle Counter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1995  
File        : a9513995

Award Number: 9513995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25025              (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Walton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mir S. Mulla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian A. Federici  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nickolas M. Waser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    A critical need for an electronic particle counter is identified  and
              funds are requested to purchase a Multisizer lle electronic  particle counter
              made by Coulter Corporation. The particle counter will  be used (1 ) to study
              the feeding ecology of larval mosquitoes and the  relationship of feeding rates
              and particle selection to trophic state  of larval developmental sites; (2) to
              study natural selection,  population genetics, and plant reproductive ecology
              by quantifying  traits such as pollen production, the amount of pollen removed
              by  pollinators and pollination success, and by examining variation and 
              environmental influences on the male component of plant reproductive  success;
              (3) to determine the selection of different particle types by  mosquito larvae
              and the impact of behavioral changes in feeding ecology  (which cause
              resistance to ingestible toxins) on particle selection.  feeding rates and,
              eventually, on the life histories of resistant vs  susceptible strains of Culex
              mosquitoes; (4) to measure particle size  distributions and abundance in
              mosquito developmental sites; and (5) to  quantify and size occluded
              bacculoviruses. In addition to fulfilling  the needs of the major and minor
              users, a particle counter will foster  collaborations with colleagues at
              University of California - Riverside  (UCR) and other institutions, meet the
              needs of postdoctoral scientists  and graduate students working in our
              laboratories, and enhance the  education of undergraduate and graduate students
              at UCR. The particle  counter will be used by investigators applying diverse
              methodologies to  a wide range of particle size. Therefore, funds are requested
              to  purchase four additional aperatures. Funds are also requested to  purchase
              software designed for the Multisizer lle, a free-standing  IBM-compatible
              computer and a printer. As compared to comparably priced  electronic particle
              counters, the advantages of the Multisizer lle  system include ease of
              operation, a greater dynamic range of particle   size, features that
              significantly enhance user safety, flexible and  user-friendly software,
              features that reduce electronic interference  from outside sources. and
              superior user-support services.
