Title       : Genetic Applications of a Phage Exclusion System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1999  
File        : a9513979

Award Number: 9513979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Loren R. Snyder snyderl@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513979  Snyder  Many plasmids and prophages exclude superinfecting phages by
              killing the host cell to prevent multiplication of the phage. The DNA element
              el4 is a defective prophage of E. coli K12 that excludes T4 and related phages
              by encoding a zinc metalloprotease that cleaves translation elongation factor
              Tu (EF-Tu) after infection. Cleavage of EF-Tu blocks cellular translation and
              prevents development of the phage. The protease is normally inactive, but is
              activated after infection by a short peptide determinant of only 25 amino acids
              internal to the major head protein of the infecting phage. Part of this grant
              is to begin to determine the mechanism of activation of the Lit protease which
              may serve as a prototype for signal transduction in other systems. The protease
              can be activated in crude extracts by the chemically synthesized peptide from
              the major head protein, making it possible to study the activation in vitro.
              This work will require purifying the protease to determine if any other factors
              are required, and determining whether the activating peptide binds to the
              protease or to EF-Tu. Clues to the mechanism of activation will come from an
              analysis of what amino acids in the protease are required for its activity and
              activation, and what amino acids in the peptide are required for the
              activation. Mutants in the protease and the peptide will be obtained both by
              site-specific mutagenesis and by directly selecting mutants defective in the
              activation. Other proteins may be cleaved by the protease since the amino acid
              sequence surrounding the site of cleavage of EF-Tu has been conserved
              throughout evolution and is also similar in other translation factors and in
              Gproteins in general. In addition, the role of the peptide coding region in the
              major head protein gene of T4 will be studied. This region of the major head
              protein gene seems to play a special regulatory role, greatly increasing the
              expression of downstream genes in transcriptional fusions. Experiments will
              establish whether thi s region is an transcription antiterminator, or acts by
              some other mechanism. If the region is an antiterminator, as seems most likely,
              the minimum sequence required for antiterminator activity will be determined,
              as well as the role of specific sequences and the function of translation in
              activating the antiterminator activity. Finally, the ability of this system to
              specifically inactivate Ef-Tu in vivo will be used to investigate the function
              of EF-Tu in the cell, including the proposed mechanism for the generation of
              ppGpp and a possible more direct role for EF-Tu in ribosomal RNA synthesis. 
              Many types of cells make highly specific enzymes that kill cells in response to
              virus infection to prevent the spread of the virus to other cells. Components
              of the translation appparatus that synthesizes proteins is often the favored
              target of these enzymes because these are among the most highly conserved
              cellular constituents. Some of these enzymes are already finding applications
              in cell biology and biotechnology.  Bacteria are known to make a number of
              enzymes that kill the cell in reponse to virus infection, but the molecular
              target of most of most of these enzymes is not understood. These studies should
              determine how the EF-Tu specific enzyme is activated by a peptide, anticipating
              that this mechanism will be used in other types of cells. These studies will
              also determine the potential of the EF-Tu specific protease in studying how
              cells regulate the expression of their genes.  ??
