Title       : A Collaborative Project: Molecular Studies of A Mitochondrial Ion Channel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9513439

Award Number: 9513439
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375473             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen W. Kinnally   (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry Tedeschi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carmen A. Mannella  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443456    518/474-2011

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              p+-                 C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       ;       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                     >*-    
              >*-         4 @                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                5   6   7   8
                9   :   ;   <   =   >   ?                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            F
                 Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 9513439
              Kinnally  Oxidative phosphorylation is intimately connected to the flux of ions
              and metabolites across the two membranes enclosing mitochondria; one pathway
              for ion flux is through ion channels.  The regulatory role of the outer
              membrane and of the contact sites between the inner an outer membranes is just
              beginning to be recognized and understood.  This proposal focusses on the
              energy-coupling inner membrane and its predominant channel activity, a multiple
              conductance channel, MCC.  Gated channels are adjustable molecular apertures
              through membranes whose opening is regulated by physiological stimuli such as
              voltage and the intracellular calcium in the case of MCC.  The main goal of
              this proposal is to determine the physiological and molecular basis of MCC. 
              This knowledge is necessary for understanding factors controlling the inner
              membrane permeability at the molecular level.  Furthermore, this information
              may provide insight into the mechanisms by which all five inner membrane
              channels interact with the regulation of energy production in mitochondria
              under changing conditions, e.g. durin g exercise or ischemia.  This proposal
              has several objectives related to its overall goal, which are to be achieved
              through a combination of electrophysiological and biophysical techniques.  It
              has been proposed by others that channels are involved in the translocation of
              mitochondrial proteins synthesized in the cytoplasm and we have evidence MCC
              may play a role in protein import.  Antibodies to and several mutants of the
              putative inner membrane channel portion of the hetero-oligomeric import
              apparatus will be examined for effects on MCC activity primarily using
              patch-clamp techniques.  At the same time, MCC activity will be examined in
              deletion mutants of proteins implicated in MCC activity by other studies, e.g.
              voltage dependent anion channel and adenine nucleotide translocator.  These two
              lines of investigation will continue until MCC s molecular basis and
              physiological role are determined.   A biophysical characterization of the
              purified MCC constituent(s) will include electrophysiological comparisons to
              MCC in mitoplasts and circular dichroism determination of (-helix and (-sheet
              content.  Finally, structure/function studies will be made of MCC and its
              relationship with contact sites between the inner and outer membranes. ***     
                                 ;                                                           
                         Oh     +'  0                                       $       H       l
                                                            D       h                        
                                        R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                     S u
              m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                           (                    
                                            4                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             9513439                         
                 Thomasina M Osborne                 Thomasina M Osborne         @     >*-   
                                     @                                   @     >*-           
                                                                                             
                     @    F #                                    Microsoft Word 6.0          
                                                         2                                   
                                                                 ;         e =       e       
                     A   ;                   A                                       j      
              j   j       j       j       j       j                                          
                                          u   1                                              
                                                              #   7               W          
              T       A   u                       j                                          
                                            u               j       j                        
                                                            j               j                
                                    ~               j       j       j       j                
                        j                                                                    
                                          9513439 Kinnally  Oxidative phosphorylation is
              intimately connected to the flux of ions and metabolites across the two
              membranes enclosing mitochondria; one pathway for ion flux is through ion
              channels.  The regulatory role of the outer membrane and of the contact sites
              between the inner an outer membranes is just beginning to be recognized and
              understood.  This proposal focusses on the energy-coupling inner membrane and
              its predominant channel activity, a multiple conductance channel, MCC.  Gated
              channels are adjustable molecular apertures through membranes whose op
