Title       : Genetic and Molecular Analysis of a Drosophila Homolog of MyoD
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9513334

Award Number: 9513334
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Abmayr SMA1@psuvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                ***  9513334  Abmayr    The proposed studies focus on the role of nautilus,
              the Drosophila homologue of the myogenic regulatory gene family that includes
              MyoD, in myogenesis. Embryos homozygous for deficiencies that delete nautilis
              are missing a distinct subset of mesodermal cells. Several of these muscles are
              missing in embryos mutant for daughterless, the putative partner of nautilus,
              and the spitz group genes, an EGF-like signaling cascade involved in
              dorsal/ventral axis determination. Additional studies have revealed that
              nautilus is capable of converting cells from non-muscle origins to somatic
              muscles, and of altering the developmental program of somatic muscle fibers in
              which it is not normally expressed. These results suggest that nautilus induces
              myogenic differentiation, and that some cells are converted to a myogenic
              program by expression of bHLH-containing myogenic genes. The proposed
              experiments are designed to address various aspects of the above findings.
              These include characterizing potential point mutations and/or overlapping
              deficiencies that affect only the nautilus gene. Results of these studies will
              provide critical information indicating whether nautilus is necessary to
              specify particular muscle progenitors or, rather, simply induces their
              differentiation program. In related studies, the origin and developmental
              status of ectopic muscles that form in response to nautilus will be explored to
              aid in understanding its role. Additional studies will search for interactions
              between nautilus and genes that cause similar or related mutant phenotypes. For
              example, the observation that daughterless mutant embryos exhibit a more severe
              mutant phenotype than that of the nautilus deficiencies suggests that it may
              interact with proteins that have yet to be identified.  ***
