Title       : Mechanism and Function in Nitrogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1998  
File        : a9513512

Award Number: 9513512
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Howard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513512  Howard  Nitrogenase is a two-protein component enzyme which mediates
              both electron transfer between the two proteins (Fe-protein and Mo-Fe protein)
              and ATP hydrolysis, which provides the energy for the electron transfer. 
              Fe-protein has a strong secondary structural motif similar to G-proteins and
              Ras which suggests that Fe-protein functions as a nucleotide-dependent switch. 
              The important distinction is that Fe-protein is competent for electron transfer
              to MoFe-protein only in the complex and during ATP hydrolysis. The objective of
              this proposal is to develop methods to stabilize the complex by trapping the
              transition from ATP to ADP states. Mutagenesis and kinetic analyses with
              nucleotide analogues provide a rational approach based upon the nucleotide
              switch model.  Specific questions to be addressed are:  l.  What is the
              location of the electron in the AlF4- ADP complex of Avl and Av2?   2. Can
              electron transfer be trapped in one of the redox clusters of the complex? 3.
              What are the amino acid residues that stabilize the transition state during the
              electron transfer step?  %%%  Nitrogen fixation is the process whereby
              atmospheric nitrogen gas is converted to the biologically important form,
              ammonia. The latter is incorporated into all major classes of biomolecules and,
              hence, is a required component of all living systems. How this process is
              performed by the nitrogenase enzyme has both practical and general biological
              importance. For example, nitrogenase is able to catalyze the reaction at 30  C
              and normal atmospheric pressure while the industrial process requires a hundred
              times the normal atmospheric pressure and elevated temperature. Understanding
              details of the enzyme catalysis portends more efficient and therefore more
              cheaply abundant ammonia for fertilizer.  The nitrogenase reaction involves the
              transfer, one at a time, of electrons between the component proteins.
              Concomitant with the electron transfer, 2 ATP are hydrolyzed (broken down) to
              provide the energy for the transfer.  It is the coupling of the two events that
              controls the overall chemical reaction. Based upon the elegant x-ray crystal
              structures of the two nitrogenase proteins, we noted that the electron donor
              component (Fe-protein) had a striking structural similarity to other
              nucleotide-dependent switch proteins such as those involved in muscle
              contraction, metabolic regulation associated with tumor initiation and others.
              In all of these molecules, the role of the nucleotide is to stabilize specific
              protein conformations; the conformation switches as the nucleotide is
              hydrolyzed. The hypothesis that a conformational "gate" in nitrogenase is
              opened during ATP hydrolysis that allows the electron to move from one site to
              another will be tested by trapping the proteins in the conformation where the
              gate is momentarily open. Because of the similarity between the nitrogenase
              protein and the proteins involved in the other biological processes, these
              results should help to elucidate the mechanisms of these other systems as well.
               ***
