Title       : Laser Flash Studies of Bacterial Photosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1997   
File        : a9513229

Award Number: 9513229
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Parson parsonb@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9513229  Parson  This proposal describes experimental and theoretical studies of
              photosynthetic bacterial reaction centers, with a focus on reaction centers
              that have been modified by site-directed mutagenesis.  Amino acid substitutions
              that are likely to alter the energies of the initial radical-pair states or
              modify the reaction center's spectroscopic properties have been chosen on the
              basis of electrostatics calculations. The major targets for mutagenesis are
              four aspartic acid residues and three arginines, which will be replaced by
              amino acids with nonionizable or oppositely charged side chains.  Effects of
              the mutations on the spectroscopic properties of the reaction center and on the
              midpoint potential (Em ) of the primary electron donor (P) will be examined. 
              To study the photosynthetic electron-transfer reactions, mutant and wild-type
              reaction centers will be excited with flashes of light lasting about 15 fs. 
              The excited state of P and radical-pair states created by charge separation
              will be probed by measuring the optical absorption and stimulated emission with
              a second pulse of light at various times after the excitation.  These studies
              will explore how the mutations affect the relaxation dynamics of the excited
              state, the rate and temperature dependence of the electron-transfer reactions,
              and the stabilities and free energies of the radical-pair states. Neutron
              scattering also will be used to study the temperature dependence of nuclear
              motions in reaction centers.  The theoretical studies will include calculations
              of the free energies of radical-pair states, spectroscopic properties and Em
              values in mutant and native reaction centers, using a microscopic treatment of
              dielectric effects.  Comparisons of calculated and measured properties will be
              used to refine and test the theoretical methods, and thus to increase the
              reliability of calculations of properties that are important for an
              understanding of the electron-transfer reactions but are not directly
              accessible experimentally.  Tim e-dependent fluctuations of the calculated
              energies will be examined by molecular-dynamics simulations and will be related
              to the kinetics of electron transfer.  %%%  This project concerns
              pigment-protein complexes termed "reaction centers," which carry out the
              initial reactions that plants and photosynthetic bacteria use t o capture the
              energy of sunlight.  Dr. Parson's studies will focus on bacterial reaction
              centers that have been modified genetically to alter the energies of the
              transient states created by light.  The modifications have been chosen from
              theoretical considertions based on the reaction center's structure.  The major
              targets for mutagenesis are seven amino acids with electrically charged side
              chains, which will be replaced by amino acids with neutral or oppositely
              charged side chains.  Effects of the mutations on the reaction center's optical
              absorption spectrum and on the electrochemical properties of the pigments will
              be examined. To study the photosynthetic electron-transfer reactions, mutant
              and wild-type reaction centers will be excited with flashes of light lasting
              about 15 femtoseconds. (A femtosecond is one millionth of a billionth of a
              second.) The very short-lived states generated by the light pulse will be
              probed by passing a second pulse of light through the sample at various time
              after the excitation.  These studies will explore how the mutations affect the
              rate and temperature-dependence of the electron-transfer reactiions. Neutron
              scattering also will be used to study the  temperature dependence of nuclear
              motions in reaction centers.  Parallel theoretical studies will include
              calculations of the energies of the transient states in mutant and native
              reaction centers.  Comparisons of calclated and measured properties will be
              used to refine and test the theoretical methods, and thus to increase the
              reliability of calculations of properties that are important for an
              understanding of the electron-transfer reactions but are not directly
              accessible experimentally.  ***
