Title       : Site-directed Mutagenesis of Glucose 6-Phosphate Dehydrogenases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1998    
File        : a9513814

Award Number: 9513814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271175             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Richard Levy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513814  Levy   Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenases (G6PDs) from different
              organisms differ with respect to their coenzyme specificity in vivo. Most,
              including human G6PD (hG6PD), are specific for NADP; a few, including G6PD from
              the bacterium Leuconostoc mesenteroides (LmG6PD), can utilize either NADP or
              NAD. This proposal seeks to elucidate differences among the coenzyme binding
              sites of these G6PDs with different coenzyme specificities. The investigators
              intend to identify critical amino acid residues in LmG6PD and the roles they
              play in differential binding of NADP and NAD, binding of G6P, and catalysis.
              All G6PDs consist of 2 or 4 identical subunits. The projected studies will also
              identify amino acids involved in interactions between the subunits of LmG6PD,
              and assess the role of intersubunit communication in this enzyme's functions.
              Steroids inhibit G6PD uncompetitively with respect to both coenzyme and
              substrate by binding to the ternary enzyme-NADP-subtrate complex.  The proposal
              also seeks to identify the steroid binding site in hG6PD. The principal
              techniques to be used in identifying the amino acids responsible for these
              various properties are: a) site-directed mutagenesis, b) kinetic analyses and
              determination of binding constants on the purified mutant and wildtype enzymes,
              and c) X-ray crystallography.  The proposed research will lead to an
              understanding of how the same enzyme (G6PD) catalyzing the same reaction
              (oxidation of glucose-6-phosphate) has evolved in different organisms (L.
              mesenteroides, and humans) to exhibit differences in coenzyme specificity and
              susceptibility to steroid inhibition, and precisely what protein structural
              features determine these differences. It will also provide a detailed
              description of the catalytic mechanism of G6PD, and identify those amino acids
              that are responsible for catalysis, binding of coenzyme and substrate, and
              transmitting information between individual enzyme subunits.  %%%  Glucose
              6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is a key enzyme in t he metabolism of
              carbohydrates and fats.  It functions in the synthesis of two key metabolites:
              pentose sugars, required for the synthesis of nucleic  acids, and NADPH,
              required for the biosynthesis of fats.  This project seeks to elucidate which
              amino acids of G6PD from the bacterium Leuconostoc mesenteroides interact with
              coenzymes and substrate. The bacterial G6PD is used because it is a more stable
              and simpler enzyme, and because we have solved its three-dimensional structure.
              Also, unlike human G6PD, it can interact with two coenzymes (NADP and NAD) and
              how this occurs is, in itself, of great interest since most dehydrogenases are
              specific for only one coenzyme. We will also determine which human G6PD amino
              acids interact with inhibitory steroids.  The principal technique to be used is
              site-directed mutagenesis, which allows us to replace any G6PD amino acid by
              any other one. By examining the kinetic and other properties of the mutant G6PD
              we can deduce the function of the amino acid that was replaced.  ***
