Title       : Genetic Analysis of Complementary Chromatic Adaptation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9513576

Award Number: 9513576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur R. Grossman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              95-13576  Grossman  The phycobilisome, a light-harvesting complex in both
              eukaryotic red algae and prokaryotic cyanobacteria, can constitute up to 40% of
              the cellular protein.  A number of filamentous cyanobacteria can acclimate to
              different wavelengths of light by altering the polypeptide and chromophore
              composition of the phycobilisome, thereby making the complex more effective in
              absorbing the prevalent wavelengths of light in the environment; this process
              is called complementary chromatic adaptation.  We have isolated several mutants
              of the filamentous cyanobacterium Fremyella diplosiphon that exhibit aberrant
              complementary chromatic adaptation.  Complementation of one of these mutants
              (red mutant or FdR) led to the isolation of rcaC, a gene that encodes a key
              regulator of chromatic adaptation.  RcaC has similarities to regulators of two
              component regulatory systems, although it has two rather than one receiver
              domain (which contains the aspartate residue important for the function of the
              protein).  The main goal of the project is to elucidate the mechanisms that
              govern chromatic adaptation by identifying the photoreceptor(s) and components
              of the light-responsive signal transduction chain.  The photoreceptor(s) and
              some of the elements of the signal transduction chain are likely to bear
              functional and evolutionary relationships to photoregulatory systems in
              eukaryotic algae and land plants.  Specifically, we will complete the
              characterization (both wavelength-and intensity-dependent responses) of strains
              in which RcaC has been altered in each or both of the aspartates of the
              receiver domains. Furthermore, we will characterize the genes that complement
              additional strains that have aberrant chromatic adaptation.  One mutant that
              exhibits no complementary chromatic adaptation has been complemented by a gene
              that encodes a protein that has some similarity to phytochrome.  This suggest
              that the phytochrome photoreceptor of higher plants may have evolved from
              cyanobacterial photoreceptors.  Analy ses of the genes that complement mutants
              in chromatic adaptation should enable us to define elements of the signal
              transduction chain and the ways in which the element interact.  Finally, we
              will continue to use both in vivo and in vitro methods to analyze the promoter
              region of the red light-activated cpcB2A2 gene set (encoding phycocyanin
              polypeptides) and the green light-activated cpeBA gene set (encoding
              phycoerythrin polypeptides), and are developing strategies to define both cis
              and trans acting factors that are involved in controlling cellular responses to
              both light quality and intensity during chromatic adaptation.  %%%  The
              research will help us understand how light affects the growth and development
              of photosynthetic organisms.  An understanding of how light modifies processes
              in photosynthetic organisms may enable us to tailor plants to specific light
              environments.  ***
