Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Kinematic Development of Pressure
               Solution Fabrics in Dense Rocks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2000        
File        : a9513911

Award Number: 9513911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10145              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark T. Brandon mark.brandon@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510703   Rock Fracture Mechanics                 
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,5936,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Mark Brandon and a graduate student  of Yale
              University to collaborate with three German geologists, Professors Passchier,
              Den Brok and Ring, and their students at the University of Mainz.  They will
              study the kinematics of the pressure-solution process by comparing its effects
              in natural and experimentally deformed materials.  The naturally deformed rocks
              will include sandstones from northern Kamchatka and sandstone and siltstones
              from regions of the Swiss and French Alps near Mainz.  Field work in these
              areas will be done by Drs. Brandon and Ring and their students.  Dr. Brandon
              will direct the natural fabric measurements, which will be carried out on his
              specialized equipment at Yale. The experimental work will be carried out
              primarily by Drs. Paschier and Den Brok in their well-equipped laboratories in
              Mainz, Germany.  They will manipulate very fine grained dense aggregates of
              `wet` halites, with selected grain size, temperature and differential stress,
              to provide valid comparisons.  All the participating scientists and some
              students will interact in portions of the laboratory research during a series
              of exchange visits between the two institutions.  Pressure solution appears to
              be the dominant ductile mechanism operating in the low temperature/high
              pressure setting that characterizes subduction zones.  The specific objective
              of the project is to improve understanding of the kinematic development of
              fabrics that typify pressure-solution deformation in dense rocks.  This
              information will improve the utility of such fabric data in efforts to
              understand regional tectonic problems.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
