Title       : SYMPOSIUM: Control of Arterial Blood Gases: Ventilatory and Circulatory
               Perspectives; December, 1995, Washington, DC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9513873

Award Number: 9513873
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stacia A. Sower                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl L. Reiber   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc for Intgr and Comp Bio
	      1313 Dolley Madison Blvd
	      McLean, VA  221013926    703/790-1745

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9513873  Reiber    Dr. Reiber requests financial support for a one day symposium
              entitled "Control of Arterial Blood Gases: Ventilatory and Cardiovascular
              Perspectives", to be held as part of the national meeting of the American
              Society of Zoologists, December 27-30, 1995 Washington D.C. The symposium will
              be sponsored by the Division of Comparative Physiology and Biochemistry.  The
              proceedings will be published in the American Zoologist.  The control of blood
              gases is vital and ultimately encompasses such homeostatic processes as
              acid-base balance and oxygen supply for cellular metabolism.  Early studies on
              the control of blood gases in mammals as well as within comparative physiology,
              centered around questions of gas exchange and its implications for metabolism. 
              While this line of research proved highly successful by explaining important
              concepts and identifying controlled parameters, the underlying control
              mechanisms could not be elucidated.  Thus, especially within the last two
              decades, subsequent studies devoted to neurophysiology and the neurological
              mechanisms have emerged. The new techniques and questions brought about by the
              recent neurophysiological approach has unraveled pivotal mechanisms and
              promises exciting future research. Nevertheless, in spite of the enormous
              progress, the contemporary dominance of neurophysiology may engender conceptual
              problems because such studies are becoming increasingly removed from the study
              of gas exchange, which is the evolutionarily significant factor which is acted
              upon by natural selection. Consequently, as a main objective of the proposed
              symposium, Dr. Reiber feels it is pertinent to maintain an integrated view
              which keep the original questions of gas exchange in perspective but fully
              utilizes the emerging neurophysiological understanding.  In this symposium we
              will discuss several aspects in which the comparative approach seems most
              promising. Although not always recognized, studies of invertebrates and
              non-mammalian vertebrates have contributed  enormously to the understanding of
              gas exchange mechanisms. This will also be the case within the
              neurophysiological aspect of blood gas regulation, because the receptor systems
              and mechanisms seem rather conserved and findings in a given group will
              therefore often provide insight to general relationships.  The first half of
              the proposed symposium focuses on the receptors which control ventilation and
              the cardiovascular system. Experimental work on both central and peripheral
              (arterial as well as airway) receptors will be presented. The same overall
              focus is maintained in the afternoon section, but the main emphasis is placed
              on the influence of the environment on blood gas regulation. As an interesting
              objective, he hopes to compare and contrast studies involving acute changes in
              the environment (such as acute reductions in inhaled Po2) with those of more
              subtle but longer lasting changes during development. Such comparisons may
              contribute to the understanding of important questions regarding how receptor
              "set points" are determined. Thus, the proposed symposium has a very broad
              scope. The proposed presentations span all major taxonomic groups and touch
              upon developmental, as well as environmental issues. He therefore expects to
              capture the interest of a wide audience.  ***
