Title       : B Mating-Type Specificities and Pheromones in Schizophyllum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1999       
File        : a9513513

Award Number: 9513513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlene A. Raper craper@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                        9513513            Raper    The aim of this research is to understand
              how a simple eukaryote distinguishes itself from many nonselves in regulating
              mating and development. The specific objective is to clarify the mechanism by
              which the multiple B mating-type genes trigger sexual development in the
              mushroom Schizophyllum commune. The B genes are in two linked loci, B( and B(,
              each of which has nine different versions, or specificities, in the world-wide
              population. A mating pair must be different at either B( or B( to be
              compatible: any of the 36 possible pairings of different specificities at
              either locus results in initiation of the identical developmental pathway. How
              does this occur? Recent analysis of one specificity at each locus, B(l and B(1,
              has revealed genes for pheromones and pheromone receptors similar to those
              found in other fungi. All previously described fungal systems, however, have
              only two different versions of such genes. In S. commune, there are multiple
              versions. A model to explain multiple B mating types in S. commune is that each
              specificity at each locus is defined by a unique combination of pheromone and
              pheromone receptor genes. These genes have coevolved so as to insure that no
              combination of genes contained within the B mating-type locus of a single
              specificity encodes a pair of molecules capable of activating sexual
              development in self; only molecules encoded by different specificities of that
              locus can interact to activate the pathway. It is proposed that the basis for
              multiple B mating-types in S. commune is a unique system of multiple pheromone
              and pheromone receptors which act as master regulators of sexual morphogenesis.
               The focus of this project is to test this model by defining the functional
              genetic components of the B(3 and B(2 loci and comparing these with the genes
              of the B(l and B(1 loci which are currently being studied in collaboration with
              two European laboratories. Genes of the wild-type B(3 and B(2 loci will also be
              compared to a series of  existing mutated genes within these loci that cause a
              variety of defective phenotypes. These comparisons will begin to explain how
              specificity of function is determined by the genes of each locus, and why
              certain pairings of these genes activate development while others do not. The
              research is divided into three parts: 1) Determine the basis for specificity of
              function among wild-type alleles by comparing differences and similarities
              between genetic elements that define B(3 and B(2 versus B(l and B(1. 2) Gain
              understanding of how the B mating-type genes determine specificity for
              self/nonself recognition by defining a mutation within the B(2 locus that
              destroys this function. 3) Determine specific functions of the multiple genes
              within the B(2 locus by correlating a series of mutations with changes in
              phenotype. Also define predicted deletions within the mutants for use as
              recipients in transformation experiments in order to test the effect of various
              combinat1ons of wild-type and mutated B mating-type genes. The pattern of
              expression of selected B mating-type genes will be examined for evidence of
              regulation with respect to development. This research will be accomplished by
              using standard techniques of DNA cloning, sequencing, sequence analysis,
              nucleic acid hybridization, PCR amplification, and DNA-mediated transformation
              of S. commune.  %%%  The long-term goal of this research is an understanding of
              how multiple pheromones and pheromone receptors regulate mating and
              cell-to-cell communication during development simple multicellular eukaryote.
              The organism being studied is the woodrotting Basidiomycete Schlzophyllum
              commune. This fungus, like other members of its class, has thousands of mating
              types. The investigator believes that the underlying mechanisms by which a
              haploid individual can distinguish self from many nonselves in regulating
              sexual development is fundamental relevance to an understanding of
              multicellular development in eukaryotes generally. S.commune is an ideal model
              system for  this study because of the relative ease with which it can be
              manipulated in the laboratory and the substantial background information
              available for molecular genetic studies.  ***
