Title       : Molecular Characterization of Phosphatidylcholine Biosynthesis and Regulation in
               Soybean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1998       
File        : a9513582

Award Number: 9513582
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph E. Dewey ralph_dewey@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9513582  Dewey  Biological membranes are complex assemblies of protein and
              lipid, held together primarily through noncovalent interactions.  Of the
              numerous lipid species found within eukaryotic membranes, phosphatidylcholine
              (PC) predominates.  In higher plants, PC is important not only because of its
              role as the primary phospholipid constituent of most cellular membranes, but
              also because it serves as a source of polyunsaturated fatty acids for both
              membrane lipids and seed storage oils.  Although numerous studies have been
              conducted describing the biochemical pathways responsible for PC production in
              plants, relatively little is understood about the genes that encode the enzymes
              involved, or the processes by which cells are able to monitor and maintain
              appropriate PC levels.  The primary objective of this proposal involves the
              utilization of the soybean Ckase- and CCTase- homologous cDNAs to facilitate a
              detailed characterization of these genes and their protein products, and better
              understand their role in the biosynthesis and regulation of PC.  The other
              major objective of this study involves examining the possibility that
              SEC14p-like proteins in higher plants function as molecular sensors in
              monitoring and regulating phospholipid content of cellular membranes as has
              been reported in yeast.  The detailed study of genes encoding enzymes of the
              CDP-choline pathway outlined in this proposal will generate valuable insights
              into the molecular basis of PC biosynthesis and regulation in higher plants
              that have not been previously attainable.  Furthermore, by characterizing and
              establishing the function of SEC14p-like proteins in soybean, it may then be
              possible to begin to answer some of the fundamental questions regarding the
              mechanisms by which plant cells are able to monitor and regulate the
              phospholipid content of specific biological membranes.
