Title       : U.S.- Germany Cooperative Research on Direct Current and High Frequency Plasma
               Spraying
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1996     
File        : a9513702

Award Number: 9513702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13396              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emil Pfender   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joachim Heberlein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5936,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professors E. Pfender and J. Heberlein and two U.S. graduate
              students from the High Temperature Laboratory of the University of Minnesota to
              collaborate in engineering research with Professor Nutsch and his group at the
              Surface Technology Division of the Technical University of Ilmenau, Germany. 
              They propose to quantify the major advantages and disadvantages of two coating
              technologies, direct current (D.C.) and high frequency (R.F.) plasma spraying. 
              Their detailed comparison will include characterization of both  D.C. and R.F.
              plasma jets through a number of techniques.  They will prepare metallic and
              non-metallic coatings with both methods, then compare the microstructure,
              adhesion, hardness and surface roughness of the resulting coatings.  The
              collaborative arrangement joins the expertise of the University of Minnesota
              group in D.C. spray technologies with the German group's expertise in R.F.
              plasma spraying.  They will coordinate their complementary experimental and
              modeling research on the two methods, and exchange both samples and junior
              members of each research group in order to maximize the comparability of their
              research     Thermal plasma spraying is a widely used technology that can
              deposit an increasing variety of coatings, even superconducting materials, on
              many types of  substrates.  In spite of the extent of its applications in
              industries as diverse as aerospace and biomedical implants,  some of the
              fundamental phenomena of the plasma spray process remain poorly understood.  
              Both of the dominant methods being studied in this collaboration have
              advantages and disadvantages.  The results of this detailed characterization
              will provide guidelines for choosing the most appropriate spray process for a
              particular application.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
