Title       : US-Korea Cooperative Research in Nonlinear Laser Spectroscopy of Semiconductor
               Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1999        
File        : a9513197

Award Number: 9513197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26706              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jin-Joo Song jjsong@okway.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5942,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9513197  Song    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Jin-Joo Song, Center
              for  Laser Research, Oklahoma State University, to pursue with Dr.  Dai-Sik
              Kim, Department of Physics, Seoul National University,  Korea, for 24 months, a
              program of cooperative research on  nonlinear laser spectroscopy of
              semiconductor heterostructures.   In this study, the collaborators plan to
              investigate recently  found strong femtosecond nonlinearities in wide band gap 
              materials such as ZnSe, ZnCdSe/ZnSe quantum wells, or GaN, that  are of
              increasing technological importance.  Femtosecond wave  mixing experiments will
              be carried out near the exciton resonance  using a second harmonic of a
              femtosecond Ti:Sapphire laser.   These experiments will be performed varying
              intensity,  polarization,and temperature on various samples grown under 
              different conditions and on different substrates.  In order to  study the
              effect of polarity and band gap on the femtosecond  nonlinearities, the
              femtosecond nonlinearities of GaN or InGaN  will be investigated.  The effect
              of changing the band gap on the  femtosecond nonlinearities will be isolated by
              performing four-  wave mixing experiments under pressure in a diamond anvil
              cell.   The collaborators expect to obtain a coherent picture of  femtosecond
              nonlinearities of wide bandgap materials through  these and other novel
              experiments.    Through their investigations, the collaborators will expand the
               frontiers of knowledge of the selected classes of semiconductor  materials,
              some of which may have useful electronic applications.    The collaborators
              have considerable complementary research  experience in the field of their
              proposed project.  This project  is relevant to the objectives of the
              U.S.-Korea Cooperative  Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
              cooperation  between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the 
              exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques  and through
              collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  Korean  part icipation in the
              project is supported by the Korea Science  and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). 
              ***
