Title       : U.S.-Netherland Cooperative Research in Linquistics: Polyadic Quantification and
               Reciprocals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1996     
File        : a9513647

Award Number: 9513647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley Peters peters@csli.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,5948,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Stanley Peters and three junior members of his
              research group at Stanford University to collaborate in linguistics research
              with Professor Frank Veltman and others of the Institute for Language, Logic
              and Computation of the University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. They are
              studying abstract aspects of information content and informational equivalence,
              centering on the concept of `reciprocals` (the expertise of the US group) and
              `polyadic quantifiers` the logical tools used to define reciprocals (which is
              the area of expertise of the Dutch group.)  The Stanford group has undertaken a
              comparative study of the nature of the relation between syntactic
              representation and semantic interpretation, taking reciprocals as a case study.
              The Dutch group is part of a European consortium applying new understanding of
              the dynamic nature of information to the interpretation of natural language. 
              Dynamic interpretation is becoming increasingly important, not only in
              linguistics, but also in computer science and artificial intelligence.  This
              research provides US participants access to a larger regional European
              collaborative project named DYANA (`Dynamic Interpretation of Natural
              Language`) funded by the European Commission, which brings together some of the
              most important scholars in the foundations of language and information
              processing in Europe.  This relatively focused U.S.-Dutch research
              collaboration is intended to be the starting point for a broader and
              longer-term collaboration in the future. Their mutual goal is to develop
              theories of information that can be applied in a variety of areas within the
              study of language and computation.  The results of their research are likely to
              have far reaching implications, not only for the study of natural languages,
              but also for the analysis and design of computer languages.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
