Title       : Mechanisms for Desiccation Tolerance in Cyanobacterium Nostoc commune
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9513157

Award Number: 9513157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm Potts geordie@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Potts
9513157
Actively growing cells are particularly sensitive to
              air-drying and most die instantly upon exposure to the atmosphere.  In
              contrast, the members of a small, diverse group of prokaryotic and eukaryotic
              organisms have the capacity to withstand the most acute of cell-water deficits.
               How they do so remains an intriguing problem in biology.  One cyanobacterium,
              Nostoc Commune, has a marked capacity for desiccation tolerance and has been
              developed as a model for the anhydrobiotic prokaryotic cell.  In response to
              air-drying cells of N. commune synthesize water stress polypeptides (Wsp) that
              constitute around 70% of the total soluble cell protein and approximately 2% of
              the dry weight of a desiccated colony.  Wsp remain stable in cells stored for
              decades in the air-dried state.  Wsp are secreted and accumulate within a
              complex extracellular polysaccharide (EPS) that completely envelops the cell
              filaments.  Within the EPS the Wsp form multimeric complexes, through strong
              ionic interactions, with a secreted, water-soluble UV-A/B-absorbing pigment
              (UVP).

The principle objectives of this study are: 1) to isolate wsp from
              Nostoc, and to characterize the gene, its flanking regions and its control
              elements; 2) to understand how wsp transcription and Wsp synthesis are
              regulated by water stress; and 3) to crystallize Wsp.  The secretion of EPS and
              UVP by N. commune represent two strategies that the cells use to achieve
              protection during long-term desiccation.  The evidence found by Dr. Potts
              suggests that Wsp play a role in one or both of these strategies.  The
              knowledge of how N. commune overcomes acute cell-water deficit will provide an
              insight into the underlying mechanisms of desiccation tolerance in all
              organisms.

