Title       : Energy and Electron Transfer During Bacterial Photosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1998     
File        : a9513457

Award Number: 9513457
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal W. Woodbury NWoodbury@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aileen K. Taguchi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513457  Woodbury  Technical Significance.  Despite the availability of
              structural information and the extensive use of genetic engineering and
              ultrafast spectroscopy, the mechanism of the initial light driven charge
              separation in bacterial photosynthesis remains a topic of debate.  It is now
              clear that factors such as static and/or dynamic heterogeneity of the reaction
              center population, vibrationally hot excited states, strong coupling between
              cofactors and the involvement of alternate electron transfer pathways or
              intermediates need to be evaluated before a consistent picture of the solar
              energy conversion reactions can emerge.  To investigate heterogeneity, we
              propose multipulse photoselection measurements to directly observe changes in
              the fluorescence yield and in the rate and yield of charge separation in
              photoseleted subpopulations of a reaction center sample.  To investigate the
              possibility of vibrationally hot states and alternate photochemistry depending
              on the initial excited state, experiments in which specific excitation of
              cofactors other than the initial electron donor of the reaction center will be
              performed.  Initial excited singlet state properties and dynamics as well as
              excited state coupling to other reaction center states will be investigated
              using a mutant from James Allen and JoAnn Williams' laboratory that show a slow
              excited state evolution apparently involving increasing chasing charge
              separated character with time.  %%%  General Singificance.  One of the most
              interesting questions in biochemistry concerns how the protein environment of
              an enzyme interior mediates the chemistry of the cofactors it contains and
              reactants it binds to.  Chemical dynamics plays a major role in these
              interactions.  The problem with studying dynamics in normal enzymatic systems
              where the reactants must diffuse through the solvent to find each other is that
              there is really no way to look at processes that occur on timescales faster
              than that diffusion (microseconds), and even on this timesca le, it is usually
              impossible to actually monitor a whole population of molecules undergoing the
              same dynamics in phase with each other.  We circumvent this problem by studying
              an enzyme whose reaction is initiated by the absorption of light.  The
              photosynthetic reaction center from purple nonsulfur bacteria is a solar
              powered enzyme that reduces a quinone molecule.  Using femtosecond resolution
              spectroscopy, we can initiate and monitor the reactions that occur upon light
              absorption on the time scale of the molecular  movements that are actually
              involved in the chemical reactions.  Much of the proposed work involves looking
              at the role of dynamics on various different timescales in the solar energy
              conversion process.  Along these lines, we are asking what happens if we inject
              additional vibrational energy into the system.  How does this additional local
              motion affect the chemistry?  Finally, one can change the protein environment
              by mutation and test the effects of this on the ability of the protein
              environment to guide the reaction.  ***
