Title       : Dissection of an RNA Protein Interaction Involve in Repression of Splicing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9513184

Award Number: 9513184
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan A. White swhite@brynmawr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bryn Mawr College
	      
	      Bryn Mawr, PA  19010    215/645-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513184  White  Yeast ribosomal protein L32, RPL32, binds to its own transcript
              and prevents splicing.  The RNA binding target can be reduced to as few at 24
              nucleotides folded into a stem-internal loop-stem motif where the loop  is
              purine-rich and is closed by a potential G:U pair.  Previous experiments have
              localized the site of protein contact to the loop and some preliminary work to
              explore the sequence requirements for protein binding has been completed.  The
              experiments proposed herein directly address the question of hydrogen bonding
              within the internal loop.  Chemical modification of the hydrogen bonding faces
              of those bases not involved in pairing will be detected by primer extension
              methods.  NMR  spectra will be collected to detect imino protons protected from
              exchange with water.  Imino and amino resonances which are visible are probably
              involved in hydrogen bonds.  Probing the protein structure and its interface
              with RNA  makes up the second part of the proposal.  At present, only the
              primary structure of the protein in known and there are no obvious regions
              related to RNA  binding domains of other proteins.  At the outset, the
              purification protocol will be improved and the purified protein will be
              subjected to analysis of the protein, the CD spectrum of the complex will be
              compared to that of the RNA to determine whether protein binding changes the
              helicity of the RNA.  To determine which protein residues contact the RNA,
              crosslinking experiments will be carried out using native and modified RNA.  As
              a complement to these experiments, a type of "footprinting" experiment will be
              done on the protein to see what portions of the protein may be protected from
              hydrolysis on RNA binding.  These experiments will require some work to develop
              practical, general techniques which work for all RNA protein complexes.  In the
              third and final portion of the proposal, the mechanism of repression is
              examined.  Evidence from  one laboratory suggests that the U1 snRNP binds to
              the L32RNA/RPL32 complex  to form a termolecular complex incapable of splicing.
              The initial hypothesis is that the U1 RNA strengthens the binding of  L32 RNA
              to RPL32 and that the dissociation of RPL32 is slowed or prevented by
              complexation with the two RNAs. The Education Plan is based on the first three
              years of teaching at Bryn Mawr College. The overriding curricular philosophy is
              to devise genuine chemistry courses which convey the current excitement in
              biochemistry.  Every attempt is made to challenge  the students to become
              active, critical learners who see themselves as participants in the scientific
              enterprise.  Given Bryn Mawr's mission to  educate young women, it is
              particularly important to encourage its students to realize their scientific
              ambitions.  For undergraduates, a full year of  research is often the
              culmination of their liberal arts education and is frequently their first truly
              independent research experience.  It is a challenge to design projects where
              students can do successful experiments while contributing to the progress of
              the laboratory. Problem solving, visualizing molecules, moles, equilibria, and
              kinetics are still vital parts of  General Chemistry which students must
              master.  The challenge of teaching at the introductory level is thus to
              simultaneously hold the students' interest and insist that they develop the
              skills needed for future work in science.  %%%  This research involves the
              study of the structure of an RNA involved in regulating the production of a
              protein.  Unlike DNA, which forms a symmetric, elongated double helix, RNA
              forms a complex, convoluted shape.  While all of DNA's bases are involved in
              either G-C or A-T pairs, in RNA some bases are paired but others are not.  The
              first portion of the research involves determining which bases pair.  Due to
              its complicated structure, RNA presents a variety of features which could be
              recognized by a protein.  In the system under study, a small protein binds to a
              portion of an RNA which has both non-standard base pairs and unpaired bas es. 
              Experiments will be done to define how the RNA and protein features contribute
              to this molecular recognition event.  When the protein is bound to the RNA, its
              biological function is blocked.  Model experiments will be designed to test
              mechanisms for this repression of protein production. The teaching of
              biological chemistry to advanced students and introductory chemistry is
              discussed in the education plan.  The common theme is to challenge the students
              to learn a rigorous experimental science while sharing in the excitement of
              current developments in biochemistry.  ***
