Title       : U1trastructural Analysis of RNA Synthesis and Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1999   
File        : a9513589

Award Number: 9513589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $444940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann L. Beyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513589  Beyer  This research involves the details of the basic cellular
              machinery involved in eukaryotic gene expression, specifically at the level of
              pre-mRNA splicing and 3' end formation.  An unusual in vivo ultrastructural
              approach, the "Miller chromatin spreading procedure", will be used to analyze
              co-transcriptional events on specific genes after their microinjection into
              Xenopus laevis oocyte nuclei.  One can visualize multiple copies of specific
              genes on extrachromosomal plasmid vectors and gain global information
              concerning structural aspects of RNA transcription and processing at the
              resolution of the individual gene and the individual transcript.  Studies will
              concentrate on the very early stages of splice site recognition and spliceosome
              assembly on constitutively spliced introns.  There is little understanding of
              how splice sites are paired across typical long introns.  The ultrastructural
              approach has revealed that splice sites are recognized and paired within
              seconds of their synthesis, even for long introns of 10-20 kilobases.  The
              ultrastructure is consistent with the possibility that, once synthesized, 5'
              splice sites are somehow tethered near the site of RNA emergence from the
              polymerase in order to be paired with the next recognized 3' splice site. 
              Experiments are designed to test the involvement of various cis and transacting
              factors in the early intron recognition phenomenon regardless of whether or not
              tethering is involved, and also to test the possibility of a tethering
              mechanism.  The second specific objective is to use this ultrastructural assay
              to determine the mechanism of transcript release at the end of a gene, and to
              distinguish the relative contributions of polyadenylation signals and
              termination/pause signals to this process.  Genes will be visualized in a
              transcriptionally active state for determination of the gene length and density
              of the transcripts at the 3' end of the gene, yielding direct visual
              information on the site(s) of transcript release, the mode  of transcript
              release (cleavage or termination), the efficiency of transcript release, and
              the possible role of transcriptional pausing in transcript release.  Two
              alternative models for transcript release have been proposed, both of which
              accommodate the known dependence of transcript release on a functional poly(A)
              signal, (i.e., co-transcriptional RNA cleavage at the poly(A) site vs
              alteration of the polymerase to a termination-competent form). The results of
              this study will allow a clear distinction between these models.  %%%  The
              information for the synthesis of a protein is encoded in blocks of sequences of
              RNA interspersed within RNA sequences that have no clearly defined function.  A
              group of proteins are responsible for the excising the blocks of amino acid
              specifying sequences from the rest of the RNA, and joining them in a linear
              chain for delivery to the protein synthesizing complex. These studies involve
              an ultrastructural approach to visualize the separate steps of the process, and
              to identify intermediates as a means of confirming postulated mechanisms of
              processing the RNA.  A second objective is to use the same assay to determine
              how the RNA transcript is released from the end of a DNA gene sequence, and the
              role of different genetic signals on this process.  Genes will be
              ultrastructurally observed in an actively transcribed state to allow
              mechanistic information to be obtained on transcription mechanisms.  * * *
