Title       : Role of the Universally Conserved 3'-CCA And Synthetase Recognition Determinants
               in tRNA Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9513932

Award Number: 9513932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336125             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Horowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9513932  Horowitz  The long-range goals of this research are to define
              structural features of transfer RNA essential for its function in protein
              synthesis. Focus will be on E. coli tRNA Val and its interaction with its
              cognate aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase. Methods of tRNA gene manipulation,
              site-directed mutagenesis, and in vitro transcription will be used to introduce
              modifications into E. coli tRNA Val and examine their effects on  function,
              primarily by examining in vitro aminoacylation kinetics and polypeptide
              synthesis.  a. Role of the universally conserved 3'-CCA sequence in tRNA
              function.  Recent results have shown that E. coli tRNA Val can function
              actively in aminoacylation  and polypeptide synthesis despite alterations in
              the universally conserved 3'-CCA end. To further explore the functional role of
              the 3'-CCA terminus the following will be done:  (1) Functional groups in the
              3' terminal sequence of tRNA essential for aminoacylation  will be examined by
              site-specific incorporation of base analogs. (2) Role of 3'-CCA in misacylation
              and editing by valyl-tRNA synthetase will be investigated.  (3) Role of  3'
              terminal nucleotides in polypeptide synthesis will be investigated.  Although
              the variants of tRNA Val termination in 3' pyrimidines are readily
              aminoacylated, they function poorly in polypeptide synthesis.  The step(s) of
              polypeptide synthesis inhibited  by pyrimidine substituents at the 3' end of
              tRNA Val   will be identified. (4) Ribosome recognition of the 3' end will be
              investigated using 3'-end mutants of tRNA. Val (5) Specific requirement for
              3'-CCA in tRNAs other than tRNA Val will be examined.  b. Recognition of E.
              coli tRNA Val by valyl-tRNA synthetase. The recognition of tRNA Val  by its
              cognate synthetase will be further investigated and the synthetase itself will
              be further characterized.  These studies will include the following: (1)
              Efforts will continue to define the complete set of sequence and structural
              elements essential for tRNA Val  recognition by valyl-tRNA syn thetase.
              Features thus far identified as necessary for tRNA Val recognition will be
              inserted into other tRNAs to assess effects of sequence context on
              valine-accepting specificity and to identify possible negative determinants
              (antideterminants) that interfere with synthetase recognition. (2) Details of
              synthetase/tRNA interactions can best be resolved by structure determination of
              the complex.  Large quantities of purified tRNA Val and valyl-tRNA synthetase
              are available and in collaboration with a crystallographer the structure of
              valyl-tRNA synthetase and its complexes will be determined. (3) The
              aminoacylation fidelity, hydrolytic editing, and other functions of an active
              truncated mutant of valyl-tRNA synthetase, which have recently been isolated,
              cloned, and overexpressed, will be characterized.   %%%  Transfer RNAs (tRNA)
              play an important role in determining the accuracy and efficiency of protein
              biosynthesis.  These molecules effectively translate the sequence of
              3-nucleotide codes determined by the genetic material into the linear
              incorporation of amino acids into proteins in their proper order.  All tRNAs
              contain a universally conserved code (3'-CCA) at one end of the molecule which
              implicates a specific function.  Interestingly, base changes within this
              sequence had no effect on protein synthesis.  The proposed research will
              explore the functional role of the 3'-CCA sequence by evaluating the effects of
              altering chemical(functional) groups within this sequence on aminoacylation
              reaction kinetics as well as on recognition by the specific tRNA synthetase
              which mediates this reaction.  The structure of the synthetase enzyme and its
              complexes with tRNA and other substrates will be obtained by X-ray
              crystallography.  ***
