Title       : Role of Skeletal Muscle in Potassium Homeostasis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1999      
File        : a9513958

Award Number: 9513958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alicia A. McDonough   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jang H. Youn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513958  McDonough      Potassium (K+) is the main salt found in intracellular
              fluid (ICF), while extracellular fluid (ECF) potassium is low, so there is a
              gradient of potassium across the cell membrane which is necessary for nerve and
              muscle excitability. Vertebrate animals must regulate extracellular fluid
              potassium concentration (ECF  K+ ) within a narrow range. If K+ loss exceeds
              input over a period of days, ECF  K+  falls, which is known as hypokalemia. The
              resulting increase in the K+ gradient across the cell membrane, if not
              corrected, can disrupt critical functions such as cardiac contractility (which
              can be fatal). During potassium deprivation, the skeletal muscle adapts by
              providing its K+ to the ECF to blunt and delay the fall in ECF K+. This
              important regulatory process is only poorly understood. In contrast, non-muscle
              cell types are adapted to maintain, not lose, intracellular K+ during K+
              deprivation. The central aim of this proposal is to identify the specific
              muscle types that supply K+ to the ECF in hypokalemia and the underlying
              cellular mechanisms responsible for the shift and for the restoration response
              when K+ becomes available. Defining the target muscles and transporters are
              critical first steps toward understanding why a subset of muscles is
              specialized to lose K+ while others are spared in order to perform, different
              critical muscle functions. The loss of ICF  K+  is accompanied by a decrease in
              number of sodium pumps, the molecules in the membrane that actively pump K+ 
              into the cell from the ECF. This supports the hypothesis that the K+ loss is
              due to a decrease in active K+ influx rather than an increase in K+ exit from
              the cell. Sodium pumps, Na,K-ATPase, are composed of ( and ( subunits and
              muscle expresses (l, (2, (1, (2 subunit isoforms, thus, up to four possible ((
              combinations. The PI's laboratory has established that the isoforms are
              expressed in a muscle specific pattern. The PI has further established that
              abundance of (2 and (2 subunits are depressed in a  muscle specific pattern.
              The PI aims to accomplish the following:  1) Test the hypothesis that the
              decrease in number of specific sodium pump isoforms is the underlying cellular
              mechanism causing shifts in K+ from a subset of muscles to ECF in hypokalemia.
              The PI will determine time course and muscle specificity of change in: ICF  K+
              , K+ influx, K+ efflux, and sodium pump subunit isoform abundance during low K+
              diet and after restoring K+ in a panel of five muscles including white
              gastrocnemius where there is a 85% decrease in (2(2, to diaphragm where there
              is no change in (2(2 in hypokalemia.   2) Test the hypothesis that muscle
              sodium pump activity is regulated at multiple levels, both long term regulation
              of RNA and protein pool size, and acute regulation of existing pumps, during
              hypokalemia and K+ restoration. During K+ depiction and repletion determine the
              time course of change in ( and ( isoforms' mRNA vs. protein, and determine
              whether there is also acute regulation of Na,K-ATPase transport activity before
              there are changes in abundance of pumps.  Significance: this fundamental,
              specialized, and poorly understood response of skeletal muscle to organism K+
              deprivation is critical for survival of all vertebrates, including humans,
              during periods of fasting or famine, or when K+ loss is high
              (mineralocorticoids, prolonged exercise in the heat, diuretics). Accomplishing
              these aims will identify the location of the K+ reservoir and the cellular
              mechanisms responsible for tapping and repleting this reservoir. This
              information contributes to an understanding how a subset of muscles have
              specialized to lose K+ to buffer ECF  K+  , thus sparing other muscles and
              organs to perform critical functions, and to development of assays for the
              signal(s) that mediate the response. All steps are requisite for defining the
              homeostatic loops responsible for adapting to altered K+ status.   ***
