Title       : The Comparative Experimental Embryology of Brachiopods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1997  
File        : a9513068

Award Number: 9513068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281818             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Freeman GFREE@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    9513068  Freeman    One goal of the field of developmental biology is to
              understand how and why the utilization of the mechanisms responsible for the
              spatial organization of multicellular organisms changes during the course of
              evolution. This proposal will study this problem in the Phoronida and the
              related phylum, Brachiopoda. The Phoronida are unknown as fossils; however,
              because of their shell, brachiopods have an excellent fossil record which has
              allowed paleontologists to do a rather convincing job of reconstructing the
              history of this phylum. A number of extant brachiopod species are derived from,
              and closely resemble, ancestors that represent important nodes in this
              phylogeny. Experimental studies will be performed on the embryos of these
              species in order to establish when, during development, different parts of the
              embryo become specified and to identify the mechanisms that are responsible for
              regional specification. These experiments begin with the construction of a fate
              map for each embryo indicating the regions of hte larva that develop from
              specific parts of the egg and early embryo. Then diffenrent regions of the
              embryo will be isolated at various stages of development, and their ability to
              differentiate will be compared to that of the same region in a whole embryo as
              indicated by the fate map. By isolating parts of eggs and embryos in
              combination with other parts and at different developmental stages, one can
              infer whether the development of a given region is autonomous or conditional.
              By comparing the timing and mode of regional specification during embryogenesis
              for a series of species at different nodes in the phyylogeny, one can document
              the changes in the utilization of mechanisms for regional specification that
              accompany evolutionary change. Some of these species have larvae that are
              morphologically similar and have similar life histories although these species
              are not closely related, while other species are closely related but have very
              different larvae with different  life history strategies. Comparisons beteen
              these species will allow one to dissect out the role of larval evolution versus
              the evolution of adult structures in bringing about developmental changes
              involving early embryogenesis.  ***
