Title       : XL-A Analytical Ultracentrifuge for the Analysis of Protein-Protein Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1996   
File        : a9513060

Award Number: 9513060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Stafford stafford@bbri.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston Biomed Res Inst
	      64 Grove Street
	      Watertown, MA  024722829    617/926-8040

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This is a proposal to acquire a Beckman Instruments Optima Series XL-A 
              Analytical Ultracentrifuge equipped with UV scanner and Rayleigh optical 
              systems. This instrument will replace 2 heavily used Beckman Model-E's in  the
              Analytical Ultracentrifuge Research Laboratory (AURL) at Boston  Biomedical
              Research Institute (BBRI). One of the Model-E's is currently  equipped with a
              real-time video-based Rayleigh optical system, developed by  the PI, that is
              being used heavily in sedimentation velocity and  sedimentation equilibrium
              analyses. The rapid acquisition Rayleigh system  has allowed the efficient
              application of the high precision time derivative  method, also developed by
              Dr. Stafford, for sedimentation velocity analysis  achieving a 100-1000 fold
              increase in the sensitivity of the  ultracentrifuge optics. The Model-E's have
              become increasingly difficult to  maintain and it is unlikely that Beckman
              Instruments will continue to  support them after they introduce the Rayleigh
              optical system in late 1995.  Many researchers at BBRI as well as many outside
              collaborators have  benefited from the ultracentrifuge facility over the years.
              The continued  viability of the AURL requires the acquisition of a new XL-A
              equipped with  Rayleigh optics. The instrument will be shared by seven major
              research  groups at BBRI and will be used in several on-going or planned
              outside  collaborations. Some of these researchers have benefited from the
              facility  in the past. Others are either currently or will in the future use
              the  ultracentrifuge facility to investigate various protein-protein and 
              protein-nucleic acid interactions. These include but are not limited to: P. 
              and A. Wang, structure, molecular weight of Caldesmon and the affect of 
              phosphorylation on its interactions with actin; T. Tao, structure and 
              molecular weight of calponin; future studies will involve studies of the 
              interaction of calponin with actin; T Tao, calcium dependence of  interactions
              between troponin I and troponin C; R Lu, interactions  of  myosin regulatory
              and essential light chains with the cloned regulatory  domain of the myosin Sl
              head; S.S. Lehrer, interactions of calponin and  caldesmon with tropomyosin,
              and studies of the end-to-end polymerization  properties of various cloned
              fragments of tropomyosin; H. Wohlrab,  investigation of properties of the
              mitochondrial phosphate transport  protein and interactions between it
              subunits; N. Sarkar, characterization  of recombinant poly (A) polymerase I and
              poly(A) polymerase I and their  interactions with primer RNA; Z. Grabarek,
              investigation of calcium  dependent conformational changes in calmodulin and
              troponin-C and the  calcium dependence of their interactions with target
              proteins; V. Raso,  Targeting c-erbB-2 Epitopes with scFv Immunotoxins and
              Acid-Releasable  Anti-Diphtheria Toxin (DT) Monoclonal Antibodies.
