Title       : Time-Domain EPR Studies of Tyrosine Z of Photosystem II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1998   
File        : a9513648

Award Number: 9513648
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273333             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. David Britt rdbritt@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9513648  Britt  The Photosystem II component of the plant photosynthetic
              apparatus utilizes light energy to oxidize water and reduce membrane diffusable
              plastoquinone.  Photon-induced charge separation occurs at the chlorophyll
              moiety P680 .  The electron transfer components that donate to the
              photogenerated chlorophyll cation P+680 are unique to Photosystem II.  A
              tyrosine residue designated as YZ serves as an electron transfer intermediate
              between P+680 and the manganese cluster of the oxygen-evolving complex (OEC)
              where water oxidation occurs.  Fast optical excitation will be combined with
              pulsed electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy to examine the role
              of YZ in electron transfer and water oxidation.  With laser pulsewidths of (3
              ns, and microwave pulsewidths of (10 ns, we will be able to measure the
              kinetics of formation and depletion of the YZ(  tyrosyl radical at each of the
              "S-state" transitions of the oxygen evolving cycle.  The kinetic isotope
              effects will be measured by repeating these experiments in 2H2O-enriched
              buffer.  The time dependence of the YZ   EPR lineshapes will be examined at
              each S-state transition to look for evidence of magnetic interactions with the
              Mn cluster and/or conformational changes of the tyrosyl radical.  Electron spin
              echo envelope modulation (ESEEM) and electron spin echo - electron nuclear
              double resonance (ESE-ENDOR) experiments will be performed to further test
              recent models that postulate that YZ(  acts directly to abstract protons or
              hydrogen atoms from water ligands to the Mn cluster.  These experiments will
              greatly advance our knowledge of the structure and dynamics of the Photosystem
              II reaction center.  The experiments represent a state-of-the-art merging of
              fast laser excitation with pulsed EPR methods and provide excellent training
              opportunities for a number of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.  
              %%%  The Photosystem II component of the plant photosynthetic apparatus
              utilizes light energy to strip electrons from water mo lecules, with molecular
              oxygen released into the atmosphere as a fortunate byproduct.  When light is
              absorbed by a certain chlorophyll molecule designated P680, it spontaneously
              transfers an electron to an adjacent pigment molecule.  This light-induced
              charge separation is the first step in converting light energy into useful
              chemical energy.  The resulting positively charged chlorophyll P+680   molecule
              has a strong affinity to regain an electron, and the electron comes initially
              from a tyrosine amino acid residue of the surrounding protein.  This tyrosine
              residue, designated YZ, in turn pulls an electron from a small cluster of
              manganese atoms where the water-splitting chemistry is thought to occur.  Our
              experiments will examine the magnetic properties of this YZ tyrosine during the
              fast electron transfer events.  Laser light pulses of only 3 billions of a
              second duration will be combined with comparably short microwave pulses to
              measure the changes of magnetic properties on this ultra-short timescale.  The
              measurements will be interpreted  to understand the dynamics of this YZ
              tyrosine during electron transfer.  The goal is to test controversial new
              models that propose that the YZ  tyrosine pulls protons as well as electrons
              off water molecules bound to the metal cluster.  These experiments will greatly
              advance our knowledge of the structure and dynamics of the Photosystem II
              reaction center.  The experiments represent a state-of-the art merging of fast
              laser excitation with pulsed magnetic resonance methods and provide excellent
              training opportunities for a number of graduate students and postdoctoral
              researchers.  ***
