Title       : RUI: An Ultrastructural Analysis of the Development of Pigment Pattern in
               Zebrafish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9513655

Award Number: 9513655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183267             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall L. Morrison   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hood College
	      Rosemont Avenue
	      Frederick, MD  21701    301/663-3131

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  Morrison  IBN 95-13655    This is a proposal to study the development of
              pigment pattern in the zebrafish, Danio rerio. The zebrafish skin is an
              excellent model system for studying pattern formation. Initially, an embryonic
              pattern of four black stripes emerges during early development and over a
              period of several weeks the pattern is progressively transformed into the
              alternating blue-black and silvery-yellow striped pattern of the adult fish.
              The pigment pattern is composed of multiple identifiable types of pigmented
              cells (chromatophores) that are arranged very specifically with relation to one
              another such that particular tissue colors are expressed in particular areas of
              the skin.    This study will examine the changes in morphology and migration of
              the chromatophores identified in normal fish and in a variety of mutant pigment
              phenotypes. The PI will also address the spatial interdependence of
              chromatophores required to produce specific pattern elements. This will require
              a comprehensive analysis of the movements and relative position of the various
              chromatophore types (both vertically and horizontally in the skin). The studies
              will also address which chromatophore types or morphologies are derived from
              common cellular progenitors.    Chromatophores combine their spectral
              properties to produce specific tissue colors. The arrangement, movements and
              the ultrastructure of these cells will be assessed using several different
              methodologies. Light microscopy and spectrophotometry will be used to observe
              and quantify tissue colors. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) will be used
              to qualitatively and quantitatively determine the distinctive ultrastructure of
              chromatophores. High resolution time lapse video will be employed to follow the
              trajectories of the chromatophores during pattern formation. In addition, high
              performance liquid chromatography techniques will be used to separate,
              identify, and quantify pigments extracted from tissues. Together these
              techniques will provide a thorough  multilevel determination of the cellular
              and biochemical basis of a given pattern and the associated tissue color. A
              comprehensive morphological framework with which to interpret pattern
              alterations is not available, despite the fact that several laboratories around
              the world are generating pigmentation mutants. The goal of this application is
              to provide the fundamental morphological data required to analyze mutant
              pigment patterns.    This research program is a part of a balanced approach to
              an academic career and is also an integral part of an educational program as
              well. The project will enhance opportunities for undergraduates at Hood
              College, a single-gender woman's institution, to participate in an active
              research program. The research plan is designed so that undergraduate students
              gain valuable experience by doing collaborative discovery-based learning. The
              very nature of determining the precise stage of embryos, preparing the
              specimens for light optical analysis, the acquisition of digital images and
              their manipulation using computer software will insure that much of the science
              effort will be performed by students. This proposal will also allow zebrafish
              preparations to be included in cell biology and developmental biology classes
              at Hood College. Funding of this proposal will provide opportunities for women
              to excel in science. It is also noteworthy that 25% of the enrollment at Hood
              College are members of under represented minorities.  ***
