Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Attractive Invariant Manifolds in
               High-Dimensional Symmetric Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9513880

Award Number: 9513880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20760              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Kirby Kirby@Math.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt Georg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rick Miranda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene L. Allgower  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,5936,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Michael Kirby, and several other professors and graduate
              students of the Department of Mathematics of Colorado State University, to
              collaborate in applied mathematics with Professor Werner Guettinger and others
              of the Institute for Theoretical Physics of the University of Tuebingen,
              Germany.  The subject of their collaboration is the study of the complex
              spatio-temporal behavior of nonlinear dynamical systems with many degrees of
              freedom. Their goal is to reduce high dimensional evolution systems to low
              dimensional dynamical systems and to analyze those with the qualitative
              geometrical concepts of nonlinear dynamics.  To do this they must develop
              suitable methods for  mathematical approximation of invariant manifolds.  The
              research benefits from the German group's pioneering work in developing
              low-dimensional dynamical systems theory and applying it to physical problems. 
              The joint research also requires the complementary expertise of the US group in
              dimensionality reduction and symmetry exploitation. In particular, they have
              developed pattern analysis methods for dynamical systems based on neural
              network modeling algorithms  Starting from fundamental principles of
              mathematics and physics,  these collaborating scientists are investigating the
              development of organized structures and moving patterns whose activation is
              triggered when external forces exceed critical values.  They seek to
              demonstrate how symmetrical or coherent spatio-temporal structures may arise,
              and why such structures are preferred in nature.  The answers to such questions
              also have bearing on larger issues of technological development.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
