Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Heat- Resistant Active Brazing of
               Silicon-Nitride
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9513862

Award Number: 9513862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15410              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. E. Indacochea JEIndaco@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5936,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor J. E. Indacochea and a graduate student of the
              University of Illinois at Chicago to collaborate in materials engineering
              research with Professor Erich Lugscheider and others of the Materials Science
              Institute of the Technical University of Aachen, Germany.  The objectives of
              their joint research are to improve the technological processes involved in
              bonding non-oxide ceramics at elevated temperatures and in otherwise hostile
              environments.  In particular, they plan to develop a filler material and define
              a joining procedure  to bond silicon nitride.  They will evaluate three
              techniques for ease of fabrication and the stability of the ceramic joint.  In
              order to capitalize on the technological benefits of high performance ceramics
              and composite materials, it is necessary to provide adequate techniques for
              joining these materials to other substances.  This collaborative research takes
              advantage of the German group's technological expertise in alloy design,
              process design and optimization.  It is enhanced by their valuable European
              industrial partnerships, which give them access to industrial mass production
              equipment.  The U.S. group has easy access to necessary microscopic, analytical
              and computing facilities, and it has expertise in microstructure evaluations
              and phase transformations which complement the German expertise.  The results
              of their joint effort are expected to produce a data base and model that could
              design the filler material and identify an effective joining process based on
              specifications of substrate, temperature levels and service environment for the
              bonding.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
