Title       : Sex-Chromosome Genes: Are XY Homologs Allele-Like?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1998      
File        : a9513537

Award Number: 9513537
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth M. Simpson ems@aretha.jax.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson Laboratory
	      600 Main Street
	      Bar Harbor, ME  04609    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513537  Simpson  Mammalian sex chromosomes are thought to have evolved from an
              autosomal pair to a hemizygous state but much of the data which have been
              generated in the molecular and genetic era do not easily fit into that
              hypothesis. The Y chromosome contains only a few genes, comparatively speaking.
              However, one unexpected observation has been that  genes which had not
              recombined since the evolution of the sex chromosomes have been found to be
              homologous to their X counterparts. One could account for this observation by
              assuming a similar function for the genes but that would not be acceptable in
              view of what is known of dosage compensation. The long term goal of this
              research is to analyze the function of the mammalian sex chromosomes,
              particularly in the Y-specific region of the Y chromosome. The immediate goal
              is to create the tools and transgenic mouse strains for the purpose of Y
              chromosome gene targeting. An embryonic stem cell line with a Y duplication
              will be created; a genomic library isogenic to the embryonic stem cell line and
              a strain of transgenic mice needed for targeting experiments will also be
              created.   %%%  Our knowledge of  how the sex chromosomes function to produce
              the two sexes without either an overdose or underdose of gene products from
              those genes found on the sex chromosomes and whether the genes on the two
              chromosomes are functionally identical is very limited. The production of the
              necessary tools for asking such questions at the molecular level will make it
              possible to expand our understanding of the mechanisms used to compensate for
              the inequality of chromosome number in males and females, particularly in
              mammals.  ***
