Title       : Regulation and Function of Yeast Transcriptional Activator ADR1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1999   
File        : a9513412

Award Number: 9513412
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clyde L. Denis cldenis@christa.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513412  Denis  The goal of this research is to elucidate the mechanisms of
              eucaryotic gene regulation.  The system chosen for study is the transcriptional
              activator ADR1 in its control of gene expression in the yeast Saccharomyes
              cerevisiae.  The ADR1 protein contains four transactivation domains (TADs) and
              at least one inhibitory region (residues 227-229).  The function of the TADs
              has been found to be highly dependent on the ADA2 coactivator complex. 
              Moreover, ADA2 components interact specifically with individual ADR1 TADS,
              suggesting the ADA2 complex is a coactivator for ADRl.  In addition, the
              227-239 region of ADRl has been implicated in binding a repressor protein that
              inhibits ADR1 function independent of the promoter context.  The central focus
              of this grant is to determine hmw the ADR1 activation and inhibitory domains
              interact with coactivators and repressors in bringing about the control of ADR1
              function.  The physical association of the ADA2 complex with ADRl will be
              explored biochemically, and the regions of the TADs required for binding this
              coactivator complex will be identified.  The regions and residues of the ADRl
              TADs required for transactivation will be determined and correlated to those
              regions required for binding to the ADA2 complex.  Using several complementary
              approaches, the putative repressor that binds the ADR1 inhibitory region will
              be cloned and characterized. These studies will help elucidate the complex
              interplay of a number of factors that can be involved in the control and action
              of transcriptional activators.  %%%  The focus of this project is a protein
              activator, ADRl, which stimulates the gene expression of certain proteins in
              the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  ADRl binds to the DNA next to genes that
              produce enzymes that allow yeast to metabolize certain compounds when they are
              growing in air.  The investigator has shown that ADR1 stimulates the production
              of RNA messages that produce the enzymes.  ADR1 is a large protein containing
              four unique amino aci d segments that are required for the activation activity.
               His laboratory has found these segments must bind to certain other proteins to
              produce activation of gene expression.  These other protein "coactivators" are
              a complex consisting of three proteins, ADA2/ADA3/GCN5.  Proteins ADA2 and GCN5
              specifically touch the sequences mentioned above.  Another segment of ADR1
              binds another protein that inhibits ADR1 activity.  The investigator will
              characterize the contact areas between ADR1 and other proteins that are
              involved in regulating gene expression by ADR1.  ***
