Title       : Meiotic Kinetochores of Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2000     
File        : a9513556

Award Number: 9513556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Kelly Dawe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513556  Dawe    The long term goal of this study is to identify the structural
              and molecular properties of the kinetochore that ensure normal meiotic
              chromosome segregation.  Kinetochores have a variety of critical roles in cell
              division, such as ensuring that the chromatids do not separate prematurely, and
              acting as the biological motors that pull the chromosomes along the spindle. 
              In meiosis, the kinetochores have more specific roles that relate to their
              critical function in ensuring that the genetic information is transmitted
              accurately from generation to generation.  Maize is an excellent organism for
              studying kinetochores, because of the unusually large size of the chromosomes
              and of the kinetochores themselves.  In prior studies, advanced three
              dimensional light microscmpy has been used to identify subtle structural
              features, first in the chromosomes and more recently in the kinetochores using
              a human antiserum that recognizes maize meiotic kinetochores.  The major cell
              biological advantages of maize are coupled with extensive genetic resources
              with which to analyze kinetochore function.  One such resource is an unusual
              variant of chromosome 10 that induces facultative centromeres
              ("neocentromeres") as a part of a more complex meiotic drive system.  In the
              presence of Abnormal chromosome 10, quiescent heterochromatic regions called
              "knobs" are converted into meiotic kinetochores that stretch the chromosome
              arms towards the spindle poles.  Neocentromeres and true centromeres are
              probably closely related, because knobs have strong sequence similarity to true
              centromeres.  However, unlike true centromeres, mutations of neocentromere
              formation can be readily identified.  The method for identifying neocentromeres
              relies on the fact that their formation is closely associated with a
              preferential segregation, or meiotic drive, of genetic markers that are linked
              to knobs.  If the genetic marker affects kernel pigmentation, meiotic drive is
              visible as an excess of pigmented kernels.  In prior stud ies, a meiotic drive
              mutation called Ab10-smd1 was identified, which proved to be a defect in
              neocentromere formation.  This proposal contains experiments leading to the
              cloning and characterization of Ab10-smd1 by virtue of the fact that the
              mutation was induced by a transposable element.  It should be possible to
              identify the genes that regulate normal meiotic kinetochore behavior by
              homology to Ab10-smd1 and other genes like it.  Additional studies are proposed
              that relate to how neocentromeres promote meiotic drive, and how normal
              kinetochores direct meiotic chromosome segregation.  It will be possible to
              verify a long-standing model for how neocentromeres lead to meiotic drive by
              directly labeling knobs with fluorescent oligonucleotides.  Labeling the knobs
              as well as the kinetochores and spindle using specific antibodies will make it
              possible to study the interaction of these three components during chromosome
              segregation.  Finally, experiments are proposed to analyze neocentromere
              behavior using time lapse three dimensional light microscopy.  The conspicuous
              nature of the neocentromeres coupled with a powerful new light microscope
              workstation will make it possible to study meiotic kinetochores in the living
              state.  Such time lapse microscopy will also provide an added level of
              resolution to the characterization of neocentromere mutations.  ***
