Title       : An Automated DNA Sequencer for Brown University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1995   
File        : a9513001

Award Number: 9513001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Rand david_rand@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Hawrot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    A group of faculty in the Departments of Ecology and Evolutionary  Biology
              (EEB), Molecular and Cellular Biology and Biochemistry (MCB)  and Molecular
              Pharmacology and Biotechnology (MPB) at Brown Uliversity  seeks funds for the
              purchase of an Applied Biosystems, Inc. ABI 377  Automated DNA Sequencer and
              dedicated thermal cycler for use with the  ABI 377. This equipment will be
              operated as a multi-user facility with  four major users (Hawrot, Hendrickson,
              Rand, Zaret) and eight minor  users (Biggins, Cane, Gerbi, Landy, Marshal,
              Mowry, Wessel, Wharton).  The research conducted with this Sequencer ranges
              from the analysis of  mutants of known genes (Biggins, Cane, Hawrot, Landy,
              Mowry, Wharton,  Zaret) to the characterization of new genomic sequences (Cane,
              Gerbi,  Hendrickson, Marshal, Wessel Wharton) to studies of genetic variation 
              and evolution of well-characterized loci (Rand). This piece of  equipment will
              provide a significant increase in research productivity  and competitiveness as
              each of the users currently does sequencing by  "hand." At present, there is no
              automated DNA sequencer at Brown  University, nor in the entire state of Rhode
              Island. For most of the  major users, acquiring the DNA sequence of cloned or
              amplified genes is  a major burden to research progress. A substantial
              proportion of  sequencing effort falls on the shoulders of graduate students.
              Hence,  an automated DNA sequencer will have a significant impact on graduate 
              education by allowing students to focus on more intellectually  challenging
              research and direct more effort towards creative  experimental design. Brown
              University will provide 48.8% of the funds  for the purchase of the ABI 377,
              and will pay the salary of the staff  member (Charles Setterlund) who will be
              the dedicated person  responsible for operating this equipment.
