Title       : Democratization and the Politics of Ethnic Identity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1996  
File        : a9513918

Award Number: 9513918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69678              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Koelble tkoelble@impala.ir.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9513918  Koelble    Democratic practices are widely believed to alleviate
              ethnic, racial, religious and class conflicts better than other systems of
              governance.  Nowhere is this proposition more clearly articulated than in South
              Africa.  Yet, most extant theories of democratization and its relationship to
              ethnic and other conflicts focus on very narrow criteria such as "free and fair
              elections"  or certain kinds of institutional structures to define what
              democracy is and when its implementation can be deemed to be successful.  But
              can we really speak of democracy when fundamental reforms to address
              long-standing social and economic grievances are not undertaken?  When
              inter-ethnic or police violence increases?  When democratic principles are not
              heeded at the local level?  This study argues that narrow conceptions of
              democracy fail to capture specific local circumstances which impinge upon the
              implementation of democratic principles.  Only if theorists pay attention to
              the "embeddedness" of constitutional arrangements in a set of local political
              interactions, the historical dynamics of ethnic and other conflicts, distinct
              cultural practices and symbols, social norms and behaviors, international and
              local economic conditions, only then will a comprehensive account of democratic
              successes and failures emerge.    This investigation has tow objectives: 
              first, it examines constitution-making in South Africa by providing a detailed
              analysis of the current constitutional committee's deliberations.  Second, the
              study deals with the question of how "post-apartheid" local. regional and
              national government functions.  The analysis investigates how constitutional
              commitments to democracy, social and  economic justice are implemented.  It
              maintains that ethnic and racial conflicts are confrontations over the
              distribution of resources, patronage opportunities and power in the political
              economy.  New institutional structures will provide incentives for new ethnic
              and racial coalition-building, but will not er adicate the possibility of
              mobilizing ethnic and racial groups on the basis of perceived discrimination. 
              Levels of ethnic and racial confrontation vary widely across South Africa
              despite a uniform constitutional system.  The intriguing question is:  how do
              we account for such variations in the efficacy of similar institutions to deal
              with ethnic conflict?  The study argues that democratization proceeds along
              differentiated paths dependent upon its agents and agencies in interaction with
              their opponents.  While the constitution imposes uniform decision-making
              parameters, the interpretations of local political actors are likely to shape
              these institutions providing them with a great deal of local flair.    The
              methods of inquiry are standard social scientific approaches.  Eight city
              councils (four urban and four rural towns), four regional governments and the
              constitutional committee will be monitored over the next four years to discover
              their mechanisms of decision-making.  This is done through interviewing
              political actors ate each level, observing the participants, and collecting
              accounts of events from as wide a variety of sources as possible.  A policy
              analysis of the implementation of the Reconstruction and Development Program
              concerning zoning, housing, land use, expropriation, and access to basic
              amenities provides additional data to measure the impact of the new
              constitution on the local and regional level.  The study will substantially
              enhance our understanding of this topic.  ***
