Title       : The Study of Isotropic and Anisotropic Motions in Proteins involving 13CO and
               15ND
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1998    
File        : a9513355

Award Number: 9513355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik R. Zuiderweg zuiderwe@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513355  Zuiderweg  Dr. Zuiderweg will develop new NMR spectroscopy
              methodologies for the study of dynamics in biological macromolecules by
              measuring 13 CO and 15ND relaxation in 13C/15N labeled proteins.  These
              experiments will yield information on the dynamics of the protein backbone and
              nitrogen-containing sidechains, complementary to the information obtained from
              the commonly performed 15NH NMR relaxation experiments.  Efforts will go into
              extending above methods to allow the detection of the presence or absence of
              cross correlation between relaxation mechanisms.  Such measurements will help
              the development of models for dynamical phenomena in proteins.  The cross
              correlation (interference) between the heteronuclear relaxation mechanisms is
              determined with new two- and three-dimensional NMR methods.  The methods will
              be mostly developed with the proteins T4-lysozyme (19 kDa) and Binase (12 kDa),
              and using a peptide loop on the protein Hsc70.  Preliminary data shows that the
              extent of relaxation cross correlation is non-uniform over the backbone of
              T4-lysozyme, indicating that the dynamical characteristics measured as such are
              non-uniform and therefore of high informational content.  The methods will be
              extended for determining the extent of motional correlation between relaxation
              vectors in protein surface loops, using the Hsc70 protein.  These methods will
              be well-suited to distinguish between disjointed-chain motions and concerted
              motions involving only a few hinge-points.  This information should be of
              importance for the understanding of the role of those loops and peptides that
              are involved in intermolecular interactions.  %%%  The research is aimed at
              developing new nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy methodologies for
              the study of dynamics in biological macromolecules.  The methods will
              concentrate on the NMR relaxation behavior of carbonyl moieties and will yield
              information on the dynamics of the protein backbone, complementary to the
              information obtained from the commonly  performed NMR relaxation experiments
              focusing on amide moieties.  The methods will be mostly developed with the
              proteins T4-lysozyme and Binase and will be extended for determining the extent
              of motional correlation between relaxation vectors in protein surface loops. 
              This information should be of importance for the understanding of the dynamical
              characteristics of loops and peptides that are involved in intermolecular
              interactions.  ***
