Title       : Electrochemical Recording System for Rapid Chemical Recordings in Biological
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1998     
File        : a9513392

Award Number: 9513392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $606301             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg A. Gerhardt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      In  recent  years, microsensors (5-30 microns in  diameter)  have  been 
              developed to investigate rapid (11000 Hz) chemical  signaling  in  biological 
              systems. Recent electrochemical recording methods  such  as  highspeed
              chronoamperometry (1-25Hz), fast-scan cyclic voltammetry  (10  Hz  and 100-1000
              v/sec scan rates) and amperometry (1000 Hz resolution)  have  been  developed
              for such recordings. The study of rapid  chemical  signaling  requires  the use
              of microelectrodes  that  are  coupled  to  sensitive  instrumentation that is
              capable of recording and  converting  the  small changes in current that are
              due to chemical reactions at the  surfaces of the microsensors. A few
              laboratory designed instruments and  some  commercial  instruments  are
              available.  However,  no  low  noise  "turnkey"  system  that is capable of
              recording, displaying,  analyzing  data  and  outputting results is available
              to the scientific community.  In   addition,  some  commercial  instrumentation
               often   requires   a  combination  of  other  laboratory instruments as  seen 
              in  Figure  la  (adapted from Stamford et al.  1992).  Presently,  there  is 
              no  self  contained  microcomputer-based  instrument  that  is  available  to 
              scientists  that  encompasses  the  capabilities  to  record rapid
              electrochemical signals using  fast-scan  cyclic    voltammetry,    highspeed  
              chronoamperometry,    1000-6000Hz  amperometry,   more   standard  
              electrochemical   methods,   and   new  modifications of the rapid
              electrochemical recording methods.          A  major  goal  of  this proposal
              is to carry  out  the  Phase  I  (design) and Phase II (modification and
              refinement) development  of  an  automated multi-channel recording system as
              depicted in Figure lb. Such  an   instrument,  which  we  call  FAST  for  Fast
               Analytical  Sensing  Technology,  will  be  useful  to students,  postdoctoral
               fellows  and  principal  investigators  in  the fields of  cell  biology, 
              chemistry,  biology, neuroscience, pharmacolog y, physiology, chemoreception,
              marine  biollogy, psychology and other biological sciences. The second goal  of
               this  proposal  is to further develop microsensors for  the  selective, 
              rapid,  and  sensitive measures of dopamine, norepinephrine, serotonin,  nitric
               oxide  and glutamate in biological systems. Both  carbon  fiber  based  probes
              and semiconductor based probe designs will be  developed.  Further   sensor 
              development  is  needed  to  enhance  the   recording  capabilities  of
              currently available instrumentation and  the  proposed  FASTin vivo
              electrochemical recording system.                            ~
