Title       : Molecular Analysis Transcription Factors Regulating phyA Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1998     
File        : a9513590

Award Number: 9513590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Quail quail@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513590  Quail  This proposal is focused on the previously cloned transcription
              factor, GT-2.  The specific objectives are:  (a) to perform further detailed
              analyses of the functional activities of GT-2, including transcriptional
              activation analysis using a transfection assay to define domains of GT-2
              involved in transactivation, and a series of biochemical assays to assess
              capacity for, and map any domains involved in, multimerization; (b) to
              undertake a structural analysis of the previously defined twin minimal
              DNA-binding domains of GT-2 using high resolution nuclear magnetic resonance
              spectroscopy for the purpose of beginning to understand the molecular basis of
              sequence-specific DNA recognition by this novel class of transciption factor;
              and (c) to screen cDNA libraries for other protein factors that interact with
              GT-2 using in vitro interaction cloning and the yeast two hybrid system for the
              purpose of approaching the question of the mechanism by which GT-2 enhances
              transcriptional activity.  %%%   Plants respond to light by activating certain
              genes that govern growth and differentiation. The mechanism involves a
              light-activated receptor in the cell that sends a chemical signal to certain
              genes that are specifically light activated including the receptor itself.  A
              protein that binds close to the DNA that contains the code for the receptor has
              been discovered.  This protein is unique to plants and has DNA binding regions
              at both ends.  This protein accelerates the production of the receptor by
              binding to the DNA and by binding to other proteins that help produce the
              message. The research will determine what parts of the protein are responsible
              for its ability to accelerate the production of the message.  Also, the
              structure of the protein will be analyzed to determine how each segment of the
              molecule is arranged into a molecular blueprint.  ***
