Title       : Determination of the Location and Size of Whistler-Electron Correlated Energetic
               Electron and Whistler Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9513241

Award Number: 9513241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79936              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry D. Voss hnvoss@tayloru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Taylor University
	      
	      Upland, IN  46989    317/998-2751

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The proposed effort during 1995-1996 is to 1) study the locations  and size
              distribution of magnetospheric ducts, 2) greatly improve  current estimates of
              loss rates of radiation belt electrons due to  VLF waves from lightning,
              chorus, and other coherent waves, 3)  clarify the relative roles of ducted and
              non-ducted whistler mode  waves in the diffusion and precipitation of radiation
              belt  particles, and 4) study the mechanisms responsible for high  latitude
              precipitation bursts.  This study will be based on  precipitating electron
              records acquired in 1982 by the SEEP  (Stimulated Emission of Energetic
              Particles) satellite and by VLF  wave receivers on the ground and on
              satellites.  Electron  precipitation by ducted whistlers and by other VLF waves
              is thought  to be the major loss mechanism for radiation belt electrons.  
              However, the relative importance of ducted whistlers, unducted  whistlers,
              chorus, and hiss is controversial.  The SEEP satellite  with its low altitude
              orbit, large geometric factor detectors, and  high data collection rates has
              acquired an unique data set which  can be used to address these issues.  In
              addition, VLF wave data  from ground stations and satellites were obtained
              during the time  interval SEEP was operating and will be used to associate wave
               characteristics with the particle precipitation.  This work will  improve
              knowledge of magnetospheric duct dimensions, will provide  quantitative
              information on the fine structure of lightning-induced  electron precipitation
              and on the number of electrons precipited by  ducted whistlers, should give
              information on the precipitation  rates caused by non-ducted whistlers and
              other VLF emissions.   Analysis of the high resolution electron data should
              also constrain  the possible mechanisms responsible of the high latitude
              electron  precipitation bursts.
