Title       : HPLC/Electrospray Triple Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9513028

Award Number: 9513028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131141             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Judith Charles   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary L. Glish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We are requesting funds for the purchase of a high-performance liquid 
              chromatography/electrospray triple quadrupole mass spectrometer.  Acquisition
              of this state-of-the-art instrumentation is essential for  biological research
              at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.  The major user group is
              comprised of Dr. Glish, Associate Professor,  Department of Chemistry; Dr.
              Charles, Research Associate Professor,  Department of Environmental Sciences
              and Engineering; Dr. Swenberg,  Professor, Department of Environmental Sciences
              and Engineering; Dr.  Zeisel, Chair and Professor, Department of Nutrition; Dr.
              Frelinger,  Professor, Department of Microbiology and Dr. Smith, Assistant 
              Professor, School of Pharmacy.    The instrument will be used by Dr. Swenberg
              to investigate the  formation and repair of DNA modifications from exogenous
              exposure to  chemicals and endogenous processes. This research requires
              advances in  analytical chemistry to detect low femtomolar quantities of DNA 
              adducts. For this reason, Dr. Charles is investigating electrospray  mass
              spectrometry methods for the analysis of DNA adducts. She is also  using
              electrospray to identify intermediates of biological oxidation  reactions. Dr.
              Zeisel requires electrospray for quantitiation of  metabolites of choline and
              for identifying phosphatidylcholines to  characterize the transport,
              biosynthesis and metabolism of cholne in  mammary epithelial cells. Dr. Smith
              wants to quantitate known,  exogenously administered peptides in biological
              fluids to understand  the metabolism and disposition of peptides. Dr. Frelinger
              will use the  instrument for molecular weight and structural determination of 
              peptides and proteins. Dr. Glish intends to investigate the  electrospray and
              collision-induced-dissociation of proteins and  peptides. The instrument will
              also be available for use by other  researchers on campus pursuing research in
              the biological sciences,  including those identified in the proposal as minor
              users.    The mass spectrometer w ill be housed in the Mass Spectrometry
              Facility  at the University of North Carolina, located in rooms 153-156 Rosenau
               Hall. The long-term objectives of the Facility are to teach students  and
              support research. The specific aims are to perform research which  develops
              solutions to analytical problems in the biological sciences;  to promote the
              use of mass spectrometer by active interactions with  students and faculty
              conducting biological research; and to provide  instruction in mass
              spectrometry by discussions and hands-on  experience.
