Title       : Circadian Rhythms of Gene Expression in Cyanobacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9513367

Award Number: 9513367
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $401198             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan S. Golden richard-ewing@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              95-13367  Golden           The approach to unveiling the mechanism of circadian
              oscillators in this project focuses on the least-complex and most
              technically-approachable organism in which a biological clock has been
              demonstrated, namely the cyanobacterium, Synechococcus sp. strain PCC 7942. The
              technical advantages that accrue from using this organism are that it has a
              small genome which is easily manipulated genetically, and that a bioluminescent
              strain has been developed in which the monitoring of circadian gene expression
              is the most flexible and facile of any system presently available. Screening of
              thousands of colonies for mutations that disrupt the clock or otherwise cause
              aberrant rhythmic behavior is possible within a single experiment. Therefore,
              this cyanobacterial system has excellent tools for detailed molecular genetic
              analyses and for clock investigations. The project will use this system to
              address three aspects of biological rhythmicity:   (1) identification and
              characterization of genes that are involved in generating circadian rhythms, 
              (2) characterization of the mechanism by which the oscillator controls rhythmic
              outputs, and (3) assessment of the fitness advantage that organisms derive from
              their circadian oscillators.  Living organisms at all levels of biological
              complexity manifest circadian (daily) rhythms which are controlled by an
              internal "clock." The biochemical nature of these biological clocks has been
              elusive, but one principle which has emerged is that their fundamental
              properties are conserved in all organisms in which circadian behavior has been
              observed, from bacteria to mammals. This principle has encouraged the hope that
              the biochemical mechanism has also been conserved, at least in terms of the
              general components and composition of the clock. This project investigates the
              composition of the biological clock by using the simplest organism known to
              show circadian rhythms: a cyanobacterium. Many processes in humans, including
              sleeping/waking, body temperature , gene expression, cell division, and
              enzymatic activities, are regulated by the biological clock.. In addition,
              these clocks are also the timers that measure the day length in timing of
              reproductive processes in plants and animals. Therefore, understanding the
              biochemical mechanism of- circadian clocks is of fundamental biological
              interest and may lead to insights which will be useful for example, in
              agriculture.  ***
