Title       : U.S.-Germany Collaborative Research on Magnetic Bolometers for Particle
               Detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a9513904

Award Number: 9513904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16800              (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. Seidel seidel@brownvm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0512204   Nondestructive Measurement              
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 0000,5936,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports George Seidel and junior members of his research group at
              Brown University to collaborate in materials research with Professor Siegfried
              Hunklinger and his group from the Institute of Applied Physics of the
              University of Heidelberg.  The objective of their research is to develop
              cryogenic particle detectors.  Both groups are actively studying low
              temperature calorimetric detection of particles using the magnetization of
              localized spins in metals for the sensing element.  They will coordinate their
              efforts to determine which materials will make the best magnetic sensors and
              under what conditions.  The special microstructure fabrication facility at the
              University of Heidelberg will be used to create the integrated systems.  Brown
              University is better equipped to investigate particle interactions in solids as
              they apply to the performance of the calorimetric particle detectors.  There
              has been a rapid growth of interest over the past decade in the development of
              particle detectors that operate at low temperatures, because such conditions
              offer the potential for very large increases in sensitivity and resolution. 
              Such detectors have a variety of applications in astronomy and physics.  These
              collaborating investigators have calculated that the performance of detectors
              based on the technology of magnetic bolometry is superior to existing devices,
              but little work has been done experimentally to demonstrate this potential. 
              Because of the broad range of materials to be investigated, and of the
              complexity of facilities required for the fabrication and testing of samples,
              the proposed collaboration offers substantial benefits of efficiency and cost
              reduction.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
