Title       : Molecular Analysis of Chlamydomonas Mating-Type Locus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9513919

Award Number: 9513919
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $353000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ursula W. Goodenough   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Ferris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513919  Goodenough  The long range goal of this project is to analyze the
              genetic control of sexual differentiation in the unicellular green alga
              Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. The organism differentiates into 4 distinct cell
              types during the course of its life cycle and most, if not all, of these
              programs are governed by its mating-type (mt) locus which exists as a pair of
              apparent alleles. Cells inheriting the mt+ locus differentiate as plus gametes
              in response to nitrogen starvation and are capable of mating interactions and
              zygote formation only with complementary minus alleles. The specific goals of
              this proposal are:  1.  To determine if the gene product of the mid gene is
              responsible for directing mt- sexual differentiation during gametogenesis and
              to determine if it acts directly or in concert with other proteins to elicit
              the transcription of minus- specific structural genes during that period.  2. 
              To define the mechanisms responsible for the movement of the mid gene and about
              20 kb of flanking DNA to an autosomal location in a specific strain of C.
              reinhardtii. Further work will be done to determine the cause for the loss of
              the element when the autosome is crossed into a plus background.  3.  A
              homologue of the mid gene has been identified in C. incerta, a close relative
              and experiments will be done to determine similarities or differences in
              chromosomal location and or configurations. Other more distantly related
              species will be screened for conservation of the domains of the mid gene.  %%% 
              The mid locus of C. reinhardtii has been characterized as the gene responsible
              for directing mt- sexual differentiation during gametogenesis will be studied
              in respect to its function.  The effect of chromosomal position of the gene
              will also be studied by comparison with a closely related species of
              Chlamydomonas where the gene is located on an non-sex chromosome. The level of
              conservation of the gene will be determined by screening of more distantly
              related species. These studies should enhance o ur understanding of  how sexual
              differentiation is determined in an important representative of the "early"
              eukaryotes.  ***
