Title       : Genes That Affect Sperm-Egg Interaction in Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1995  
File        : a9513464

Award Number: 9513464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen H. Pilder   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia Olds-Clarke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9513464  Pilder    The objective of this proposal is to identify and
              localize mutations in the mouse t complex whose products perturb sperm
              penetration of the investment-free oocyte, a process whose molecular nature is
              not well understood in mammals. The proximal 30-40 million base pairs of mouse
              chromosome 17 is known as the t complex. Variant forms of the t complex, called
              t haplotypes, can be distinguished from wild type homologs structurally, by the
              presence of four large, non-overlapping inversions which extend nearly over the
              entire region, and phenotypically, by their detrimental effects on male
              fertility. Male mice carrying two t haplotypes (t/t) are invariably sterile,
              and their sperm are unable to penetrate investment-free mouse eggs, indication
              that there are t complex genes intimately involved in the process of
              sperm-oolemma penetration (SOP). Preliminary data suggest that at least one
              gene affecting sperm-egg fusion is located in the largest and most distal t
              haplotype inversion (In4). Specific Aim I is designed to determine if or how
              well sperm from a mouse that is homozygous only for In4 of the t haplotype
              (In4/In4) can penetrate the investment-free egg, in comparison to sperm from
              nearly congenic +/In4 heterozygotes or +/+ homozygotes. More precise
              localization of a t haplotype specific sterility phenotype to an
              intra-inversion sub-region requires an indirect approach, since intra-inversion
              recombinants between t haplotypes and wild type homologs are extremely rare.
              Since male laboratory mice carrying the t complex from M. spretus (S), a
              distantly related mouse species, and a t haplotype homolog are invariably
              sterile, and because S and + homologs of the t complex are not inverted
              relative to each other in the t haplotype inversions in which sterility factors
              are known to reside, intra-inversion S-+ recombinants can be produced and used
              to more precisely map these sterility factors. Preliminary data suggest that a
              SOP factor that poorly complements the t haplotype SOP defect  maps to the In4
              region of the M. Spretus t complex. Specific Aim II is designed to use S-+
              recombinants to examine the genetic basis of the S/t SOP detect for evidence of
              allelism between S and t haplotype SOP genes. Additionally, the phenotype of
              defective sperm penetration of investment-free mouse eggs will be more
              precisely mapped using sperm from congenic mice carrying a variety of S-+
              recombinant t complexes (specific Aim III). the precise localization of t
              complex SOP genes will make possible their future isolation and molecular
              characterization.  ***
