Title       : Solution Structure of the E. coli Homologue of the Signal Recognition Particle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1997  
File        : a9513214

Award Number: 9513214
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Uli Schmitz schmitz@picasso.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513214   Schmitz  In mammalian cells, protein translocation across the
              endoplasmic reticulum is facilitated by the signal recognition particle (SRP). 
              Upon recognizing a specific signal sequence, SRP essentially shuts down the
              ribosome by forming a tight complex.  Once the latter has been positioned on
              its receptor in the membrane, SRP dissociates from the ribosome which can then
              secrete the new protein across the membrane.  Mammalian SRP is comprised of six
              proteins and one large RNA molecule.  One domain in the RNA has been found to
              be phylogenetically conserved over a wide range of species.  Furthermore, the
              protein that interacts with this domain, SRP54 is also involved in recognizing
              the peptide signal sequence.  A homologue of SRP54 has been found in E.coli
              which also exhibits a two domain structure.  The domain which interacts with
              the RNA and the signal sequence can be expressed alone and binds efficiently to
              shorter versions of the SRP RNA hairpin exhibiting two bulged regions.  We will
              determine the solution structure of a 24 nucleotide hairpin involving one of 
              bulged region and a 43 nucleotide hairpin with both bulges.  Ultimately, we
              will study the structural changes in the RNA concomitant to binding to the E.
              coli SRP54 fragment. Methods will involve multidimensional heteronuclear NMR
              and molecular dynamics refinement methods. The ultimate goal is to understand
              the RNA protein interactions in SRP on a molecular, structural level.  %%%  All
              proteins are manufactured on ribosomes which reside inside of the cell. 
              However, a large number of these proteins is utilized throughout the body and
              must therefore be translocated across the cell walls.  Efficiency and accuracy
              of protein translocation is essential for all higher organizms and a
              disturbance in these processes can lead to many different diseases, including
              cancer.  Some of the key cellular players in the protein translocation process
              have been identified including a large particle called the signal recognition
              particle.  Its fu nction is to recognize if a protein belongs across the
              membrane by examining the first part of the new molecular as it is synthesized
              on the ribosome.  In the case of a trans-membrane protein the particle will
              turned off the ribosome, helps it find the whole in the cell membrane and
              protein secretion through the membrane can start.  At present we know virtually
              nothing about how these complex interactions involving proteins and RNA
              molecular occur on a molecular level.  Our main goal is therefore to determine
              three-dimensional pictures of some of the involved parts of RNA and protein
              molecules as they exist in solution .  We will compare the structures of  the
              molecules when they are alone and when they are interaction with each other. 
              This will help identify the crucial parts of the molecules that are essential
              for these interaction and hopefully reveal unique schemes that can be
              recognized in other processes as well.  ***
