Title       : Structural Studies with the Receptor for the Insulinotropic Glucagon-like
               Peptide I
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9513989

Award Number: 9513989
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Svetlana Mojsov mojsov@rockvax.rockefeller.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9513989  Mojsov      The maintenance of steady levels of glucose in response to
              a meal is controlled by a complex network of metabolic factors. Insulin plays a
              major role in modulating circulating glucose levels, and is a part of a feed
              back loop that maintains both glucose and insulin levels constant in a basal
              state. In addition, a number of neurotransmitters, as well as metabolic
              hormones secreted in the gut in response to a meal, can influence glucose
              metabolism by stimulating secretion of insulin from the pancreas. The failure
              of insulin producing beta cells to respond to elevated levels of blood glucose
              leads to the metabolic disorders manifested in patients with Type II diabetes
              mellitus.  The PI has discovered that a new peptide called glucagon-like
              peptide I (GLP-I), which is secreted in the gut in response to a meal, is one
              of the most potent insulin releasing peptides described to date. Results from
              clinical studies demonstrated that administration of GLP-I together with a meal
              in patients with Type II diabetes mellitus eliminates the rise in blood glucose
              in these individuals. On the basis of these findings it has been proposed that
              GLP-I based therapeutic agent can be used as a new treatment of glucose
              imbalance observed in patients with Type II diabetes mellitus.  Recently, the
              receptor for GLP-I has been cloned from the rat and human pancreas. GLP-I
              receptor is structurally related to a newly identified family of G-protein
              coupled receptors for several endocrine peptides. At present, there is no
              understanding about the mechanism of interaction of these G-protein coupled
              receptors with their respective ligands.  The objective of the proposed
              research is to determine the structural factors that contribute to the specific
              interaction of the insulin releasing GLP-I peptide with its receptor. To gain
              insights into the binding specificity of the mammalian GLP-I receptors, GLP-I
              receptor will be cloned and sequenced from the whole catfish cDNA library. It
              is hypothesized that the highest  degree of structural homologies will be found
              in domains of the receptor that play a role in the specific binding to its
              GLP-I ligand, receptor interactions with G-proteins and expression of the
              receptor on the cell surface. To test these predictions, mutant GLP-I receptors
              will be obtained and their functional properties will be determined in
              mammalian cell lines that do not exogenously express GLP-I receptor.  Results
              of these studies will contribute to a better understanding of basic principles
              in biology. In addition, these results can potentially be useful for commercial
              development of new generation of "gut-based" therapeutic agents for treatment
              of patients with Type II diabetes mellitus.   ***
