Title       : Evolution of Photoperiodic Time Measurement in the Pitcher- Plant Mosquito
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1996   
File        : a9513834

Award Number: 9513834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Bradshaw bradshaw@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9513834  Bradshaw    Many organisms use the length of day to regulate their
              seasonal development.  The pitcher-plant mosquito enters dormancy under the
              influence of short (Winter) daylengths and terminates or avoids dormancy under
              the influence of long (Summer) daylengths. This mosquito is a formerly tropical
              mosquito that has adapted to the climatic gradient of North America by altering
              its pattern of dormancy and development.  In the north, or at high elevation,
              Winter arrives earlier and Spring arrives later than at lower latitudes or
              altitudes.  Concomitantly, northern or alpine populations of the mosquito enter
              and remain in dormancy under the influence of longer days than mosquitoes for
              southern or lowland populations.    Invasion of temperate latitudes by tropical
              mosquitoes requires not only the ability to withstand the harsher winter but
              also the ability to modify their seasonal development to coincide with
              progressively shorter northern growing seasons.  Thus, disease-carrying
              mosquitoes, such as the Asian tiger mosquito, that are in the process of
              invading North America, must both increase their tolerance of cold and modify
              their seasonal program. The pitcher-plant mosquito provides established
              populations that have already adapted to the climate of North America from
              Florida to Canada.  In this research, we ask how the mosquito's internal
              biological clock and genetic organization of that clock have enabled them to
              adapt to more northern and alpine seasons.  Unlike many mosquitoes, the
              pitcher-plant mosquito does not require blood for reproduction. This trait,
              makes it an ideal model system for investigating how a formerly tropical
              mosquito has adapted to more temperate climates while not requiring the use of
              animal hosts for a blood source.  Furthermore, this study will provide
              information that will increase our understanding of the evolution of
              photoperiodic time measurement - a process critical to a great many number of
              organisms.
