Title       : Trace Element Scavenging and Variable Particle Flux: A Time-Series Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1992    
File        : a9222482

Award Number: 9222482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62329              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Sherrell sherrell@imcs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              Study will be made of trace element scavenging mechanisms and                  
              particle dynamics through measurements of temporal variations in               
              dissolved, suspended particulate and sinking particulate elemental             
              distributions during a two year time-series study in the northeast             
              Pacific.  A recently-developed in situ pump will be used for                   
              collection of contamination-free size-fractionated samples of                  
              suspended matter throughout the water column.  Five occupations of             
              a deep-water station in the California Current will sample three               
              seasons of varying productivity.  This sampling will be coupled                
              with simultaneous sediment trap and dissolved element measurements             
              to examine the effect of changing productivity and vertical mass               
              flux on the overall distribution of trace elements in a productive             
              eastern boundary water column.  Samples of all three pools will be             
              analyzed for Al, Fe, Ca, Si, Mn, Pb, Zn, Cu, Ni, Cd, Ba, I, U, and             
              232Th.  This research will address the shortage of fundamental                 
              information on the distribution of particulate trace elements which            
              currently limits formulation of realistic scavenging models.  The              
              chemical differences in the behavior of elements will be used as               
              probes of the scavenging process, as illustrated by our previous               
              measurements of a subset of these elements in samples from Bermuda,            
              the Northeast Atlantic, and the Northeast Pacific.  In addition,               
              elemental composition of particulate matter will be used as a                  
              tracer of mass exchange among particulate pools.
