Title       : Dynamic Duopoly and Bounded Rationality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9222903

Award Number: 9222903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78003              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Rosenthal rosentha@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              One of the characteristics of standard modelling in decision                   
              theory, game theory and economic theory has been the postulate                 
              that all the people in the models are completely rational; they                
              have well-specified objectives, unlimited memories, and unlimited              
              abilities to compute without using up time or other resources.                 
              In recent years discontent with this postulate has been growing                
              within economics because of the cumulative weight of years of                  
              data from experiments consistently showing that even in very                   
              simple decision problems and games the theories do not predict                 
              the actions of subjects very well.  This project explores                      
              alternatives to the standard optimization model.  In these                     
              alternatives, each decision-making situation is a pattern                      
              recognition problem in which the individual decision maker                     
              decides which of a small set of decision making tools ("rules of               
              thumb") or actions to use.  The project addresses such questions               
              as how did the individual's set of rules and method of assigning               
              rules to decision making problems come to be and how do they                   
              evolve.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              More specifically, the project examines two broad classes of                   
              models.  In the first class there are single decision-maker                    
              models in which the decision maker's choices influence the path                
              of some stochastic process about which the decision maker has                  
              little information but which affects his well-being.  The effect               
              of certain crude rules of thumb on the long-term survival of an                
              individual is explored in a variety of contexts.  The second                   
              class builds on previous work by the investigator on bounded                   
              rationality models in which individuals use rules of thumb to                  
              conserve on decision-making costs and to overcome imperfect                    
              reasoning and computing abilities.  A population of individuals                
              interacts over time using crude rules of thumb in a variety of                 
              settings.  Here the focus is on what profiles of rules can                     
              survive over time as poorer performing rules are weeded out.  The              
              models used in the latter part of the project are adapted from                 
              the literature on anonymous random matching games.
