Title       : Conference entitled "Future Directions for Lasers in Medicine and Surgery III"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1993  
File        : a9222398

Award Number: 9222398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. M. Mudry                             
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Massoud Motamedi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph T. Walsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : United Engr Trustees, Inc.
	      
	      New York, NY  10017    /   -

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award will provide partial support for a conference,                      
              organized by the Engineering Foundation, on the "Future                        
              Directions for Lasers in Medicine and Surgery".  The conference                
              will be held in late February, 1993 and will bring together                    
              engineers, scientists, clinicians, and representatives from                    
              industry and federal agencies.  The conference will review the                 
              status of the field, identify those areas where applied research               
              and developmental efforts are needed and those problems where                  
              fundamental technological research is warranted.                               
                                                                                             
              The areas of presentation and discussion that will be covered in               
              this conference are interdisciplinary in nature and specific to                
              the biomedical focus area.  Regular meetings of professional                   
              societies are unlikely to have participation from all the                      
              communities that will attend this conference.  This conference                 
              should stimulate research by biomedical engineers into important               
              areas associated with lasers in medicine.  The results of this                 
              conference will be written and distributed by the Engineering                  
              Foundation.
