Title       : A Dynamic Analysis of Cellular Interactions and Lineage Relationships in the
               Developing Optic Tectum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1994      
File        : a9222896

Award Number: 9222896
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John S. Edwards                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143732             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda S. Ross ross@ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The cells of the nervous system go through many changes as the                 
              develop, and many factors control their development.  Individual               
              cells are born in one region but must then migrate to another                  
              region where development continues.  As cells develop, they extend             
              processes or axons to make connections with other cells of the                 
              nervous system.  A cell also receives axonal connections from other            
              neurons.  It has been suggested that projections from neurons in               
              the eye influence the development of cells with which they connect             
              in visual centers in the brain such as the tectum.  The goal of                
              this project is to determine how cell-cell interactions influence              
              the birth, migration, and maturation of individual cells.                      
              Individual cells in the optic tectum will be labeled with                      
              fluorescent dyes, and the cells will be followed with video                    
              microscopy as they proceed through development.  Subsequently, the             
              environment of the tectal cells will be manipulated by unilateral              
              enucleation.  In these altered embryos, the tectal cells will not              
              receive the normal contacts from the retina.  Using the normal data            
              as a reference, labeled cells in the tectum will be analyzed to                
              determine precisely the aspects of development that are affected by            
              interactions with projections from the eye.  The aim of this                   
              research is to provide an integrated description in real time                  
              earliest dynamic processes involved in the development of the                  
              visual system.***//
