Title       : Mechanisms of Chemical Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1993     
File        : a9222598

Award Number: 9222598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64332              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Johnston rej1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The general goals of this project are to understand individual                 
              recognition by scent in animals and, eventually, to use this as a              
              way to understand the functional organization of the olfactory                 
              system in the brain as well as aspects of social memory.  In this              
              project, Dr. Johnston will investigate how animals communicate by              
              scent.  In particular, he will study a phenomenon known as scent               
              over-marking, in which one animal deposits its scent in the same               
              places as another.  Preliminary results suggest that, by doing                 
              so, one animal can mask the information in scent deposited                     
              previously by another individual, suggesting that over-marking                 
              has competitive functions.  Using golden hamsters in a variety of              
              behavioral tests, Dr. Johnston will attempt to (1) document such               
              competitive functions of over-marking in the social lives of                   
              animals, (2) characterize the special perceptual mechanisms that               
              allow animals to decipher information from places that have been               
              marked by several individuals, and (3) investigate how animals                 
              use information about individuals in such marks to guide their                 
              social behavior.                                                               
                                                                                             
              These experiments have importance for at least three domains of                
              science, and may have some practical implications as well.                     
              First, olfactory communication and scent-marking are important in              
              the lives of most mammals, a few birds, most reptiles, some                    
              amphibians, and a huge number of invertebrates, yet we still                   
              understand little about it.  This research promises entirely new               
              insights into how animals use scent to communicate with one                    
              another and thus to regulate their social interactions.  This new              
              knowledge would help us to understand such aspects of behavior as              
              territoriality, dominant-subordinate interactions, mate choice                 
              and competition for mates, and social recognition.  Thus, it                   
              could eventually have practical implications for how to better                 
              house animals in captivity in labs and zoos, or to manage their                
              behavior in households, and could even be helpful in wildlife                  
              management.  Second, these experiments should give us new                      
              insights into the sense of smell by characterizing heretofore                  
              unsuspected sensory-perceptual abilities by which animals can                  
              extract information about one individual from complex mixtures of              
              scent from two or more individuals.  Third, the experiments will               
              provide new knowledge and new behavioral paradigms that can be                 
              used as models for investigating the brain mechanisms underlying               
              both the sense of smell and more general processes such as                     
              individual recognition and memory.
