Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Gender-Typing in Inter-War Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1993      
File        : a9222755

Award Number: 9222755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4998               (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Lesch 4156424581  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A recurring theme of study within the hsitory of science is the                
              efforts of scientists to characterize "normalcy" within the human              
              species.  Stephen Jay Gould in his regular articles in "Natural                
              History" has detailed some of the problems in such examples as                 
              efforts to measure average cranial size, the "criminal" tendencies             
              of those with an xyy chromosome and efforts to explain via gender              
              typing of male/female variations in mathematical abilities.                    
              Whatever the good intentions of the scientific experts who frame               
              the standards of what is normal, the history of such efforts has               
              not been a particularly beneficent one.  The message from these                
              studies is clear:  not only the scientists constructing such                   
              standards but the public who is "measured" by them should take                 
              great care in evaluating what these standards really mean.                     
                                                                                             
              Ms. Stephanie Kenen, with the advice of Dr. John Lesch, her                    
              dissertation adviser, is examining the development of psychological            
              personality tests between World Wars I & II.  She is examining the             
              efforts of Lewis M. Terman and Catharine Cox Miles to quantify sex-            
              based personality traits in a 14 year study whose results were                 
              published in 1936.  Terman, Miles, and their research team crated              
              a multiple-choice personality test designed to distinguish between             
              the sexes and to establish a range of "normal" scores for each sex.            
              The psychologists emphasized the empirical, objective and                      
              quantitative aspects of their methods as evidence of the scientific            
              status of their work.  Their claim to legitimacy of science                    
              underscored their authority as experts in the psychology of sex.               
                                                                                             
              Ms. Kenen's research is focusing on three sets of questions related            
              to the "Male-Female" or "M-F test".  First, how did the researchers            
              establish the legitimacy of their project in the halls of academe,             
              in the budgets of philanthropic organizations, and in the eyes of              
              the public?  Second, to what degree and in what ways was Terman and            
              Miles' research contingent on their historical setting?  Third, how            
              was the test appraised and applied in the years after its                      
              publication?  These questions provide a framework for historical               
              analysis of the M-F research project in terms of the legitimacy of             
              scientific expertise, the construction of social-scientific                    
              knowledge, and the impact of that knowledge on the society from                
              which it has derived.
