Title       : The Scientific Data Revolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9222950

Award Number: 9222950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick Suppe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Technological developments enable science to gather or produce                 
              massively complex data sets which cannot be analyzed or understood             
              via traditional methods.  Instead, new computationally intensive               
              methods of visualization and simulation have been developed for the            
              analysis of data and the testing of models and theories.  These                
              developments call into question traditional concepts and                       
              dichotomies used by those researchers, including philosophers of               
              science,  to analyze science.  They also call into question                    
              standard accounts of testing and confirmation.                                 
                                                                                             
              Under this professional development fellowship, Dr. Frederick Suppe            
              is focusing on analyzing the sorts of interpretive arguments that              
              lie at the heart of manipulating and using scientific data via                 
              these new methods.  He is studying these methods as a participant-             
              observer on a research team in structural geology.                             
                                                                                             
              Scientists are taught to do empirical research largely through                 
              apprenticeship as graduate students.  In the training component of             
              this fellowship, Dr. Suppe is spending a year in an Earth and                  
              planetary structural lab undergoing such an apprenticeship as a                
              participant-observer mentored by one of the world's leading                    
              structural geologists.  His lab uses the new computer data methods             
              as it regularly produces major developments in Earth and planetary             
              structural geology such as discovering the tectonic structure of               
              Venus.
