Title       : Collaborative Research: Seismic Traverse of the Byrd Subglacial Basin-Field Test
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1995      
File        : a9222121

Award Number: 9222121
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $571026             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian W. Dalziel ian@utig.ig.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul L. Stoffa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald D. Blankenship  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports an in situ and short traverse seismic                      
              reflection/refraction and magnetotelluric experiment in West                   
              Antarctica.  This collaborative experiment involves four awards at             
              four institutions.  The four-fold purpose is 1) to investigate part            
              of the Byrd Subglacial Basin, 2) to test techniques for this work              
              that could be done in a long traverse, 3) to determine the                     
              viability of the magnetotelluric method on a thick (electrically               
              resistive) ice sheet, and 4) to evaluate the relative merits of                
              refraction with wide reflection versus reflection with narrow                  
              refraction seismic studies in imaging the lithosphere.  The                    
              geophysical techniques that will be employed are capable of imaging            
              the ice sheet, the continental lithosphere, and the upper mantle,              
              as well as determining physical properties of parts of the                     
              lithosphere and mantle.  Investigations of outcrop geology over the            
              last thirty years in West Antarctica and the Transantarctic                    
              Mountains have lead to recent interpretations that the crust is                
              made up of many different lithospheric blocks.  Seismic reflection             
              work is the only way to image the crust in detail and the                      
              refraction work is the only way to determine physical properties of            
              the layers and blocks defined by the reflection work.  The                     
              magnetotelluric work is scientifically risky because it may not                
              yield useful information when used over the electrically resistive             
              ice sheet; however, if it works it has the potential to image                  
              molten rock in the crust and upper mantle.  In a continental rift              
              region such as West Antarctica, the presence of melt in the                    
              lithosphere is likely and, if documented, has very important                   
              ramifications to ice sheet dynamics.  Research work supported by               
              this award is expected to provide constraints to models of a range             
              of crustal processes from models of ice sheet dynamics to tectonic             
              and kinematic models of lithospheric thinning and rifting.
