Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Dynamic Conductivity of Lateral
               Superlattices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9222876

Award Number: 9222876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23600              (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Merz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 5936,
Abstract    :
              9222876  Merz  This award supports the participation of a group of young
              American scientists and engineers in a regional European collaboration
              investigating the electronic properties of semiconductor quantum structures. 
              The technical coordinator for the U.S. side of the linked effort is Professor
              James Merz, Director of the Science and Technology Center for Quantized
              Electronic Structures (QUEST) at the University of California, Santa Barbara.
              The senior U.S. participants in the proposed research are Professors H. Kroemer
              and P. Petroff of UCSB; however, the engineers to be funded by this NSF award
              are students, postdoctoral researchers and new faculty affiliated with QUEST. 
              The European group most involved in collaborating with the QUEST group is led
              by Professor J. P. Kotthaus of the Physics Section of the
              Ludwig-Maximilians-University in Munich, Germany.  Their work is part of a
              regional effort with several European partners which is funded by the ESPRIT
              Basic Research Program.     The participating U.S. and German engineers will
              produce three distinct lateral superlattice systems based on III-V
              semiconductor quantum structures and then investigate their specific electronic
              properties via dynamic conductivity experiments at low temperatures and in high
              magnetic fields.  The U.S. group contributes expertise in the conception and
              fabrication of these structures by growth with molecular beam epitaxy and
              patterning with focused ion beam. The German group also has very strong
              fabrication capabilities with particular expertise in lithographic processing
              for semiconductor nanostructures.  In addition, the German group has
              specialized equipment for detailed analysis of the electronic properties of the
              jointly fabricated structures.  By combining their expertise and specialized
              facilities, they will be able to optimize the fabrication technologies and
              better assess which types of superlattices offer the best high-frequency device
              performance.  In addition, the planned exchanges of junior researcher s between
              the two groups will give them the opportunity to work in a top flight
              laboratory with equipment and strengths different from their own.  They will
              also gain insights into the practice of research in another country and make
              some early contacts with potential professional colleagues.  ***
