Title       : Theoretical Study of Nitride Wide Bandgap Semiconductors forElectronic and
               Optical Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1995     
File        : a9222387

Award Number: 9222387
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter R. L. Lambrecht wxl2@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin Segall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9218,9256,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research will provide theoretical investigations of several               
              areas which are crucial to the emerging class of wide bandgap                  
              semiconductor compounds comprised of group three-nitrides.  A range            
              of basic properties, including the electronic transport and optical            
              properties of aluminum nitride, gallium nitride and indium nitride,            
              will be calculated by means of first-principles methods.                       
              Calculations of the dependence of the electronic properties on                 
              strain and optical phonon distortions will provide information                 
              needed in the modeling of high temperature transport.  The optical             
              response functions and other spectroscopic information will be                 
              calculated for both the zincblende and the wurtzite forms.  The                
              nitrogen vacancy, an important defect for the quality of the                   
              material, will be investigated.  The project will study the                    
              corresponding properties for ternay alloy systems composed of                  
              aluminum and gallium, and indium and gallium with nitrogen, as well            
              as the pseudo-binary alloy of silicon carbide with aluminum                    
              nitride.  This part of the work will make use of appropriate                   
              statistical models in the treatment of disorder.  The optical                  
              properties of small period superlattices and the band-offsets of               
              heterostructures will be studied.  The work is expected to have a              
              significant impact on the characterization efforts of material                 
              produced by novel growth techniques currently under development.               
              This will assist the development of opto-electronic devices                    
              operating at short wavelengths and at high temperatures.                       
              %%%                                                                            
              Computationally intensive research will be conducted in order to               
              calculate the properties of a new class of semiconductor compounds             
              which have the potential for many applications.  These complex                 
              materials, which are based on the nitrides, are particularly useful            
              for their optical properties in addition to their electronic ones.             
              Also, these are hard materials which can function at high                      
              temperatures.  Thus, applications requiring opto-electronic devices            
              operating at high temperatures will benefit.
