Title       : Small Grants for Exploratory Research: Virtual Design Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1992   
File        : a9222742

Award Number: 9222742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Homayoon Kazerooni Kazeroon@newton.me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9146,9237,
Abstract    :
                   This research is concurrent in the development of a Virtual               
              Design Laboratory (VDL): a system which uses virtual reality                   
              technology to design and  assemble prototypes of mechatronic                   
              systems rapidly and naturally.  For this research, virtual reality             
              can be thought of as the computer-generated simulation of real                 
              experience which immerses the computer user in any system of                   
              location which the computer can model. The research VDL                        
              system offers three advantages over current approaches to design:              
              (1) the VDL saves the designer a great deal of time in the design              
              process; (2) the VDL allows the designer to design in a more                   
              natural and less mathematical way without discounting the                      
              importance of mathematics to good design work; and (3) the VDL lets            
              the designer experiment with a very wide variety of parts,  and,               
              in fact, potentially experiment with every possible part                       
              option.  To develop a new machine using the VDL system, the                    
              designer wears a helmet and two powered master gloves.  The helmet             
              has a  computer-generated virtual reality display mounted in a type            
              of  faceshield to produce the virtual reality environment in front             
              of the designer's eyes.  The gloves have sensors in them to let the            
              designer "feel" and manipulate various machine parts in the virtual            
              reality environment.  The designer installs in the VDL the virtual             
              reality software developed as a catalog of parts by parts                      
              manufacturers.  In the resulting virtual reality display, the                  
              designer can see various computer-generated shelves, each shelf                
              containing only one type of machine parts.  The designer                       
              manipulates the master gloves to have the computer-generated slave             
              gloves within the VDL choose from the shelves several parts to try             
              in the particular machine design and also to build the machine,                
              both within the VDL.  These parts are not physically present.  They            
              exist in the VDL with all of their engineering properties having               
              been modeled mathematically in the virtual reality environment to              
              replicate the behavior of the actual part.                                     
                   The objective of this research project is to determine the                
              ground rules for the operations of the VDL through the design,                 
              construction, and control of a simple experimental design                      
              workstation.  The knowledge obtained from this preliminary research            
              will serve as a basis for the design and construction of the next-             
              generation design workstations.
