Title       : Equivalence Classes in Pigeons and Rats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1993     
File        : a9222203

Award Number: 9222203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59999              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. McIlvane   (Principal Investigator current)
              William V. Dube  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Shriver Ctr Mental Retard
	      
	      Waltham, MA  02154    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9222203  McIlvane    A continuing interest in comparative psychology is the
              degree to which different species can  perform different types of stimulus
              classification.  Stimulus classes are demonstrable when  (1) two or more
              physically dissimilar stimuli occasion the same behavior and (2) events that 
              directly affect one class member also affect the other(s) indirectly.  This
              project asks if rats  can form one type of stimulus class, called a
              "contingency class," which may result when  two or more stimuli covary in their
              relation to a common behavioral outcome (e.g., a food  delivery).  Contingency
              classes have been demonstrated in humans and birds, but not yet in  rodents.  A
              demonstration of these classes in rats would establish the generality of the 
              relevant behavioral processes in relatively small-brained mammals.  It would
              also permit  further tests to evaluate whether or not rats can form a second
              type of class, an "equivalence  class."  Equivalence classes are higher-order,
              contextually determined classes that are  thought to underlie relatively
              advanced cognitive capabilities.  Such classes have so far been  demonstrated
              only in humans, higher primates, and sea lions; the capacity of smaller-brained
               species to form equivalence classes is unknown.
