Title       : The Anchoring Problem in Surface Lightness Perception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1995      
File        : a9222104

Award Number: 9222104
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Gilchrist   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research is part of a broad effort to determine the means by              
              which the human visual system processes the pattern of light                   
              falling on the retina, in order to determine the white, gray or                
              black level of surfaces within a person's field of view.  It is                
              generally accepted that perceived surface gray levels are based on             
              relative light intensities extracted from intensity gradients in               
              the retinal image, but little is known about how these relative                
              intensities are anchored, that is, processed to yield the specific             
              shades of gray that we see.  Strictly speaking, relative                       
              intensities provide information only about relative shades of gray.            
              Absolute shades of gray can be derived only with the addition of an            
              anchoring rule.  For instance, in many scenes the visual system                
              automatically treats the highest intensity as white.  This can be              
              demonstrated under the simplest conditions by placing an observer's            
              head inside a large dome, half of the interior of which is painted             
              black and half of which is painted gray.  The gray part will appear            
              white and the black part will appear gray, consistent with the                 
              highest-intensity-as-white rule.  However, if an observer's head is            
              placed within a uniformly painted black dome containing a white                
              disk at its center, the black dome appears white and the disk                  
              appears luminous.  This would follow from a rule by which white is             
              assigned to the surrounding region, not to the highest intensity.              
                                                                                             
              In this research, human observers will be placed in a variety of               
              visual environments, chosen to distinguish different potential                 
              anchoring rules.  These will include simple patterns on large                  
              plastic domes that completely surround the viewer, more complex lab            
              displays, computer simulated displays, and on-site natural scenes.             
              Analysis of how the anchoring rules change as the visual field                 
              becomes increasingly complex may well fill an important gap in the             
              modelling of surface color perception.
