Title       : Structure and Impact of Spatiotemporal State on Catalytic Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1994   
File        : a9222476

Award Number: 9222476
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306479             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Luss dluss@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A wide variety of spatiotemporal patterns exist in nature with                 
              a wide degree of complexity, from simple and regular to highly                 
              disordered structures.  These structures show some order in                    
              the midst of complex nonlinear behavior.  The coupling of                      
              chemical reactions and transport processes, such as diffusion                  
              or hydrodynamic convection, is known to lead to the formation                  
              of spatially organized distributions of reactive compounds.                    
              Analysis and prediction of pattern-formation in chemically                     
              reacting systems to date have been for homogeneous medium and                  
              there is lack of understanding if and in which way                             
              inhomogeneity of a medium will distort the patterns that exist                 
              in a uniform medium.  This relates directly to the performance                 
              of commercial heterogeneous catalysts, which are inherently                    
              nonuniform.  The answer has implications on the assessment of                  
              the impact of spatiotemporal patterns on the performance of                    
              catalysts.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              This research involves experimental, numerical and theoretical                 
              studies of the formation, evolution, characterization, and                     
              impact of spatial and spatiotemporal patterns on catalytic                     
              surfaces.  The experiments will provide quantitative data                      
              about the dynamic features of the patterns on catalysts with                   
              simple and symmetric geometry in a well-controlled environment                 
              for several test reactions, and will provide important                         
              information on the impact (or lack of impact) of catalytic-                    
              surface inhomogeneity on the observed patterns.  The                           
              experimental information will serve as a guide to theoretical-                 
              model development and modification and for determining                         
              parameter values.  Numerical and theoretical studies will help                 
              direct and organize the experimental research and point out                    
              potentially interesting regions of experimentation and                         
              catalyst geometries, and guide the development of principles                   
              predicting pattern formation and its impact.  The research                     
              should provide insight into the role and impact of                             
              spatiotemporal patterns on the performance of heterogeneous                    
              catalysts.
