Title       : Cloning the Shootless Locus of Arabidopsis Thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1992    
File        : a9222013

Award Number: 9222013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Kathy Barton mkbarton@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1131,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Plant meristems are located at the tips of growing roots and                   
              shoots.  They are comprised of densely cytoplasmic,                            
              undifferentiated, dividing cells.  These cells have properties                 
              characteristic of "stem cells" in that their descendants give rise             
              not only to more undifferentiated, meristematic cells but also to              
              the many different cell types that make up the plant body.  Thus,              
              understanding how shoot apical meristems work is not only critical             
              to understanding the development of plants but will also shed light            
              on the more general problem of how undifferentiated "stem cell"                
              populations of cells generate complex structures comprised of many             
              different cell types.                                                          
                                                                                             
              This new investigator proposes to identify, isolate and                        
              characterize a clone the wild-type DNA encoding the                            
              SHOOTLESS locus of Arabidopsis.  Possible practical applications               
              of this research include the ability to more precisely control                 
              shoot regeneration.  The data thus far suggest that the SHOOTLESS              
              locus is necessary for the formation  of a shoot apical meristem.              
              It is possible that in addition to being necessary for shoot                   
              meristem formation, the SHOOTLESS product is also sufficient for               
              shoot meristem formation.  If this is true, an increase in the                 
              expression of the SHOOTLESS product would increase the likelihood              
              that a given tissue would regenerate shoots.  Learning how to                  
              control such a gene would result in an increased ability to                    
              regenerate shoots from tissues or species that are otherwise                   
              recalcitrant to shoot regeneration protocols.  This would                      
              accelerate the creation of new varieties of commercially important             
              plant species.//
