Title       : Dissertation Research: Prehistoric Egyptian State - Local Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1992   
File        : a9222224

Award Number: 9222224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11969              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Harvey  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. David O'Connor, Mr Stephen Harvey will              
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. Working at the site                
              of Abydos in Southern Egypt, he will examine the large funerary                
              cult complex established by the pharaoh Ahmose to determine how                
              it developed and changed over time. The underlying goal of the                 
              work is to examine the economic and political relationships                    
              between a state level of government and and local level                        
              communities and to understand how state level goals are                        
              translated and adapted to often different local needs. It is                   
              known from recovered texts that Ahmose originally established a                
              cult complex at Abydos to commemorate himself and his lineage.                 
              During the ca. 300 year course of its history, the function and                
              direction of the complex was dramatically redirected towards more              
              local ends.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Mr. Harvey will conduct a three stage field project. He will                   
              first survey portions of the site which have not yet been                      
              carefully examined. This is possible because remains of                        
              structures are still visible. He will then collect surface                     
              ceramics and use these to date different areas and structures. On              
              the basis of this information he will carry out controlled                     
              excavations. These data should allow him to examine how the                    
              nature of the site changed over time and gain insight into the                 
              underlying social processes responsible.                                       
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed light on                 
              the long term relationships between state authorities and local                
              communities. Finally it will assing in the training of a                       
              promising scientist.
