Title       : Affective Structure of Responsive Parenting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1994  
File        : a9222069

Award Number: 9222069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore H. Dix   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              Although responsive parenting is critical to child development,                
              why it occurs and the processes that comprise it are poorly                    
              understood. This research will test a model of responsive                      
              parenting that emphasizes the emotions and emotional                           
              communication occurring during parent-child communication.  The                
              model details how maternal responsiveness is influenced by                     
              mothers' experience of particular emotions and their ability to                
              understand the emotional communications of children. Mothers will              
              play, feed and wait with their young children. From videotapes of              
              these interactions, mothers' behavior will be coded for three                  
              aspects of responsiveness: sensitivity, intrusiveness and                      
              contingency. The data will be used to understand how responsive                
              behavior is influenced by mothers' immediate emotions, the child               
              behavior that elicits them, and the emotions mothers think their               
              children are experiencing. The data will also be used to                       
              understand whether emotions are a principal reason why                         
              responsiveness is influenced by other, non-immediate variables,                
              specifically by mothers' personalities, mothers' social                        
              relationships, and the temperaments of children. Do mothers'                   
              levels of empathy, depression, or marital conflict, for example,               
              undermine mothers' responsiveness because these influence the                  
              emotions mothers feel when interacting with their children? This               
              research will enable us to understand how emotions control the                 
              responsiveness of mothers' behavior, and how emotions determine                
              the impact that life experiences and personality dispositions                  
              have on parenting behavior. This knowledge is critical to                      
              understanding human development in the first years of life and,                
              in fact, to understanding ways that emotions promote and                       
              undermine interpersonal behavior generally.
