Title       : Emergent Properties of Irrigation Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1993      
File        : a9222426

Award Number: 9222426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond B. Hames                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15132              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Stephen Lansing   (Principal Investigator current)
              James N. Kremer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              For centuries the Balinese have used an irrigation system                      
              controlled by temple priests to coordinate the water schedules of              
              paddy rice farmers.  The effectiveness of indigenously run                     
              irrigation systems has been questioned by social scientists and                
              development planners in terms of whether they will permit the                  
              maximization of rice yields or the minimization of risk of                     
              failure.  This project will help answer this question and                      
              potentially provide insights into how complex systems are simply               
              and effectively coordinated.  The research will evaluate the                   
              hypothesis that Balinese water temple networks are                             
              self-organizing managerial systems, a hitherto unknown form of                 
              complex adaptive system.  It will also test whether computer                   
              simulation models can predict variations in the structure of                   
              temple networks.  Previous research has enabled the investigators              
              to build and test a predictive linear simulation model of the                  
              role of water temples in the management of the terraced rice                   
              field ecology.  This project builds directly on that research,                 
              but shifts attention from the ecological role of individual                    
              water temples to possible system-level properties of temple                    
              networks.  Models of coadaptation on rugged fitness landscapes                 
              will enable one to investigate emergent properties of temple                   
              networks under varying ecological conditions in a comparative                  
              study of five different river systems.  The results of                         
              optimization analyses will yield models of the adaptive landscape              
              of each river, which will then be compared to existing temple                  
              networks.
