Title       : Flexible Production Technologies and Changing Work Relations: An Ethical
               Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1993    
File        : a9222474

Award Number: 9222474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39926              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tony Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9222474  Smith  This award provides partial support for philosophical research
              on  the ethical implications of flexible production technologies.   These
              technologies include numerically controlled tools, robots,  and other forms of
              information technology that are or have the  potential to change work relations
              in manufacturing.  This research  project examines these changes and claims
              about these changes from  an ethical standpoint.  Among the ethical principles
              that form the  basis in normative social theory for an approach to this subject
               are those of individual autonomy, or freedom, and the social good,  defined as
              the absence of fundamental social antagonisms.  The  analytical component of
              the research involves a thorough review of  the empirical literature and
              studies of flexible production  technologies that have been published,
              including those from both  management and labor perspectives.  The research
              involves  identifying alleged consequences of ethical relevance in this 
              literature, including areas of agreement and disagreement about the 
              consequences of these technologies.  It involves clarifying the  assumptions
              and evidence that underly the various conclusions, and  their strengths and
              weaknesses.  Careful consideration of these  issues may allow the investigator
              to formulate conclusions that are  defensible normatively and empirically.  If
              this is not possible,  he may be able to make clear the kind of further
              empirical work  needed to resolve the normative questions.  This research will
              be  undertaken with regular interaction and discussions with a group of  social
              scientists who are doing empirical research on these issues.   Results will
              include publication of articles and a monograph and  presentations at
              professional conferences.  Results will also be  presented in more public
              media.  ***
