Title       : RUI: Corticotropin-Releasing Factor and Infant Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9222077

Award Number: 9222077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246809             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Hennessy michael.hennessy@wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Infants that are involuntarily separated from their mothers may                
              suffer severe physiological and behavioral consequences.  Most of              
              what we know concerning the physiological effects has derived                  
              from studies using nonhuman primates.  These effects include                   
              increases in sympathetic activity, changes in neurotransmitter                 
              levels, and increased activity of the pituitary-adrenal system, a              
              neuroendocrine system associated with stress.  For many years, it              
              was only possible to study such questions in primates since                    
              common laboratory rodents have been thought to respond to                      
              separation in a fundamentally different way than to primates, and              
              possibly humans.  In his previous NSF support, Dr. Hennessy                    
              demonstrated that the responses of young guinea pigs to maternal               
              separation are in many ways similar to those of primates.  The                 
              guinea pig model provides an alternative to primate research                   
              which, in turn, offers many practical advantages.  Dr. Hennessy                
              would continue his research to further our understanding of how                
              brief periods of maternal separations alter neuroendocrine and                 
              behavioral function.  He will examine the role of corticotropin-               
              releasing factor (CRF) since this hypothalamic neurohormone is of              
              primary importance in the body's diverse physiological and                     
              behavioral responses in threatening situations.  Dr. Hennessy                  
              will investigate the role of centrally and peripherally                        
              administered corticotropin-releasing factor and its antagonists                
              in mediating stress-induced behavioral changes.  These basic                   
              studies will contribute to our understanding of the consequences               
              of mother-infant separation and processes of attachment and                    
              elucidate the nature of the stress response in young.
