Title       : A Comprehensive Study of Direct Photon Production in Hadron Induced Collisions,
               U.S.-India Cooperative Research, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1996 
File        : a9222423

Award Number: 9222423
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1027462            (Estimated)
Investigator: R.K. Shivpuri   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delhi
	      
	      New Delhi, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This project supports Dr. R. Shivpuri of                         
              the Physics Department at the University of Delhi, and                         
              a number of his graduate students, for collaborative                           
              research with a team of U.S. scientists working at                             
              Fermi Laboratory.  The U.S. team includes Dr. John                             
              Peoples at Fermi Lab. and Dr. Paul Slattery at the                             
              Universsity of Rochester.  The Indian scientists and                           
              graduate students will participate in a multi-institution                      
              experiment at Fermi Laboratory.   The experiment                               
              E706 is designed to study interactions of protons, pions                       
              and kaons in a variety of targets, triggering on high                          
              transverse momentum (>5 GeV/C) electromagnetic                                 
              showers.  It is a second generation fixed target                               
              experiment using high energy beams (800 GeV protons                            
              from Fermilab Tevatron) and with a wide acceptance                             
              spectrometer, it is intended to reach approximately 10                         
              GeV/C.  A goal of the experiment is to obtain                                  
              information on quark and gluon interactions in                                 
              collisions of positive pions, negative pions and protons                       
              with nucleons.  The Indian scientists participation                            
              includes building detectors, data acquisition and data                         
              analysis.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This is a renewal of work currently under the                          
              leadership of Dr. Peoples at Fermilab, Dr. P. Slattery                         
              of the University of Rochester, and of Dr. R. Shivpuri                         
              of the University of Delhi.  The collaboration is                              
              considered quite successful, and a number of joint                             
              publications have resulted.  The project fits the U.S.-                        
              India Cooperative Science Program objectives.
