Title       : The Rejection of Continental Drift
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1994      
File        : a9222597

Award Number: 9222597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72577              (Estimated)
Investigator: Naomi Oreskes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              How science develops is a major subject of investigation for                   
              science and technology studies both because of its intrinsic                   
              interest and because of its obvious policy relevance.  A major                 
              aspect of studying scientific development is understanding not only            
              why a scientific theory is accepted but also why scientists resist             
              accepting a theory.  Dr. Oreskes study of American scientists'                 
              resistance to the theory of continental drift promises greatly to              
              enrich our understanding of factors blocking acceptance of a                   
              scientific theory.                                                             
                                                                                             
              In the early 20th century, American earth scientists vociferously              
              opposed the notion of continental mobility.  Yet less than 50 years            
              later, the same idea was hearlded as a major conceptual                        
              breakthough, and today continental mobility is considered a                    
              scientific "fact."  Dr. Oreskes is studying why American geologists            
              adamently rejected an idea that is now considered true.  Why did               
              they react so much more negatively than their British or European              
              counterparts?                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The standard explanation given for the rejection of continental                
              drift before 1960 was that there was no mechanism to explain how               
              enormous blocks of land could slide over the surface of the globe.             
              Dr. Oreskes rejects this explanation.  She has found that                      
              continental drift was rejected in spite of the availability of                 
              several explanations of continental mobility--including the                    
              explanation generally accepted today--and suggests instead that                
              drift was rejected because the implications of the theory were                 
              perceived as a challenge to underlying methodological principles               
              and standards of practice in American earth science.  Dr. Oreskes              
              is attempting to place this drift debate within the context of                 
              existing American geological research traditions, and to relate                
              attitudes about theory to patterns of scientific practice in                   
              American geology.  This work will thus contribute to an                        
              understanding of the relationshsip between scientific theory and               
              practices, the cultural origins of those practices, and suggest                
              some philosophical issues that may arise when standards of practice            
              change.
