Title       : Dissertation Research: Therapeutic Practice and Cultural Conflict:
               "Non-Compliance" in the Treatment of Anorexia Nervosa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1993      
File        : a9222748

Award Number: 9222748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond B. Hames                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen Gremillion  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The researchers will investigate the social and cultural                       
              reasons why anorexia nervosa is difficult to cure through an                   
              ethnographic study of "non-compliance" on the part of                          
              anorexic patients in the United States.  Anorexics often                       
              resist treatment, and the purpose of this project is to                        
              determine if this resistance is related to the fact that                       
              anorexia exaggerates a contemporary ideal of feminine                          
              "fitness" and bodily control.  Many young women today try to                   
              attain autonomy and self-control through dieting and                           
              exercise, in the face of pressures to relax and consume.                       
              Anorexics carry the dieter's dilemma to an extreme in their                    
              experience of a control paradox; the more anorexics are able                   
              to control their bodies, the more their bodies seem to                         
              control them with demands for food and relaxation.  The                        
              central hypothesis for this project is that anorexics do not                   
              comply with psychiatric protocols because these treatment                      
              practices participate in the cultural production of the                        
              anorexics' predicament, by recreating her fundamental                          
              anxiety about whether or not she can control herself.  The                     
              doctoral researcher will investigate this problem through                      
              interviews with patients and clinicians, case studies of                       
              individual anorexics' life histories, and observations of                      
              the interaction between anorexics and clinicians in eating                     
              disorder clinics.  If the researchers' central thesis holds                    
              up to evaluation, this project will demonstrate the close                      
              relation between clinical practice and cultural                                
              constructions of the ideals of feminine control and should                     
              aid clinicians in devising better ways in which to treat                       
              anorexics.
