Title       : Lexical Acculturation in Native American Languages: Phase 2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1993     
File        : a9222311

Award Number: 9222311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond B. Hames                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cecil H. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this project is to identify and explain                            
              cross-language patterns in ways Native American languages                      
              have named new objects or concepts encountered in contact                      
              situations with Europeans.  This will be achieved by                           
              surveying words for 77 items of Occidental culture (e.g.,                      
              hen, horse, paper, rice, and soap) in vocabularies of 600 to                   
              700 American Indian languages and dialects.  Such words are                    
              either loanwords (e.g., from Portuguese into Brazilian                         
              Indian languages) or terms manufactured from native                            
              vocabulary (e.g., "little maggots" for rice in many North                      
              American Indian languages).  Preliminary research suggests,                    
              for example, that languages that are heavy adopters of                         
              European loans for these items have histories involving                        
              significant bilingualism of speakers, while languages that                     
              show considerable use of native terms for such items do not                    
              have such histories.  Another preliminary finding is that                      
              some items of acculturation, such as the hen, tend strongly                    
              to be labeled by native terms across languages, while other                    
              items, such as the horse, tend to be labeled by loanwords.                     
              This finding indicates that words for items such as horse                      
              may have been used in interactions with donors in the past                     
              to a greater extent than have words for items such as hen.                     
              Eludications and explanation of these and other findings                       
              will contribute to several areas of anthropological interest                   
              including sociolinguistics, ethnobiology, language                             
              universals, language and culture change, areal phenomena,                      
              and social histories of individual Native American groups.
