Title       : Metabolic and Feeding Strategies For Coping with Food Scarcity and Cold
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1995        
File        : a9222369

Award Number: 9222369
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188703             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Rashotte Rashotte@FSU1.CC.FSU.edu                Rashotte@psy.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9222369  Rashotte    To survive in vastly different environmental conditions,
              such as  occur across the seasons of a year, animals and humans must have  good
              strategies for keeping their energy expenditure in balance  with energy intake.
               Endothermic (warm-blooded) animals,  including humans, face the most serious
              problem because of the  need to maintain high body temperature and metabolic
              rate.  This  project will use advanced experimental methods to study in 
              greater detail than has previously been possible the ways a very  widely
              distributed and, in survival terms, highly successful  endothermic animal (the
              pigeon) manages to cope with the range of  environmental conditions in which it
              is found.  By using unique  computerized environments, this project will vary
              the ambient  temperature, the difficulty associated with finding food, and the 
              length of the daily light-dark cycle in ways that simulate some  natural
              conditions for these animals.  The experimental situation  in which they live
              is highly instrumented to record their use of  strategies for achieving energy
              balance through changing their  feeding behavior, body temperature, metabolic
              rate, and overall  daily activity level.  In some cases, the environmental 
              conditions are specifically designed to elucidate factors that  influence which
              of these strategies are brought into play when  the environment changes.  This
              project is unique in providing new  information about the changing interplay of
              these strategies  across the animal's normal daily cycle of activity and 
              inactivity, and in providing such data from animals which are  free to adopt
              varied combinations of these strategies over the  long term as they become
              acclimated to new environmental  conditions.    The outcome of this research is
              likely to deepen our knowledge of  the survival strategies used by endothermic
              animals to cope  successfully with varied environmental conditions.  With the
              new  and detailed information in hand which this project promises to  provided,
              it shoul d be possible to encourage new lines of future  research on specific
              brain and hormonal bases for these  strategies.  A thorough understanding of
              the relationship between  changes in environmental conditions and the
              appearance  of  certain survival-related strategies involving feeding, 
              metabolism, activity, and energy balance will contribute to basic  knowledge in
              the life sciences and may ultimately have relevance  for problems as diverse as
              the proper management of animal  habitats and seasonally related human
              disorders involving  metabolism and feeding.
