Title       : Equilibrium and Non-Equilibrium Behavior of Low Dimensional Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9222812

Award Number: 9222812
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Kosterlitz mikekost@het.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9256,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical research will be conducted in two areas: phase                     
              transitions and noneqilibrium interfaces.  A new method of                     
              analyzing simulation data will be used, including finite size                  
              scaling of distributions of energy and order parameter.  This can              
              detect weakly first order transitions and accurately estimate                  
              exponents.  Extensions to systems with continuous symmetries,                  
              frustrated junction arrays and random systems will be made.  Two-              
              dimensional XY-like transitions will be studied to see if                      
              unambiguous numerical detection is feasible.                                   
                                                                                             
              Two aspects of driven interfaces will be studied by analytical and             
              numerical methods.  The first study is of the rough-smooth                     
              transition in dimensions greater than three and molecular beam                 
              epitaxy growth focussing on effects of initial conditions and the              
              connections between logarithmic and algebraic roughness in vicinal             
              surfaces.  The second study is of directional solidification and               
              eutectic growth driven by a moving temperature gradient by full                
              phase, rather than interface, models.  Successful simulations in               
              one- and two-dimension interfaces have been done.  Extensions to               
              allow for thermal and external noise, a study of interface                     
              instabilities, and comparison to experiments will be made.                     
              Generalizations to include convective effects and to interpolations            
              between one- and two-sided models will be made.                                
              %%%                                                                            
              The theoretical research focuses on two areas of broad interest and            
              importance in condensed matter physics and materials science.                  
              Sophisticated numerical techniques developed by the principal                  
              investigator will be exploited to determine the nature of the phase            
              transition in a variety of complex systems.  The results will have             
              profound impact on the study of phase transitions and critical                 
              phenomena.  In addition, the results will provide a better                     
              understanding of the real materials systems involved.  A second                
              area of study will be the growth of interfaces.  This area is one              
              of fascinating fundamental interest, yet also has important                    
              ramifications for materials processing through crystal growth and              
              thin film growth.
