Title       : Cell Culture Models of the Regulation of Corticotropin- Releasing Factor Release
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9222263

Award Number: 9222263
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale L. Birkle   (Principal Investigator current)
              Adrienne Salm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Albert J. Azzaro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9222263  Birkle         Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), a 41-amino acid 
              neuropeptide, plays a central role in the physiological response  to stress and
              anxiety.  Behavioral studies have demonstrated that  injection of this
              neuropeptide into the brain mimics anxiety-like  and stress-like reactions
              possibly by its activation of the  hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.  Indeed
              under certain  conditions, CRF is released into the portal system from neurons 
              in the hypothalamus, stimulates the pituitary to secrete  adrenocorticotropic
              hormone (ACTH) which then acts on the adrenal  to release glucocorticoids. 
              Recently, CRF-secreting neurons have  been shown to be not only located in the
              hypothalamic area but  also in limbic structures, including the amygdala.  This
              is  exciting since the amygdala is considered to be the seat of  emotional
              responses like fear and rage.  Dr. Birkle will examine  the regulation of the
              release of CRF from neurons in the  amygdala.  She will use neurons from this
              brain region that are   isolated from developing tissue and grown in culture. 
              This  technique offers the advantage of creating a pure population of  nerve
              cells in an easily manipulated environment.  Dr. Birkle  will first identify
              neurons that contain CRF receptors and then  determine what type of
              neurotransmitter are also located in these  cells.  She will use then determine
              the effects of exposure to  these neurochemical mediators and their antagonists
              on the  release of CRF.  The results will provide new insights about the 
              regulation of CRF in extrahypothalamic sites.  Since CRF plays a  pivotal role
              in the expression of anxiety and autonomic responses  to stressful events, the
              results will provide a better  understanding about how the brain, as a whole,
              integrates the  multicomponent response to stress and anxiety.  Moreover, this 
              work will increase our knowledge of the neurochemical processes  that lead to
              the experience of anxiety and will provide direction  for the development of
              better preventi on and therapy for this  disorder.  ***
