Title       : U.S.-Hungary Physics Research on N-Body Scattering Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1993      
File        : a9222354

Award Number: 9222354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31563              (Estimated)
Investigator: Colston Chandler chandler@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Archie G. Gibson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5916,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Hungary research project on "N-Body                                    
              Scattering Theory" is between Drs. Colston                                     
              Chandler and Archie G. Gibson of the University                                
              of New Mexico and Dr. Gyula Bencze of the                                      
              Research Institute for Nuclear & Particle                                      
              Physics, Hungarian Academy of Sciences.  The                                   
              researchers will continue examination of the                                   
              Coulomb interaction, a difficult, few-body                                     
              problem in theoretical physics for which no                                    
              practical, mathematically rigorous theory exists.                              
              Work will emphasize code development to evaluate                               
              scattering amplitudes numerically for proton-                                  
              deuteron scattering, treating the Coulomb                                      
              interaction exactly.  The researchers will pursue                              
              work on a scattering theory to more accurately                                 
              account for electron correlations in atomic                                    
              breakup reactions.  Finally, they will study the                               
              Coulomb reaction for three particles interacting                               
              with repulsive Coulomb interactions to determine                               
              how to incorporate into the scattering theory a                                
              practical distorted wave approximation for                                     
              breakup wave functions.  The inclusion of breakup                              
              channels in scattering calculations is a topic of                              
              considerable interest at present in both atomic                                
              and nuclear physics.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The researchers also intend to continue their                                  
              theoretical and numerical work on breakup                                      
              amplitudes in the context of the Chandler-Gibson                               
              equations.  The specific problem to be addressed                               
              is a simplified model for neutron-deuteron                                     
              scattering, though the techniques should be                                    
              applicable to more general problems.  Study will                               
              also be initiated to develop a practical N-body                                
              distorted wave approximation for three-cluster                                 
              breakup wave functions.  Success in any of the                                 
              proposed studies would have considerable                                       
              practical application in atomic or nuclear                                     
              physics, or both.                                                              
                                                                                             
              This project in theoretical physics fulfills the                               
              program objective of advancing scientific                                      
              knowledge by enabling leading experts in Hungary                               
              and the United States to combine complementary                                 
              talents and pool resources in areas of strong                                  
              mutual interest and competence.
