Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Moving Mountains: Technology and the Environment
               in Western Copper Mining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1993     
File        : a9222788

Award Number: 9222788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. LeCain  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Mr. Timothy LeCain, under the direction of Drs. David Hounshell and            
              Reed Geiger, is probing the complex relationships among society,               
              technology and the environment.  The dangers of environmental                  
              degradation have become all too apparent in recent years.  Yet for             
              a society that is highly industrialized and reliant on advanced                
              technology, the precise role of technological change in                        
              environmental destruction is poorly understood.                                
                                                                                             
              At the turn of the century, copper mining in the western United                
              States entered a new era of corporate domination.  Large                       
              corporations like Anaconda Company and Kennecott used an array of              
              new technologies to dig immense amounts of ore from the earth and              
              process it.  Mr. LeCain raises these questions:  What were the                 
              environmental consequences of this copper mining?  How was it                  
              changed by the evolution of mining technology and management?  Was             
              technology a causal factor of the change or simply a tool?  How did            
              technology relate tot he wider process of rationalizing the human              
              and natural world during the 20th century?  What role did the                  
              methods and beliefs of engineers and scientists play in the                    
              development of mining and how were these experts trained?  What was            
              the source of technological innovation of mining machinery and how             
              important were machinery manufacturers in this process?                        
                                                                                             
              In order to address these questions, Mr. LeCain is examining                   
              archives in the West (Colorado, Montana, Utah, California and                  
              Arizona) as well as university and government archives in the East.            
              This study promises a significant contribution to debates within               
              the history of technology, environmental history, western history,             
              and business history.
