Title       : Research In Econometric Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1995        
File        : a9222728

Award Number: 9222728
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173719             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Schmidt schmidtp@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9216,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal focus of this project is panel data,i.e., data                   
              which contain repeated observations over time for each                         
              individual.  Panel data are increasingly the data of choice for                
              empirical economic research in labor and industrial organization               
              because the data capture both changes over time and cross-                     
              sectional relationships at a given point of time.  Existing                    
              statistical tools do not permit economists to utilize all of the               
              rich informational detail provided by panel data.   This project               
              provides applied economists with statistical tools that will do                
              as better job in exploiting the information in panel data.  The                
              research project also extends methods for estimating changes of                
              industry technological inefficiency and it improves forecasting                
              methods for rational expectations models.                                      
                                                                                             
              More specifically, the research on panel data has three                        
              components.  First, the project considers the dynamic panel data               
              model, in which one of the explanatory variables is the lagged                 
              value of the dependent variable.  Existing estimators for this                 
              model are inefficient, because they fail to utilize all of the                 
              available moment conditions, and the efficiency gains from using               
              all moment conditions are quantified.  Second, various panel data              
              models with autocorrelated errors are considered.  Once again it               
              is possible to find efficient estimators that make use of all                  
              available moment conditions, and the interesting question is to                
              find equally efficient estimators that use less conditions; that               
              is, to find out which conditions are superfluous.  Third, the                  
              project investigates a model with interactive individual and time              
              effects.  A connection is made between generalized method of                   
              moments and likelihood-based approaches to this model, and the                 
              model is extended to the case of more than one interactive                     
              component.   In addition, the project extends the literature on                
              frontier production functions in ways that allow a flexible                    
              pattern of technical inefficiency over time.  The project                      
              investigates the possible efficiency gains in estimation of                    
              rational expectations models from the use of observable forecast               
              errors.
