Title       : RUI: Hormonal Influences on Behavioral Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1993      
File        : a9222763

Award Number: 9222763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86413              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel N. Levin rLevin@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexader Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    714/621-8131

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,
Abstract    :
              9222763  Levin      The purpose of this project is to investigate the origin of
              sex  differences in social behavior by examining bird song.  Bird  studies have
              focused on species in which only males sing, have  identified specific areas in
              male brains that control song  behavior, and have shown that these areas are
              turned on and off  by testosterone.  Non-singing females of these species don't
              have  these well-developed brain regions and lack significant levels of 
              testosterone in their blood.  Dr. Levin will expand this  understanding of the
              origin of sex differences in behavior by  looking at a tropical species in
              which both sexes sing, in which  sex differences are maintained in songs.  She
              plans to raise  young birds hearing only one male song, only female song, the 
              song of both sexes, or no song.  Examining what these birds learn  to sing and
              how their hormone levels change during song learning  will help reveal the
              roles played by hormones and social role  models in the development of sex
              differences in song.  She will  test any suggested role of hormones in song
              development by  examining song development in surgically castrated birds.     
              While the issue of the origin of sex differences in behavior,  particularly in
              humans, is a topic of much interest, it is  difficult to address in a rigorous,
              systematic fashion.  Studies  of bird species offer a unique opportunity to do
              so because the  avian nervous system is so amenable to study and because of the
               vast array of species differences in the relative roles played by  males and
              females, population differences in sex-species  behaviors within one species,
              and individual differences within a  population that can be found among birds. 
              Avian systems have  been successfully used to generate and test proposed models
              in  other areas of interest, such as the inter-relationships of  hormones,
              aggression, and social environment, and the results of  these studies have
              proven to be remarkably parallel to those from  studies of primates and other
              ve rtebrates.  Thus, it seems likely  that simply by prudently choosing
              appropriate species, we can  exploit avian systems to reveal the mechanisms
              that might be  associated with the process of sexual differentiation in the 
              behavior of vertebrates.
