Title       : Specific Complexation of Metal Oxo Cations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1993  
File        : a9222330

Award Number: 9222330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth N. Raymond raymond@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award provides continuing support for the study of                        
              selective binding of oxo metal cations by Dr. Kenneth N.                       
              Raymond of the Department of Chemistry, University of                          
              California, Berkeley.  Shape selective ligands for cations such                
              as osmyl and vanadyl will be developed.  These ligands will be                 
              designed to stabilize the high oxidation state metal center                    
              through normal coordinate binding, while at the same time                      
              incorporating hydrogen bond donors for interaction with the oxo                
              cation.  Preliminary results show that the hydrogen bonding                    
              interaction can be significant if carefully oriented, rigid                    
              ligands can be developed.  Ligands to be investigated include                  
              aminocarboxylates, catechol amides, catechol phenols and                       
              amidates.  The resulting compounds will be characterized by                    
              crystal structure analysis, vibrational spectroscopy,                          
              electrochemistry, and solution thermodynamics studies.  Both                   
              the specificity and complexing ability of the ligands will be                  
              tested.                                                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              The goal of this project is to develop effective and selective                 
              agents for scavenging metal oxo cations.  A new approach                       
              involving the positioning of hydrogen atoms on the complexing                  
              agent in such a way as to bind to the oxo group associated with                
              the metal will be tried.  The research has implications for                    
              separation methodology, including that for members of the                      
              lanthanide and actinide families which are found in radioactive                
              waste.
