Title       : Suprachiasmatic Control of Neuroendocrine Rhythms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1996     
File        : a9319653

Award Number: 9319653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric L. Bittman elb@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9198,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9319653  Bittman    All Multicellular organisms possess an internal clock that
              insures  daily rhythmicity of multiple physiological function even in an 
              aperiodic environment.  In higher vertebrates, these endogenous  daily or
              circadian rhythms are driven by the suprachiasmatic  nucleus of the
              hypothalamus.  This endogenous oscillator insures  that incompatible processes
              occur at different times, and that  metabolic, thermoregulatory,
              osmoregulatory, immune and  reproductive functions and arousal are properly
              scheduled to meet  environmental challenges.  Dr. Bittman will elucidate the
              role of  this central pacemaker in the timing of ovulation.  Ovulation is 
              triggered by a surge of pituitary luteinizing hormone which results  from the
              discharge in tot he hypothalamic-hypophyseal portal system  of gonadotropin
              releasing hormone, a decapeptide synthesized in  cells of the diagonal band,
              medial septum, preoptic area and  anterior hypothalamus.  This release of
              gonadotropin-releasing  hormone is ultimately regulated by estrogen.  Dr.
              Bittman will  examine the function of specific cell types within the 
              suprachiasmatic nucleus in the regulation of the estrous cycle by  determining
              whether these neurons project directly to cells  elsewhere in the brain which
              in turn control the pituitary gland.   Using state-of-the-art neuroanatomical
              techniques, Dr. Bittman will  then determine whether these neurons that receive
              input from this  hypothalamic nucleus contain estrogen receptor or gonadotropin
               releasing hormone.  In addition, he will establish whether the  signals from
              the suprachiasmatic nucleus at specific times of day  underly the appropriate
              timing of ovulation.  The results from  these studies will help delineate the
              circadian regulation of  neuroendocrine cells which govern integrative
              processes.  This  research will provide basic information critical not only to 
              understanding how environmental factors impinge upon the nervous  system but
              may provide the fundamental groundwork towards  developme nt of therapeutic
              approaches to fertility and may have  applications to contraception.  ***
