Title       : Congruence in Codeswitching and the Nature of Lexical Entries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1996   
File        : a9319780

Award Number: 9319780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216653             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol Myers-Scotton carolms@vm.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janice L. Jake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319780  MYERS-SCOTTON                                ABSTRACT    This a project
              to investigate the structural constraints on  intrasentential codeswitching.
              Specifically, the investigators  will collect and analyze intrasentential
              codeswitching in  naturally-occurring languages in particular language pairs,
              some  in the United States and others in Africa or Europe. The language  pairs
              have been selected because apparent differences in the  structure of their
              lexical items will test the hypotheses  contained herein. While this study will
              further our knowledge  about intrasentential codeswitching, it is more
              important for the  information it will provide about the nature of lexical
              entries  in some universal sense.       This information becomes available from
              codeswitching data  because the existence of sentences containing codeswitching
              seems  to depend on compatibilities between the languages involved  regarding
              Lexical-Conceptual Structures and Predicate-Argument  Structures. The playing
              out of these compatibilities in  codeswitching, in turn, provides a uniquely
              available 'empirical  window' on the viability of key theoretical claims about
              the  structure of language.       The proposal's eight hypotheses extend the
              analysis found in  the Matrix Language Frame Model of codeswitching
              (Myers-Scotton  1993b). Under this model, one of the languages participating in
               codeswitching is more dominant (the Matrix Language) in  structuring
              codeswitching utterances. The less dominant language  is called the Embedded
              Language. The distinction between content  and functional categories is also
              critical in this model. While  that model successfully predicts the form of
              Embedded Language  material in sentential frames prepared by the Matrix
              Language, it  is not sufficiently constrained to explain why one option rather 
              than another occurs and the form which Embedded Language material  takes. The
              hypotheses in this proposal provide necessary  constraints.       This research
              will provide evidence for or agai nst theories  about the nature of the
              abstract features of lexical entries,  including semantic content, and their
              relation to actually  occurring forms. In addition, the results may provide
              motivations  for language production modeling in psycholinguistics, especially 
              in regard to the nature of lemma entries in the mental lexicon.  Finally, the
              project has a material objective. It will provide a  large-scale computerized
              data base of diverse codeswitching data.  It is expected that collecting
              preliminary analysis, data base  entry, formal analysis, and a presentation of
              the results of this  study will require three years.  ***
