Title       : Neurohypopysial Peptides and Cognate Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1994      
File        : a9319525

Award Number: 9319525
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karen Sigvardt                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas I. Koike   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence E. Cornett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Med Science
	      4301 West Markham
	      Little Rock, AR  722057101    501/661-5454

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9319525  Koike    Neuropeptides act as chemical messengers in the brain and play
               vital roles in the physiology and behavior of a variety of species.  Hormones
              of the vasopressin/oxtyocin superfamily has been shown to  exist in may life
              forms including, molluscs, hydra and protozoan  suggesting that gene
              duplication occurred in ancestors common to   invertebrates and vertebrates. 
              In vertebrates, including mammals,  these hormones play a crucial role in
              reproduction, osmoregulation  and cardiovascular function.  Dr. Koike is
              interested in arginine  vasotocin (AVT) and mesotocin, two members of this
              peptidergic  system, that are found in domestic fowls.  He has adopted the most
               sophisticated technology to examine the sites and regulation of the 
              physiological expression of vasotocin in the brain and periphery.   Dr. Koike
              will clone the receptor for this peptide and then examine  the regulation of
              the AVT gene expression.  He will influence the  domestic fowl's physiology by
              a number of mechanisms including  varying the availability of water injecting
              gonadal hormones, and  determine how these changes affect the expression of the
              genes  for AVT and its receptor.  These studies will lead to a better 
              understanding of the physiological roles of this family of hormones  as
              neurotransmitters, as players in the reproductive systems and as  regulators of
              cardiovascular function.  Moreover, the findings will  allow comparisons of the
              genes for AVT and its receptor in domestic  fowl with homologous genes of other
              vertebrate classes and thus,  will provide basic knowledge on the manner in
              which members of this  hormone family and their functions have evolved. 
              Finally,  understanding the normal physiology of an economically and 
              nutritionally important species will impact on the poultry industry  which
              provides high quality protein at economical prices.  ***
