Title       : The Effects of Heat Release on the Flow Structure of Planar Hydrogen Diffusion
               Flames
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1995   
File        : a9319136

Award Number: 9319136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243747             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel T. Clemens clemens@cfdlab.ae.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9135,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT -- CTS-9319136  CLEMENS    The role of heat release on the structure of
              turbulence and the mixing process has not been fully established.  The
              understanding of this phenomenon is very important to our capability of dealing
              with turbulent reacting flows.  This proposal presents a research plan, that if
              successful, will contribute important knowledge to the field of turbulent
              combustion by experimentally determining  heat release effects, measured on
              non-premixed Hydrogen/Air flames using a planar slot burner.  The objective of
              the proposed work is to document the influence of high levels of heat release
              under mixing limited conditions, on the large-scale turbulent structure of
              planar jet flames.    The proposed effort is an extension of work done at
              Sandia while the PI was a post doctoral fellow.  In this study, the near field
              structure of Hydrogen/Air round jet flames was investigated.  Laser Induced
              Fluorescence (LIF) was used to visualize the reaction zone by excitation of OH
              and the fuel was marked by excitation of seeded acetone.  Considerable
              modification of the flow field in the reacting case was observed as compared to
              the non-reacting case; turbulence appeared to be significantly laminarized and
              the growth rate of the mixing layer greatly reduced; the hot reaction zone
              appeared to stabilize the local turbulent fluctuations, resulting in an
              independence of the reacting and turbulent regions. In order to simplify the
              interpretation of these experiments, the PI has proposed a series of
              experiments in which  a simpler geometry shear flow (provided by a planar
              mixing layer) will be used to hopefully yield clearer evidence for the
              modifications to the flow by high levels of heat release.  A planar jet nozzle
              flow facility together with flow visualization techniques including OH and
              acetone PLIF and planar Mie scattering of seeded ceramic particles will be used
              in this proposed investigation.  Comparisons of cold and hot flows will be
              made.  A major goal of the study will be to compare  the large-scale structure
              of burning jets to the structure of their non-burning counterparts.  This
              research effort could lead to important contributions in the understanding of
              turbulent reacting flows.
