Title       : Randomization and Derandomization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9319106

Award Number: 9319106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162653             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard J. Karloff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This project studies randomized algorithms and  derandomization techniques;
              specifically, randomized  algorithms for on-line  problems, randomized
              algorithms for  graph connectivity questions, techniques  for ``derandomizing''
               (making deterministic) algorithms for on-line and  connectivity problems, and
              general techniques for  derandomizing large classes  of randomized algorithms. 
                An on-line problem is one in which the input is  revealed to  the algorithm
              only one piece at a time, and the algorithm is  required to respond without
              knowledge of the future.  An  example is the problem  of paging in a computer
              system:  the  operating system does not know which pages  will be requested  in
              the future, and therefore does not know which pages put  in fast memory and
              which to leave in slow memory.  Recent  research has shown  that randomized
              algorithms can be  dramatically better than deterministic  algorithms for some 
              on-line motion planning, scheduling, and graph coloring.  The (edge)
              connectivity of a connected graph is the minimum  number of edges one has to
              remove to disconnect the graph.  Determining the  connectivity of a graph is an
              important  problem in the area of network  reliability.  Recent advances  have
              provided the key to faster algorithms to  determine the  edge connectivity of a
              graph.  But the new algorithms are  not  likely to be the fastest possible
              algorithms.  This research   builds faster connectivity algorithms,  randomized
              if necessary, deterministic if  possible.    Much research over the past few
              years has dealt with  derandomizing  randomized algorithms.  This work
              continues this effort in the hope of  derandomizing  algorithms for certain
              on-line and connectivity problems,  and  also providing new general techniques
              for  derandomizing randomized algorithms.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
