Title       : Detecting Deception: Sex Differences, Social Motives, and Untapped Knowledge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9319556

Award Number: 9319556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bella M. DePaulo bmd@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9319556  De Paulo                                ABSTRACT       Several new
              motivational and cognitive explanations for  people's inaccuracy at detecting
              deception are described, and  tests of those explanations are proposed.  A
              basic assumption  guiding the research is that people are better at detecting 
              deception than previous research suggests, and an accommodation  motive is
              proposed to explain the less than optimal rates of  detection. Specifically, it
              is hypothesized that people (women  especially) read other people in the ways
              they think those people  want to be read.  The research includes laboratory and
              field  studies that investigate whether accommodation really is the  relevant
              motive; whether in reading others as they want to be  read, people might be
              pleasing themselves as well as others, and  whether people might be actively
              avoiding information that could  help them determine when others are lying. 
              These studies include  manipulations of interpersonal contexts which may
              moderate  accommodation, including the threat of being exploited,  subordinate
              power positions, and the possibility of negative  evaluations of self.  The
              nature of the perceivers' personal  relationships with others is also examined
              as a predictor of  sensitivity to deceit.  It is also hypothesized that
              people's  success at detecting deception can be improved by feedback about  the
              accuracy of their deceptiveness judgments and by  manipulations that are
              motivationally rich but informationally  vacuous. The research is important
              because it offers (a) a new  answer to the question of why people are sometimes
              so inept at  detecting deception, and (b) new promise for improving lie 
              detection skill.  The traditional answer to the question of why  people are
              unskilled lie detectors is that they do not know which  cues to look for.  This
              may in fact be part of the answer.  But  another important part may be that
              people are sometimes motivated  to overlook deception rather than detect it. 
              This research will  determine  whether detection accuracy improves when people
              are  appropriately motivated to detect deception.  It will also  determine
              whether people have implicit knowledge about deception  that they ordinarily do
              not even realize they have.  The studies  investigating procedures for helping
              people to make use of their  implicit knowledge hold promise for developing
              cost-efficient and  time-efficient methods of improving people's lie-detection 
              skills.  ***
