Title       : Condition Assessment and Capacity Evaluation of Historic Steel Bridge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9319878

Award Number: 9319878
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ashland O. Brown                        
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmet E. Aktan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kuo-Liang Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Relva C. Buchanan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Narayanan Jayaraman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0317000   Urban Technology                        
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1038,1442,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                  9402392  Aktan  PIs obtained permission from the City of Cincinnati to
              install an  active vibration control system under the ballroom floor of the 
              Cincinnati Convention Center.  Highly perceptible floor vibration  has occurred
              during large dance events, causing concern to ballroom  patrons.      The
              control system which will feature several electromagnetic  actuators, several
              dozens of different types of sensor and a  modular open hardware system will
              remain installed over a  sufficiently long time period in order to permit other
              researchers  in the national program to participate in many of the basic, 
              system-integration and experimental demonstration aspects.      The research
              will make use of the multiple sensor/actuator  availability for developing an
              validating failure detection and  accommodation algorithms which will have the
              capability to detect  any hardware/software failures.  The algorithms will be
              based on  the adaptive modal filter concept which was used successfully for 
              the active-control of the highway bridge.  Also to be explored is  the
              development of a secondary capability of the control system to  continuously
              monitor itself for accommodating the deliberate or  random changes which will
              occur in the structural characteristics.   Such a continuous monitoring of the
              facility characteristics will  permit to uncouple the changes in the structural
              dynamic properties  due to occupation/owner intervention from large
              fluctuations caused  by ambient condition changes.  As importantly, a realistic
              multi-  output installation is expected to reveal as-yet-undiscovered 
              phenomena such as those related to inter-component interactions.   Such issues
              will have to be identified and addressed in order to  bring this technology
              forward to widespread industry acceptance.
