Title       : A Formal Model of Visual Feature Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1996  
File        : a9319103

Award Number: 9319103
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199706             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Ivry ivry@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur P. Shimamura  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319103  IVRY    Theories of object recognition in psychology, physiology, and
              even computer science have concerned themselves with feature analysis, where
              features may be line segments, colors, spatial frequencies, etc.  According to
              these theories, recognizing an object involves detecting the features of that
              object.  For example, the features round, shiny, and red might signal an apple.
               Recently, however, Treisman and her colleagues have pointed out that correct
              feature registration is not sufficient for veridical object recognition.  When
              many different objects are present, as they are in most natural scenes,
              observers must not only correctly register the features, but also correctly
              bind the features into separate objects.  Treisman and other have shown that
              under conditions of a brief exposure, observers will report "illusory
              conjunctions," or precepts in which they correctly identify the visual
              features, but combine them incorrectly.  For example, an individual briefly
              presented a red X and a green O would perceive the X as green in some
              laboratory conditions on up to 30% of the trials.    In most circumstances, our
              visual systems combine features of objects seemingly without error or effort,
              making the process of feature integration difficult to study.  By studying
              errors in this feature binding process under laboratory conditions (i.e.,
              illusory conjunctions), we can test different theories of feature integration. 
              Unfortunately, the study of feature binding has been hampered for three
              reasons.  First, most theories have been specified in a vague or informal
              manner.  Second, theories have not been formulated in a format that allows a
              direct test between them.  Finally, there has been considerable disagreement on
              how to measure illusory conjunctions.  Many of the widely used methods of
              measuring feature binding from the occurrence of illusory conjunctions confound
              feature registration with feature binding.  Preliminary research has led to the
              development of a mathematical model that add resses the above three issues, as
              well as to the development of a new theory of feature binding, based on
              probabilistic multidimensional modeling and on the psychophysics of location
              perception.      The 15 experiments to be performed fall into four categories:
              (1) The formal theory will be tested by varying stimulus values (e.g., color of
              items) systematically and seeing how they affect parameters of the mathematical
              model, adjusting the model if necessary.  (2) Cognitive variables such as
              attention will be varied and the effect of these variables on feature
              integration estimated separately.  (3) Different theories of feature binding
              will be compared directly.  (4) The analytic method and formal analysis will be
              extended to new experimental paradigms, in order to make it as useful as
              possible to other investigators.    ***
