Title       : New Relevance for the New Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1996        
File        : a9319015

Award Number: 9319015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas R. Leinbach                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin D. Crowley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9319015  CROWLEY       The scientific discipline of geography plays a central
              role  in economic, political, and social life in the United States.  It  also
              has become a major focus of educational reform in the  nation, having been
              designated as one of five core subjects for  American schools in the National
              Education Goals adopted by the  President and state governors in 1990.  Several
              significant  challenges now face the discipline, however.  Among these 
              challenges are:    - connecting geography as a science with grassroots interest
              in  geographic literacy,    - strengthening the relationship between geographic
              scholarship  and geographic education,    - meeting the demand for geographic
              educators, focusing more  research by geographers on national and global
              issues,    - clarifying the role of geography as a discipline relative to  the
              many partly geographic multidisciplinary activities, and    - coping with the
              higher costs of scientific research in  geography.       With support from NSF
              and other organizations, the National  Academy of Sciences/National Research
              Council (NAS/NRC) will  convene a committee to conduct a comprehensive
              assessment of  geography in the U.S.  The objectives of the assessment are  (1)
              to identify critical issues and constraints for the  discipline, (2) to clarify
              priorities for teaching and research,  (3) to link developments in the
              discipline with national needs  for geographic education, (4) to increase the
              appreciation of  geography within the scientific community, and (5) to
              communicate  with the international scientific community about the future 
              directions of geography in the U.S.  Committee members will be  drawn from the
              academic, public, and private sectors.  The  committee will use briefings,
              fact-finding exercises, and  discussions to produce a report that will
              summarize its findings.  This report will be subject to NAS/NRC review
              procedures and will  be readily available to geographers and others.       This
              project will provide a valuable and timely  examination  of the prospects and
              problems facing geography.  Especially  beneficial will be recommendations
              regarding research priorities  and steps that can be taken to more closely link
              basic and  applied research in geography.  ***
