Title       : Phonetic Structures of Endangered Languages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1998       
File        : a9319705

Award Number: 9319705
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1019261            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter N. Ladefoged oldfogey@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian Maddieson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319705  Ladefoged                                 ABSTRACT         The survival
              of many languages is endangered as the speakers die  out or are absorbed into
              larger communities. Soon we will no longer  know what these languages sounded
              like, or what articulatory gestures  their speakers used. Their disappearance
              will result in permanent loss  of data for future linguistic investigations.
              Following a pattern  established during previous research we will investigate
              endangered  languages that are important from the linguistic point of view. 
              Another major aspect of this project is that it provides standardized 
              descriptions in quantified form using a set of basic phonetic  measures,
              designed to characterize both specific and universal  phonetic features.
              Fieldwork will be conducted in response to  invitations from linguists already
              working on appropriate languages.  In many cases such linguists lack sufficient
              phonetic expertise or  field experiences to do the job alone, but are eager to
              cooperate in  producing a good phonetic description.       The principal
              phonetic and phonological patterns will be  identified and illustrated in
              specially prepared material, along with  supplementary material illustrating
              coarticulatory and other phonetic  phenomena. We will make both audio and
              physiological recordings  including aerodynamic records for airstream
              mechanisms and the timing  of articulatory gestures, and palatographic records
              for articulatory  contacts. Audio recordings will be analyzed in the UCLA
              Phonetics  Laboratory. Fully illustrated and documented accounts of each
              language  will be published so that the knowledge of the sounds and
              articulatory  gestures involved in these endangered languages will remain
              available  for future researchers and can form part of the input to the 
              formulation of theories of phonetic and phonological universals.  ***
