Title       : Three Dimensional Modeling of Dynamical Interactions With Convective, Radiative,
               and Surface Fluxes Over the Tropical Pacific
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1994     
File        : a9319461

Award Number: 9319461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119851             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Seager rich@rosie.ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Zebiak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1324,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9319461  Seager, R.  Zebiak, Stephen E.  Columbia University 
              Title:    Three Dimensional Modeling of Dynamical Interactions with           
              Convective, Radiative and Surface Fluxes Over the            Tropical Pacific  
               This project will concern the interaction between the convective,  radiative
              and surface fluxes over the Pacific sector with an  emphasis on the west
              Pacific.  The PIs will use a newly developed,  efficient and accurate, global,
              linear primitive equation model  together with parameterizations of moist
              convection, radiative  transfer and boundary layer processes.  The ultimate
              goal of the  work is to improve model representation of these processes in
              order  to improve model simulations of the large scale variables  (especially
              near surface properties) necessary for continued  progress in simulation and
              prediction of climate variability on  time scales of months to decades. 
              Verification of model physics  will hence be based on observations of these
              processes within the  TOGA COARE domain and also on their effect on simulation
              of the  large scale circulation.  The PIs are especially interested in  being
              able to model the observed limited scale of convection and  convective
              anomalies, errors in which currently create large errors  in modelled surface
              winds.  This work will proceed through  experiments with observed SST forcing
              and through studies of the  role of the radiative, convection and surface
              fluxes in  determination of the character and organization of propagating 
              convective disturbances.  Another focus of the work will be on the  surface
              energy budget of the west Pacific.  The PIs will aim to  reconcile estimates of
              the flux, and its components, derived from  the atmospheric modeling work with
              other estimates derived from  ocean SST modeling and with the TOGA COARE data. 
              The various roles  of convection, radiation and boundary layer processes in 
              determining the surface flux will be analyzed.    This research is important
              because it seeks to clarify proces ses  important for understanding climate
              variability.  It is funded  under the TOGA COARE program.
