Title       : RUI: Evolution of Cholinesterase In Vivo and In Vitro
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1997  
File        : a9319354

Award Number: 9319354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111684             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leo Pezzementi lpezzeme@bsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Birmingham Southern Col
	      900 Arkadelphia Road
	      Birmingham, AL  35254    205/226-4600

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9319354  Pezzementi    Whenever one moves a muscle, the enzyme
              acetylcholinesterase insures that the muscle will relax by breaking down the
              neurotransmitter acetylcholine, which is released by the nervous system
              initiating the processes of muscle contraction.  Thus, acetylcholinesterase is
              required for all motor activity, including writing and speech.  In addition to
              acetylcholinesterase, humans possess another evolutionarily related enzyme,
              butyrylcholinesterase, with similar, but distinct, characteristics.  In
              contrast to acetylcholinesterase, the function of this enzyme is unknown.  In
              fact, there appear to be individuals who lack this enzyme entirely, yet appear
              normal.  It has been suggested that butyrylcholinesterase acts as a scavenger
              of ingested neurotoxins and that it plays a role in the embryological
              development of the nervous system.  Although humans and other higher
              vertebrates possess both cholinesterases, lower vertebrates appear to possess
              only one, acetylcholinesterase.  Invertebrates also possess only one
              cholinesterase; however, it is neither acetylcholinesterase, nor
              butyrylcholinesterase, but an enzyme with intermediate characteristics.  It has
              been stated that "nothing in biology makes sense, except in the light of
              evolution."  Thus, in an attempt to clarify the roles of the two
              cholinesterases in humans, in particular butyrylcholinesterase, Dr. Pezzementi
              is tracing the evolution of the two enzymes, using the techniques of
              biochemistry, pharmacology, and recombinant DNA technology to study the
              structure and function of cholinesterases in selected organisms, where the
              transition from a single intermediate cholinesterase to two distinct
              cholinesterases occurs.  Integration of this information with the biology of
              the organisms in question could provide further clues about the physiological
              functions of these enzymes.    ***
