Title       : The Delivery of Ion Channels to the Surface Membrane of Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1996      
File        : a9319496

Award Number: 9319496
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206339             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Wonderlin wonder@wvu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Many of the electrical signals required for neuronal  communication are produced
              by the activation of ion channels  located in the surface membrane of neurons. 
              A rich  repertoire of electrical signals can be produced within a  single
              neuron by the selective activation of various types  of ion channels
              heterogeneously distributed among different,  specialized regions, including
              the cell body, which contains  the nucleus and the metabolic machinery involved
              in protein  synthesis, and the dendrites and axons, long filament-like 
              processes through which neurons communicate with each other.  We are studying
              the mechanisms by which ion channels are  synthesized by neurons and inserted
              into their surface  membrane, with the overall goal of identifying mechanisms 
              that neurons used to regulate the expression of ion channels  in their surface
              membrane.  In particular, our proposed  research is focused on the packaging of
              ion channels into  small transport vesicles that carry the channels from their 
              site of synthesis in the cell body to the surface membrane  throughout the
              neuron.  We recently developed a simple  technique for collecting transport
              vesicles from cultured  cells.  From samples of these vesicles, we are using 
              immunological techniques to isolate subpopulations of  vesicles carrying
              specific ion channel proteins, thereby  enabling us to use biochemical and
              electron microscopy  techniques to characterize in detail the properties of the
               vesicles and their ion channel cargo.  In addition, we are  testing the
              hypothesis that:  (1)  different types of ion  channels are sorted, packaged
              and independently transported  to different regions of the surface membrane and
              (2)  ion  channels acquire their functional properties prior to  insertion into
              the surface membrane.  Although the scope of  this investigation will not be
              affected by the reduction in  my current budget request, the reduction will
              require my  continued reliance on equipment in other laboratories.
