Title       : The Reconstruction of Recent Earth History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1994      
File        : a9319955

Award Number: 9319955
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin J. Rudwick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319955  Rudwick  Modern analyses of the practice of scientific research have 
              generally focussed on laboratory work.  But much scientific  knowledge is (and
              has been) produced in two other locations, namely  in the field and in museums.
               Understanding how scientific research  generates reliable knowledge would be
              enhanced by closer study of  such non-laboratory settings.  Historical studies
              are particularly  important because they help distinguish intrinsic--or at
              least  long-term--features of the process from those that contingently 
              characterize our present moment in history.  Dr. Rudwick is  consequently
              undertaking a study of a major development in the  history of science for which
              the original research took place  almost entirely in the field and in museums,
              not in laboratories.   Specifically, he is examining what he has called the
              "discovery of  time."    Three centuries ago, a cosmic history totalling a few
              thousand  years seemed so obviously reasonable that is was simply taken for 
              granted by almost all educated people.  It has been replaced by one  in which
              the age of the universe, and indeed of the earth, is  routinely estimated in
              billions of years.  This revolution in  perspective should be considered,
              however, not primarily as a mere  expansion of the timescale, but rather in
              terms of a reconstruction  of an unexpectedly long and complex history of
              nature, in which  human beings turn out to have been relative newcomers. 
              Learning  how to make such a reconstruction was largely worked out by 
              geologists during a mere half-century, a period equivalent to no  more than a
              single scientific lifetime.  The most decisive part of  this research was the
              reconstruction of geologically quite recent  history:  specifically it entailed
              learning how to relate recorded  human history to the far earlier periods of
              prehuman history.    This grant continues support for Dr. Rudwick's study on
              this  outstandingly important field- and museum-based scientific  research, on
              the basis of a detailed analys is of relevant books and  articles,
              correspondence, and field and museum notes.  This study  should help to deepen
              our understanding of how reliable scientific  knowledge is generated in
              settings other than that of the  laboratory.  ***
