Title       : Biosynthesis of Isoflavonoid Phytoalexins in Pea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1994     
File        : a9319733

Award Number: 9319733
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans D. VanEtten vanetten@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9319733  VanEtten  The objective of this proposal is to further the
              understanding of  the biosynthesis of (+) pisatin, the pterocarpanoid
              phytoalexin  produced by pea.  Pterocarpans exist as either of two
              stereoisomers  in nature although the (-) isomer is more common.  Recent
              results  suggest that the biosynthesis of (+) pisatin and (-) pterocarpans 
              share an intermediate that has a (-) chirality.  Synthesis of (+)  pisatin is
              also unusual in that the oxygen on one of its asymmetric  carbons derives from
              H2O, whereas the oxygen on the analogous  carbon of (-) pterocarpans is derived
              from O2.  These observations  imply that fundamentally different mechanisms
              establish the  chirality and incorporation of oxygen in (+) pisatin compared to
               the (-) pterocarpans.  Genes that encode the enzymes which produce  the (-)
              chirality intermediate and the putative terminal step in  pisatin biosynthesis
              have been cloned.  These genes, and the  enzymes they encode, will be used to
              resolve the origin of  chirality in (+) pisatin by combining traditional tracer
              studies  and biochemical analyses with the production of transgenic pea  tissue
              lacking each of these enzymes.  Such experiments should  establish conclusively
              whether the enzymes are involved in pisatin  biosynthesis and, if so, will
              subsequently be used to identify the  novel steps in this pathway. 
              Furthermore, this work will define an  experimental system in which the
              biological function of this  phytoalexin can be delineated.  %%%  Many plants
              synthesize antibiotics, called phytoalexins, in  response to microbial
              infection.  Production of these antimicrobial  compounds is believed to be one
              mechanism used by plants to defend  against disease.  The objective of this
              grant proposal is to  identify the biochemical steps involved in the production
              of the  phytoalexin pisatin made by garden pea.  We will use standard 
              biochemical procedures in addition to making specific mutations in  suspected
              steps to characterize the pathway.  The information  gained f rom this research
              may eventually be used to clone genes  involved in the biosynthesis of
              phytoalexins.  The cloned genes  could be used to engineer new biosynthetic
              pathways in plants with  the goal of augmenting the plant's disease resistance
              mechanisms.  This research program is funded jointly by the Metabolic 
              Biochemistry Program, Division of Molecular & Cellular Biosciences,  and the
              Integrative Plant Biology Program, Division of Integrative  Biology and
              Neuroscience.  ***
