Title       : SGER: Flexible Active Computer Integrated Inspection Based on Computer-Aided
               Design Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1993    
File        : a9319208

Award Number: 9319208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25213              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael M. Marefat marefat@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,
Abstract    :
              9319208 Marefat          The objectives of this project are to develop a new
              research program involving multi disciplinary work in active machine vision,
              flexible manufacturing, and artificial intelligence, which address CAD problems
              in automated visual inspection of manufactured (particularly machined)
              components based on their (CAD) design models.  This research addresses two
              facets which are both important for success in this new research direction. 
              The first facet is concerned with automated intelligent generation of
              inspection plans.  This facet, which may be done off line, essentially
              constructs the inspection strategy.  The second facet deals with the lower
              level methods for effective execution of the generated inspection plan together
              with sensors and other resources.  In order to achieve the integrated
              intelligent inspection goals, the project addresses several interrelated
              problems.  These problems include: (i) developing hierarchical representation
              mechanisms to effectively capture the knowledge about geometric entities, their
              relationships, sensors, and plans (ii) reasoning mechanisms to determine the
              different attributes of the different features of object to be inspected, and
              the alternative strategies which can be used for inspection of each attribute,
              (iii) strategies for placement and viewing angles of cameras, and for
              determining the visible entities in each configuration, and (iv) optimization
              of the constructed plan.          An effective solution to this problem is
              clearly very important not only from the automation point of view, but also in
              order to effectively gather and use sensor information to overcome the volume
              and complexity of the needed data pro cessing for adequate performance.  The
              requested support will be used for investigations to achieve further results,
              and to develop a limited prototype system.  The ultimate goals are to
              demonstrate the developed limited prototype to industrial clients to stimulate
              their interest and involvement, and also to document the research results in
              professional publications.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
