Title       : Signal Transduction Mechanisms of Neuronal Membrane Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1996     
File        : a9319456

Award Number: 9319456
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288145             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shigehiro Nakajima shign@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yasuko Nakajima  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This grant project investigates the properties of a non-  selective ion channel
              (channels are functionally important  proteins located in the cell membrane). 
              The non-selective  channel plays an important part in slow excitation of brain 
              cells induced by brain chemicals.  The overall summation of  the excitatory
              state of each of the brain cells in each  specialized nucleus (region) of the
              brain determines the  tone of the brain.  In spite of its widespread nature and
               its functional importance, the non-selective channel has  long been ignored,
              and little is known about its properties.  To investigate this channel in brain
              neurons has been  difficult because of the lack of a suitable cell type. 
              Recently, the laboratory of the principal investigator has  found that cultured
              neurons from the ventral tegmental area  (a brain region playing an important
              part in the  pathogenesis of schizophrenia) are an excellent cell type  for
              this purpose, since this channel is consistently  activated by four excitayory
              chemicals:  (1) neurotensin,  (2) neurokinin B,  (3)  metabotropic glutamate
              agonist,  (4)  and muscarine  Thus, it is now feasible to conduct a  systematic
              investigation of this channel.  The specific  projects examine:  (1)  whether
              each one of these brain  chemicals acts on its own receptor,  (2)  the
              permeability  of the channel to various ions,  (3)  the signal  transduction
              mechanism (details of the events leading to a  slow excitation of the neuron). 
              (4)  the pharmacology of  this channel, and  (5)  the single channel properties
              of  this channel.  Preliminary results suggest that this non-  selective
              channel has unusual characteristics:  (1)  It is  different from a Ca-activated
              non-specific cation channel.  (2)  The channel activiation is independent of G
              proteins  (an important protein for many types of signal  transduction).  (3) 
              Yet, it does not seem to be a ligand-  gated channel (usual channel for very
              quick excitation),  since the latency of activation is very long.
