Title       : Models Relating Population Dynamics to Individual Physiology and Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9319301

Award Number: 9319301
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger M. Nisbet nisbet@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Murdoch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319301  Nisbet       Individual-based models are becoming widely used tools in 
              population biology.  These models use mathematical descriptions of  the
              physiology and behavior of individuals to predict properties of  populations. 
              The PIs view individual-based models, not as an end  in themselves, but as part
              of a process that can allow them to  develop testable theory.  They aim to
              identify those components of  individual physiology that are key to predicting
              population  dynamics.%%%       The system for which these questions will be
              explored is the  zooplankter Daphnia and its algal food supply.  This system is
               appropriate for many reasons.  Daphnia is an important genus in  many natural
              lakes and ponds and previous studies have identified  common dynamic patterns
              across many populations; thus any  understanding gained from the population
              models is likely to be  ecologically important.  The physiology of the more
              common Daphnia  species is well documented, in part because of their common use
              in  toxicological studies, and the PIs have a major on-going program of 
              research on the energetics of individual Daphnia.  Daphnia  populations in
              large stock tanks have been studied by one of the  PIs and by one of our
              collaborators, Dr. E. McCauley at the  University of Calgary.  Thus the chosen
              system offers the  possibility of studying the individual-to-population link in
               systems of increasing complexity.%%%     The "deliverables" from the project
              will be of three kinds: (1)  increased insight into the population dynamics of
              the chosen  system, (2) sharper understanding of the processes of formulating, 
              testing and simplifying individual-based models, and (3) new  general
              theory.***
