Title       : Group Dynamics, Reproductive Success and Hibitat Utilization in Chimpanzees and
               Baboons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1996      
File        : a9319909

Award Number: 9319909
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237568             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne E. Pusey pusey001@maroon.tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig Packer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,5928,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     9319909  Anne Pusey    In the past 30 years, Jane Goodall revolutionized
              our  understanding of chimpanzee behavior, and in the process  gave us an
              extraordinary perspective on ourselves and our  behavioral origins. Chimpanzees
              are fascinating in their own  right.  They are one of the few mammalian species
              to show  female dispersal and male-male cooperation, and this  continuing study
              will provide new insights into the causes  and consequences of this unusual
              social organization.  Though less prominent than the chimp study, the Gombe
              baboon  study is the longest and most extensive field study of any  African
              monkey.   This current research effort, in  coordination with Goodall and
              Tanzanian collaborators, will  involve three interconnecting projects.   
              First, long-term demographic and behavioral data on  chimpanzees and olive
              baboons will be analyzed and new data  will be collected.  This will include
              Goodall's records from  the past three decades.  The emphasis will be an
              examination  of the costs and benefits of female dispersion and male 
              sociality.   In contrast, olive baboons show the social  organization typical
              of old world monkeys, with home ranges  maintained largely by the females and
              males moving between  troops.  This research effort will investigate
              group-level  factors influencing female reproductive success, and the  causes
              of individual variability in male reproductive  success, social relationships
              and paternal care.  The large  sample sizes allow sophisticated statistical
              analysis of  demography and social behavior.      The second project involves a
              highly detailed survey of the  diversity and distribution of vegetation in the
              entire park  -- an area of unusual plant diversity.  The vegetation  studies
              will clarify the ecological basis of chimpanzee  social organization, the
              importance of inter-troop  competition in baboons, and will also contribute to
              the  inventory of biodiversity in Tanzania.    The third project will use DNA
              extracted from feces of both  species to  assess paternity, measure genetic
              relatedness and  levels of inbreeding.  By perfecting the extraction of 
              nuclear DNA from feces and developing baboon-specific  primers, the team will
              facilitate paternity studies in other  primate field studies.
