Title       : Dissertation Research: An Ethnoarchaeological Study: Subsistence Economies in
               the Melendiz Plain, Central Anatolia, Turkey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1994   
File        : a9319164

Award Number: 9319164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Patty Jo Watson pjwatson@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319164  Watson    Under the direction of Dr. Patty Jo Watson, Ms. Ertug-Yaras
              will  collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will study  current
              subsistence practices in a traditional Turkish village  located in the
              Cappadocia region, south-east of Ankara. Ms.  Ertug-Yaras is an archaeologist
              interested in understanding the  past and she will examine present and recent
              practices to glean  information relevant to this goal. The economy of the
              village is  based on agriculture, basically field cropping and gardening, as 
              well as the husbandry of sheep, goats and cattle. Although the  economy is
              integrated into the regional, national and even  international systems,
              preliminaries studies indicate that local  knowledge about pre-market oriented
              techniques still exists. Ms.  Ertug-Yaras will collect basic social and
              demographic data. She  will also observe and document current subsistence
              activities and  especially focus on the gathering of wild plants which still
              play  an important economic role. Use of animals and herd management 
              strategies will also be examined. Finally extensive structured  interviews will
              be conducted to record strategies which are no  longer employed. The results
              will then be applied to an  archaeological site in the region.    The
              domestication of animals such as goats and sheep and plants  such as barley and
              wheat occurred just over 10,000 years ago in  the Near East and sites in Turkey
              and adjacent regions document  this process. This Neolithic revolution marks a
              major turning  point in human prehistory and it laid the groundwork for the 
              development of complex societies. While many relevant sites have  been
              excavated, archaeological material does not speak for itself  and can be
              difficult to interpret. Studies of present day peoples  who appear to engage in
              some of the same activities provide an  extremely useful interpretive context.
              The Ms. Ertug-Yaras has  been fortunate enough to locate a region in which both
              early  archaeological sites and a range of traditiona l activities are 
              present.    This research is important for several reasons. It will provide 
              data of value to archaeologists who work in many parts of the  Near East. It
              holds the potential to shed new light on the  origins of complex society and
              will assist in the training of a  promising young scientist.  ***
