Title       : A Computerized Database for Theoretical and Historical Bantu Phonology and
               Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9319415

Award Number: 9319415
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry M. Hyman hyman@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               WPC@               2           B     V   L     Z                 NLQ 10cpi     
               ? x x x            x   6 X      @  ?{    X @                                  
               IBM Proprinter                       IBMPROPR.PRS   x            @            
                     kX @    2           .         >                        #| x             
                       9319415 HYMAN        &  ABSTRACT   This three year project aims to
              produce in Berkeley a Comparative Bantu On Line Dictionary (CBOLD) designed to
              support and enhance the theoretical, descriptive and historical linguistic
              study of the languages in the Bantu family. The computerized database will
              include upwards of 4,000 reconstructed Proto Bantu roots, several thousand
              additional reconstructed regional roots, and reflexes of these roots for an
              initial 50 of the 500+ daughter languages. Published and unpublished
              dictionaries of selected Bantu languages will be scanned and also entered in
              the database. Working with colleagues and students from the United States,
              France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Cameroon, Tanzania and other countries,
              organized into the Bantu Working Group (BWG), the project will (i) unify
              computational efforts that have thus far been separately explored; (ii) share
              all linguistic materials; and (iii) establish separate and collaborative
              efforts to push the fields of theoretical and historical Bantu linguistics
              forward. Coordinating with other members of the BWG, the PI and co workers will
              contribute in two major ways. First, computationally, Berkeley will: (i) set up
              the database for all of the researchers to input; (ii) establish a unified
              format for computational lexicographic work in the Bantu languages; (iii) input
              extensive (annotated) dictionaries of at least nine languages (Duala, Basaa,
              Fang, Luganda, Runyankore, Kinande, Chichewa, Ciyao, and Shona Ikalanga); and
              (iv) input lexicons of 4,000+ words for another 15 languages. Second,
              linguistically, the PI will: (i) participate in evaluating "Narrow" and "Wide"
              Proto Bantu reconstructions; (ii) conduc t specific studies in the historical
              phonology of the Bantu consonant, vowel and tonal systems; and (iii) produce
              theoretical work based on the phonology and morphology of Bantu. As outlined in
              the proposal, the database will be designed specifically to facilitate detailed
              lexical studies of the different Bantu languages.
