Title       : Collaborative Research: Lithospheric Controls on the Behavior of the West
               Antarctic Ice Sheet: Corridor Aerogeophysics of Eastern Ross Transect Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1999   
File        : a9319854

Award Number: 9319854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin E. Bell robinb@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Blankenship: 9319369  Bell: 9319854  Behrendt: 9319877  This award supports a
              project to conduct an integrated  geophysical survey over a large portion of
              the West Antarctic Ice  Sheet (WAIS) toward an understanding of the dynamic
              behavior of  the ice sheet and the nature of the lithosphere beneath the ice 
              sheet.  West Antarctica is characterized by two kinds of the  Earth s most
              dynamic systems, a continental rift (the West  Antarctic Rift System) and a
              marine based ice sheet (the WAIS).   Active continental rift systems, caused by
              divergent plate  motions, result in thinned continental crust.  Associated with
               the thin crust are fault-bounded sedimentary basins, active  volcanism, and
              elevated heat flow.   Marine  ice sheets are  characterized by rapidly moving
              streams of ice, penetrating and  draining a slowly moving ice reservoir. 
              Evidence left by past  marine ice sheets indicates that they may have a
              strongly non-  linear response to long-term climate change which results in 
              massive and rapid discharges of ice.  Understanding the evolution  of the ice
              stream system and its interaction with the interior  ice is the key to
              understanding this non-linear response.    Subglacial geology and ice dynamics
              are generally studied in  isolation, but evidence is mounting that the behavior
              of the West  Antarctic ice streams may be closely linked to the nature of the 
              underlying West Antarctic rift system.  The fast moving ice  streams appear to
              glide on a lubricating layer of water-saturated  till.  This till requires
              easily eroded sediment and a source of  water, both of which may be controlled
              by the geology of the rift  system; the sediments from the fault-bounded basins
              and the water  from the elevated heat flux associated with active lithospheric 
              extension.    This project represents an interdisciplinary aerogeophysical 
              study to characterize the lithosphere of the West Antarctic rift  system
              beneath critical regions of the WAIS.  The objective is to  determine the
              effects of the rift architect ure, as manifested by  the distribution of
              sedimentary basins and volcanic constructs,  on the ice stream system.  The
              research tool is a unique  geophysical aircraft with laser altimetry, ice
              penetrating radar,  aerogravity, and aeromagnetic systems integrated with a
              high  precision kinematic GPS navigation system.  It is capable of  imaging
              both the surface and bed of the ice sheet while  simultaneously measuring the
              gravity and magnetic signature of  the subglacial lithosphere.  Work to be done
              under this award  will build on work already completed in the southern sector
              of  central West Antarctica and it will focus on the region of the  Byrd
              Subglacial Basin and Ice Stream D.  The ice sheet in these  regions is
              completely covered by satellite imagery and so this  project will be integrated
              with remote sensing studies of the ice  stream.  The changing dynamics of Ice
              Stream D, as with other  West Antarctic ice streams, seem to be correlated with
              changes in  the morphological provinces of the underlying rift system.  The 
              experimental  targets proceed from the divide of the interior  ice, downstream
              through the onset of streaming to the trunk of  Ice Stream D.    This study
              will be coordinated with surface glaciological  investigations of Ice Stream D
              and will be used to guide  cooperative over-snow seismic investigations of the
              central West  Antarctic rift system.  The data will also be used to select a 
              site for future deep ice coring along the crest of the WAIS.   These data
              represent baseline data for long term global change  monitoring work and
              represent crucial boundary conditions for ice  sheet modeling efforts.
