Title       : Role of Glial Cells in Spinal Cord Regeneration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1994    
File        : a9319702

Award Number: 9319702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265793             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Selzer selzerm@mail.med.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is aimed at determining whether glial cells in  lamprey spinal
              cord revert to an earlier developmental type  in response to injury.  In most
              vertebrates, the main type  of glial cell, the astrocyte, is filled with
              bundles of  filaments composed of a protein called glial fibrillary  acidic
              protein (GFAP).  However, in animals, such as the sea  lamprey, that show
              regeneration in the central nervous  system, the glial filaments are composed
              of keratins,  similar to the protein that makes skin tough, and are 
              interconnected by a network of "spot weld" mechanical  contacts called
              "desmosomes".  Our laboratory is determining  the reasons for this correlation.
               In the lamprey, three  different keratin subunits combine in different
              proportions  to form filaments in glial cells of brain and spinal cord.  Near a
              spinal cord transection, the glial filaments become  like those found in the
              brain.  Since the brain develops  later than the spinal cord, this may
              represent a  developmentally more primitive glial cell.  The goal of the 
              present proposal is to determine whether this change in  keratin composition
              truly represents a reversion to an  earlier embryonic form and whether this
              comes about by a  change in the relative rates of synthesis of the three 
              keratin subunits.  We will clone and sequence the gene for  each of the three
              subunits and thus generate molecular  probes with which to determine how
              actively each subunit is  made.  In situ hybridization will be used on brains
              and  spinal cords from animals of different ages, in order to  determine how
              the mix of keratin subunits expressed by glial  cells changes during
              development.  Then we will compare this  pattern of change with the pattern
              seen in glial cells at  the site of a spinal cord cut.  If there is evidence
              from  the composition of keratin filaments for a reversion of  glial cells to
              an earlier developmental form, future work in  the laboratory will be targeted
              toward discovering the  molecules on the surface of the Glial cells  that may
              be  responsible for guiding nerve fibers during their  regeneration and
              presumably also their early development.
