Title       : Neural Control of Adrenocortical Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9319097

Award Number: 9319097
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255774             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Engeland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9198,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319097  Engeland    Stress Activates the neuroendocrine system through a
              feedback  mechanism involving the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal system. 
              Corticotropin releasing factor, a peptide hormone, is released from  the
              hypothalamus and travels to the pituitary where it triggers the  release of
              adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).  ACTH travels in the  blood to the adrenal
              glands where it stimulates the release of  glucocorticoids, such as cortisol
              and corticosterone.  This system  is also involved in the maintenance of the
              body's normal internal  functioning.  Glucocorticoids not only help the body
              respond to  stress but play an integral part of daily life and adaptation to 
              environmental change.  Recently, Dr. Engeland and others have found  changes in
              plasma glucocorticoids in the absence of changes in  plasma ACTH under both
              stressful and non-stress conditions.  The  finding challenges our simplistic
              view of adrenocortical secretion  and indicates that other mechanisms are
              involved in the release of  adrenal hormones.  Recent evidence suggests a role
              for the adrenal  nerves but the specific contribution of adrenal neural input
              to  physiological responses are not known.  Using a variety of  innovative
              techniques, Dr. Engeland will characterize the  contribution of adrenal neural
              activity to non-stress and stress-  induced secretion of adrenal
              glucocorticoids.  He will then  determine which neurotransmitters are mediating
              its effect.   Finally Dr.Engeland will identify the adrenal cellular mechanisms
               that mediate neural effects on steroidogenesis.  These results will  provide a
              new understanding about why exposure to the same  environmental conditions that
              appear to have similar effects on  ACTH release may produce different
              adrenocortical responses.  The  function of most tissues is dependent on the
              maintenance of normal  plasma glucocorticoids levels.  Aberrant adrenal hormone
              secretion  can result in weaken muscles and suppressed organ systems.  
              Understanding the nature of the interaction  between adrenal nerve  input and
              ACTH will provide a new perspective on physiological and  pathological
              alternations in adrenocortical secretion.  Thus,  findings resulting from this
              basic research may eventually lead to  the development of new pharmacological
              or surgical approaches to  control adrenal secretion of glucocorticoids.  ***
