Title       : Protecting the Public's Trust: A Search for Balance Among Benefits and Conflicts
               in University Industry Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1994   
File        : a9319891

Award Number: 9319891
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40353              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheila Slaughter slaughtr@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Teresa I. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              92        Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319891  SLAUGHTER    As the economy shifts from a heavy emphasis on defense
              science and  technology (S&T) to a focus on civilian S&T and the application of
               innovation to commercial markets, decision makers within  universities,
              businesses and government agencies are eager to learn  how to shape successful
              partnerships to develop technology that is  beneficial to all participants and
              contributes to social and  economic progress.  Since 1980, the numbers of
              business-university  partnerships have increased dramatically.  Several authors
              have  identified the problems and barriers that must be overcome and many  have
              described the primary characteristics of university-industry  relationships. 
              However, few studies have investigated empirically  the factors that influence
              organizations to become involved with  each other and, as a possible result,
              increasingly share similar  perspectives and interests.  Given that the trend
              is toward greater  numbers of partnerships, it would be useful to understand
              and  identify empirically any compelling factors and normative behaviors  that
              might exist between institutions and corporations,  particularly those related
              to possible conflicts.  This project  investigates whether scientists and
              administrators involved in  university-industry cooperation in corporations and
              universities  share similar perspective and mutual interests, and, if so, to 
              determine the implications for the two sets of institutions and for  federal
              policy toward these institutions.  The study seeks to  understand the factors
              influencing university-industry  relationships in order to provide decision
              makers with insight into  issues and recommendations that might address this
              phenomenon.    The research project consists of a survey instrument that will 
              establish an empirical understanding of university and industry  perceptions
              related to benefits, conflicts, and mutual interests.   It will include
              universities and colleges from all the major  Carnegie classifications as well
              as both small,  medium, and large  companies, delineated by Business Week
              (1993) and Inc. (Mangelsdorf  1992).  Within these organizations, individuals
              from a variety of  university administrative, academic, industry management,
              and  scientific levels will be asked to participate.  Also, persons  involved
              in cooperative activities as well as those who are not  will be included.  The
              study focuses on potential conflicts and  provides insight into possible
              implications of potential  organizational transformations that may be occurring
              and  experiences and  mechanisms used to pursue mutually beneficiary 
              cooperation while ameliorating potential conflicts.
