Title       : Environmental Accounting for Managing Pollution in the Chemical and Refining
               Industries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1996   
File        : a9319795

Award Number: 9319795
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297688             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Shields david@ced1.cba.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beth Beloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Miriam Heller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Devaun Kite  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 5374      MANAGEMENT OF TECHNOLOGY PRGM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0522400   Information Systems                     
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9319795  Shields    The proposed research investigates the information gap
              that  confronts decision-making regarding both investment in R&D for  and
              deployment of innovative technologies for pollution  prevention to support
              environmentally conscious manufacturing.   Commitments by major industries were
              made up to three years ago  to reduce hazardous wastes and toxic emissions by
              50% by the year  1995.  Industrial managers are now challenged to decide: 1)
              which  product changes should be initiated to achieve pollution  prevention
              goals? 20 which innovative technologies should receive  research and
              development investments to advance pollution  prevention goals? and 3) Which
              processes should be redesigned  using innovative technologies that have already
              been researched  and developed but not yet deployed?   To ensure the economic
              as  well as the environmental viability of the company, these  managers must
              make informed decisions based on reasonably  accurate costs and benefits. 
              Historically, though, environmental  costs have not been properly valued,
              notably externalities have  not been internalized by producers.  Additionally,
              the manner in  which any environmental costs have been tracked is not
              conductive  to on-going management of technology innovation because the costs 
              are not allocated accurately to technologies, processes and  products.  The
              proposed research effort addresses both these  needs.  Through case-studies and
              benchmarking the research will  establish a systems framework to track
              environmental costs as  well as a method for valuing them.  Life-cycle costing
              will  enable this.  Eventual practical implementation of the system  will be
              facilitated by formalizing the links between the costs  and the technologies by
              defining waste generating processes and  overlaying on them Activity-Based
              Costing (ABC) methods.  The ABC  system will be specific to the Chemical and
              Refining Industries  since it is activity based.  These two industries were
              selected  for three reasons: 1) together the y contribute to over half of  all
              waste generated in the United States; 2) the tendency to  focus on discrete
              manufacturing has neglected these very  important waste producers and economic
              contributors; and 3) these  industries are heavily concentrated in the State of
              Texas where  the majority of the research will be conducted.  The wide range 
              of support to this effort from industry representatives, policy  organizations,
              academics and government agencies is a testament  to feasibility and
              desirability of this research endeavor.  ***
