Title       : Site Response Analysis: Blind Deconvolution of Seismic Signals and Site
               Characteristics Using Data Fusion and Higher-Order Cepstra Operations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1995   
File        : a9319829

Award Number: 9319829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Athina P. Petropulu athina@artemis.ece.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aspasia Zerva  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9319829  Petropulu  It has been shown, through theory and observations, that 
              conditions at the site of a constructed facility can amplify  the seismic
              ground motions significantly, as compared to  those recorded on bedrock.  This
              amplification increases the  potential damage and collapse of engineered
              structures.    The objective of this research is to examine the feasibility  of
              applying a blind deconvolution algorithm to site response  analysis; and to
              investigate whether the approach can lead  to a better understanding of the
              complex phenomena  underlying this problem.  The approach utilizes the blind 
              deconvolution algorithm and the recordings of ground motions  at two stations
              on a sediment site in order to reconstruct  the seismic input at the
              bedrock-layer interface and to  recover the characteristics of the site through
              impulse  responses (reflectivities) between the input location and  the
              recording stations.  The site characteristics are  estimated by combining
              higher-order statistics of the  seismograms and the theory of signal
              reconstruction from  higher-order spectral phase only.    Potential advantages
              of this approach over existing  techniques are that (i) it does not require
              recordings at  nearby rock sites or downhole recordings for the site-  specific
              analysis, but reconstructs the seismic input motion  at the base of the
              sediments from two surface records; (ii)  it identifies the reflectivities
              between the bedrock-layer  interface and each recording station rather than one
              one-  dimensional site response function from the downhole (or  nearby rock)
              station and one station on the surface of the  sediment site; and (iii) it
              remains robust even in the  presence of additive white Gaussian noise in the 
              observations and in the input seismic motion at the base of  the sediments.   
              This exploratory study concentrates on well documented  earthquakes recorded by
              the SMART-1 accelerograph array in  Taiwan.  ***
