Title       : RUI: Transbilayer Lipid Movements in Apoptotic Lymphocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1996        
File        : a9319104

Award Number: 9319104
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268835             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick Williamson PLWILLIAMSON@AMHERST.EDU(internet)  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Schlegel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amherst College
	      
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/542-2000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9319104  Williamson, Patrick  Schlegel, Robert  Apoptosis, or programmed cell
              death, is a developmental process  whose result is the death and engulfment of
              cells without the  pathological consequences which attend cell death due to
              injury  (necrosis).  The presence of phosphatidylserine (PS) on the cell 
              surface has been implicated as one of the signals for recognition  and
              phagocytosis of apoptotic lymphocytes.  The exposure of PS  requires alteration
              of the normal distribution of plasma membrane  phospholipids, and thus
              regulation of the processes which control  this distribution must be part of
              the program of apoptotic cell  death.  Studies of erythrocytes have
              demonstrated the existence of  two distinct pathways governing transbilayer
              lipid distribution.    The first is an ATP-dependent transport of the
              aminophospholipids,  and particularly PS, to the inner leaflet; the second is
              an energy  independent randomization of all phospholipids between the two 
              leaflets, a process which brings PS to the cell surface.  In this  project,
              flow cytometric techniques will be used in combination  with specific
              fluorescent phospholipid probes to analyze  transbilayer lipid movements in
              apoptotic cells.  The normal, ATP-  dependent, NEM-sensitive movement of PS to
              the inside of  lymphocytes will be characterized in cells before and after 
              induction of apoptosis, to determine whether and when this pathway  is
              inactivated.  NEM-insensitive movement of phosphatidylcholine  (PC) from the
              outer to the inner leaflet (a marker for the second  pathway) will be
              characterized before and after induction of  apoptosis to determine whether and
              when lipid randomization occurs  during apoptosis.  The generality of these
              events will be tested by  comparing the results in cells induced to undergo
              apoptosis by  steroid hormone treatment and by inactivation-induced suicide,
              and  by extension of the results from tissue culture cells to thymocytes  in
              the mouse.  The role of elevation of cytoplasmic calcium as a  regulatory me
              diator of alterations in transbilayer lipid movements  will be assessed, and
              the role of several specific calcium-related  signalling pathways in this
              regulation will be investigated.  %%%  Fatty, organic molecules called lipids
              form the basis of the  structure of the membrane that separates a cell interior
              from its  external environment.  Despite their importance, however, little is 
              known about the mechanisms by which lipids are organized in  membranes and play
              their roles in cell membrane structure and  function.  Recent evidence
              indicates that one of the molecular  species of phospholipid in the cell
              membrane (phosphatidylserine or  "PS") serves as a signal for recognition and
              removal of cells  undergoing programmed cell death.  Programmed cell death is
              an  orderly process activated during tissue remodeling in development, 
              allowing replacement of one cell type by another, or, in the adult  organism,
              to remove cells with a limited life span.  Removal of  dying cells by
              specialized scavenger cells prior to their  disintegration is important to this
              orderly process. The goal of  this research is to understand the molecular
              mechanisms which  regulate the exposure of PS on the surfaces of cells at the
              time  they begin programmed cell death so that they are targeted for 
              removal.***
