Title       : Mapping and Simulating the Electric Fields of Weakly Electric Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1996   
File        : a9319968

Award Number: 9319968
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299467             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Bower jbower@bbb.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,9169,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
               A variety of small freshwater fishes are known as weakly electric fish, since
              they have an electric organ like that of the electric eel, but produce only a
              small voltage with it.  Their electric organ discharge, the EOD, has a
              particular waveform and temporal pattern, and produces a spatially patterned
              electric field around the fish.  A sophisticated system of electroreceptor
              organs in the skin allows them to investigate their environment by detecting
              changes in this electric field produced by objects around them, and the signals
              of other fish.   By analogy to the bat and the dolphin auditory echolocation
              system, this electrosensory behavior is called electrolocation.  This project
              incorporates electrical field measurements into computational simulations to
              produce novel three-dimensional reconstructions of the electrosensory images
              detected by the fish.  Detailed analysis of the spatial and temporal
              organization of these electric fields will help to better understand both the
              mechanisms by which they are generated, as well as their possible significance
              for object recognition.   Development of a simulator capable of accurately
              reconstructing the fields will allow a quantitative investigation of the
              electrosensory consequences of fish movements during exploratory behavior. 
              This combined mathematical, physiological and behavioral approach will clarify
              how the external environment is "imaged" by a whole sensory system, and how
              that image is used to guide spatially oriented behavior, which is a major
              general issue for sensory neuroscience.  There is potential impact in two other
              fields, one in bioengineering development of sensing systems for robotics or
              aids to handicapped, and the other in field ecology where the this software for
              mapping electric field potential data could be used for analyzing aquatic
              salinity data to track critical changes in estuarine ecosystems.
