Title       : Quantitative Analysis of Growth Defects in II-VI Semiconductors by X-Ray
               Diffraction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1994      
File        : a9319421

Award Number: 9319421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Matyi matyi@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9319421   Matyi      The overall goals of this program are (1) to develop
              advanced  analytical techniques based on x-ray diffraction for the 
              quantitative study of crystallographic defects in II-VI  semiconductors; (2) to
              develop a better understanding of the  effects of alloying on the crystal
              defect structure and the process  of defect generation; and (3) to articulate
              the effect of  structural defects on the optical properties of these materials.
               The intrinsic defect structure of the starting materials will be  fully
              characterized using a broad array of advanced x-ray  diffraction methods, with
              particular emphasis given to high  resolution triple crystal diffraction and
              diffuse scattering  measurements. We will also explore the usefulness of
              anomalous  transmission and short wavelength x-ray diffraction measurements as 
              alternative methods for defect characterization. In addition to  analyzing
              as-grown samples of Cadmium Telluride and its ternary  alloys, samples will be
              annealed under Group II and Group VI  overpressures to alter the defect
              structure and optical behavior in  a controlled fashion.    %%%   The primary
              goal of this program is to develop a fundamental-  understanding of the growth,
              processing, and properties of wide  bandgap II-VI semiconductor materials so
              that they can be exploited  in the realization of a variety of advanced
              electronic and photonic  devices.  In addition to these fundamental research
              goals, the  proposed research will lead to a better understanding the 
              relationship between overall II-VI materials growth and processing 
              methodologies and the physical properties of II VI semiconductors.   An
              important feature of the program is the training of graduate and  undergraduate
              students in a fundamentally and technologically  significant area of materials
              and processing research.  This  research will contribute to improving the
              general performance of  advanced devices and integrated circuits used in
              computing,  information processing, and telecommunications.    ***
