Title       : Control of Organelle Inheritance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1995   
File        : a9319595

Award Number: 9319595
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ursula W. Goodenough   (Principal Investigator current)
              E. Virginia Armbrust  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319595  Goodenough       The research proposed would provide detailed molecular
               understanding of the mechanisms of uniparental inheritance of  organelle DNA
              in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.  Uniparental  inheritance of the plastid genome
              in C. reinhardtii involved two  events:  protection of the chromosome
              contributed to the zygote  by the mating-type plus (mt+) gamete, and nuclease
              destruction of  the unprotected mt- chromosome in the zygote.  A cloned gene 
              cluster, ezy-1 linked to both mt loci, has been shown by this lab  to be
              involved in destruction.  Experiments using native and/or  recombinant ezy-1
              protein are designed to learn whether ezy-1  functions as the nuclease or as an
              activator of nuclease  activity.  Genetic and biochemical experiments will
              determine  whether protection is conferred directly on the mt+ chloroplast  DNA
              (e.g. via methylation) or via protein(s) that associate with  this DNA.  And
              finally, insertional mutant strains defective in  protection will be sought and
              analyzed.  %%%  Eukaryotic organisms are composed of cells that contain 
              organelles.  Of these, mitochondria (animals and plants) and  chloroplast
              (plants only) contain their own complements of DNA,  derived from their
              evolutionary origin as free-living bacteria.   During sexual reproduction,
              organelle DNA is invariably  transmitted to offspring via only one parent,
              usually via the  maternal egg.  In the unicellular alga Chlamydomonas, both 
              parental gametes contribute equal amounts of organelle DNA to the  zygote, but
              one set is then destroyed.  The lab has cloned a gene  whose protein product
              appears to participate in this selective  degradation of chloroplast DNA.  The
              project proposes to test  this inference via genetic, molecular, and cell
              biology  experiments, the goal being to learn how one parental set of DNA  is
              destroyed and the other is preserved within a single cell.  ***
