Title       : Stochastic Control Problems in Mathematical Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9319816

Award Number: 9319816
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138959             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ioannis Karatzas ik@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jaksa Cvitanic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319816  Karatzas       This project will focus on various mathematical problems
               arising in continuous-time finance that require the development  of new
              techniques in stochastic control theory. These include (1)  questions of
              optimization, hedging, and valuation of contingent  claims in incomplete
              markets and/or under constraints; and (2)  questions of economic equilibrium in
              incomplete or "effectively  complete" markets. With regard to (1), it is
              expected that the  problem of portfolio optimization with random endowment
              streams  will require non-standard techniques from functional and convex 
              analysis. Questions of pricing are formulated in terms of a new  kind of
              stochastic control problem where the terminal reward  function has a random
              component. Issues related to (2) include  the establishment of the martingale
              property for certain  exponential local martingales, and the representation
              property of  a given set of martingales as stochastic integrals with respect 
              to a second, given set.       Existing methods for pricing financial
              instruments (for  example, contracts whose value will be revealed at some
              future  date) assume that financial markets are "complete" of "perfect"  in the
              sense that it is possible to exactly calculate the present  value, and hence
              the price, of such instruments. In reality, this  is not the case; markets are
              "imperfect" or "incomplete" due,  among other things, to investment
              constraints, transaction costs,  different interest rates, different patterns
              of information, etc.  Thus, it is very important to develop new methods for
              pricing  financial instruments in imperfect markets; such methodologies  will
              be investigated in this project. In a similar vein, standard  economic
              equilibrium theory provides ways to determine prices for  financial assets so
              that individual agents' utilities are  maximized and "markets clear" (that is,
              supply equals demand) -  but again, only in the context of perfect markets.
              This project  will develop an equilibrium theory which is more g eneral and at 
              the same time also more applicable by being able to deal with  imperfect
              markets.
