Title       : Ant Diversity Patterns and Conservation Planning in Madagascar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1994   
File        : a9319515

Award Number: 9319515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip S. Ward psward@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5992,9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9319515  Ward    This dissertation enhancement grant supports a  U.S. graduate
              student, Brian Fisher,  working  under the guidance of Dr. Philip S. Ward, 
              Professor of Entomology at the University of  California/Davis,to survey the
              distribution and  abundance of ants in tropical forest habitats in  Madagascar,
              and  compare the results to known  patterns of vertebrate distribution.  The
              aim of  the project is to test the hypothesis that  patterns of diversity,
              endemism and rarity of  insects differ from those of birds and mammals,  with
              insects showing greater between-site  variation and local endemism.  A primary 
              objective is to develop standardized methods of  assessing ant diversity that
              can be used in any  tropical wet forest.  The project will develop a  database
              regarding the distribution of ants in  the most biologically diverse region of 
              Madagascar.  Altitudinal ant surveys will be  conducted at five sites in the
              eastern tropical  wet forest of Madagascar.  Species richness and  abundance
              will be calculated for each elevation  at each locality, and compared to those
              extracted  from existing data bases for vertebrates.  This  information will
              allow estimates of the degree of  protection the Malagasy invertebrate fauna 
              receives in existing reserves.     This study will illuminate a question
              fundamental  to conservation biology:  "Are 'indicator' taxa  really
              indicators?"  In the course of the  project, young Malagasy biologists will be 
              trained in inventory, curation and identification  techniques.  This study is
              being conducted in  collaboration with the World Wide Fund for Nature  -
              Madagascar, and the Xerces Society.  Augmenting  the usual channels of
              publication in scientific  journals, these two non-profit organizations will 
              assist in diffusing the information collected to  other scientists,
              conservation biologists, and  government agencies in Madagascar.  ***
