Title       : Innovations in Processing Technology for the Mass Formation of Multilayer
               Microfluidic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1999 
File        : a9980804

Award Number: 9980804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $491162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Kohl paul.kohl@che.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford L. Henderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sue A. Bidstrup-Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1602,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Engineering Microsystems: "XYZ on a Chip" project will investigate the
              development and exploitation of a new, integrated circuit (IC) compatible
              microfabrication processing technology that has the potential to make profound
              changes and improvements in the way microfluidic devices are manufactured.  A
              vast array of microfluidic devices have been disclosed that could improve our
              way of life by impacting medical, environmental, and chemical technologies. 
              Examples include devices for combinatorial chemical synthesis, genetic
              diagnostics and micro-chemical analysis and sensing.  Although the principles
              of many of these devices have been demonstrated, their ultimate success will be
              determined by the ability to use inexpensive, standardized, mass fabrication
              processes to build the complex three-dimensional fluidic layers and to
              integrate the fluidic components with functional electrical devices.  The basis
              for this fabrication technology is the recent discovery that certain classes of
              polynorbomene materials can be thermally decomposed in-situ at moderate
              temperatures to form buried, micrometer-sized air-gap structures in
              microelectronic materials.  

The development of this technology, which can
              use conventional lithographic patterning techniques and be easily integrated
              with existing IC manufacturing processes, offers the possibility to form
              complex, multi-layer three-dimensional channel networks.  In order to exploit
              this discovery for IC compatible microchannel applications, it will be
              necessary to gain both a fundamental understanding of the materials and process
              parameters involved and to demonstrate the utility of this concept in
              engineering relevant Microsystems.  Devices integrating CMOS circuits, complex,
              multi-level capabilities, and chemically altered surfaces will be
              demonstrated.

