Title       : KDI: Multi-scale Simulation Including Chemical Reactivity in Materials Behavior
               Through Integrated Computational Hierarchies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a9980015

Award Number: 9980015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney J. Bartlett bartlett@qtp.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hai-Ping Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph H. Simmons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael C. Zerner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel B. Trickey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1339,1348,9162,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9980015
Bartlett
This is an award in the KDI initiative that is managed by
              DMR, CHE, and DMII.  The objective of this proposal is to describe phenomena
              that are critically dependent upon chemistry in real materials.  Such phenomena
              include subcritical crack propagation, fatigue in solids, chemical-mechanical
              polishing of semiconductors and optical components, and dislocation etchings.
              These effects occur because of the synergistic action of high strain and
              chemical reactivity on material surfaces.   Simulation of such processes
              requires the development of a methodology that provides a reliable description
              of both chemical reactivity (including solvents and contaminants) and
              mechanical strain to fracture.  These studies must be done on a large ensemble
              of particles while accounting for large departures of individual atoms from
              mechanical and chemical equilibrium.  Quantum chemistry, surface electronic
              structure, and ensemble simulations of mechanics must be integrated
              simultaneously.  An interdisciplinary team has been assembled to work on this
              problem. The project has three elements:  (1) construct computational methods
              that integrate first-principles quantum mechanical calculations of electronic
              states of molecules and extended systems, large scale ensemble calculations for
              the dynamics of molecules and clusters, and dynamical calculations of highly
              strained macroscopic structures; (2) combine these mult-scale simulations of
              chemically sensitive materials with critical experimental data, and (3) develop
              and implement software technologies that manage information flow among
              assemblies of large, disparate computer programs without significant 'hands-on'
              manipulation. 
Developed computational tools will be applied to several
              prototypical systems: the brittle fracture of SiO2 exacerbated by the influence
              of solvents, chemical polishing of surfaces, and dislocations emitted in
              silicon. 
The central objective of coupling theoretical descriptions of
              chemical processes and mechanical processes that occur on larger length scales,
              will be carried out by a team that spans four universities, six departments,
              and two companies, centered at the Quantum Theory Project of the University of
              Florida.  The team includes experts in all computational scales from the
              quantum mechanical scale to continuum descriptions. 
%%%
This is an award in
              the KDI initiative that is managed by DMR, CHE, and DMII. The proposed work
              constitutes a new computational challenge.  The PIs seek to couple different
              simulation methodologies, each able to describe chemical and mechanical
              processes, into a computational tool that will attack problems in which
              important chemical and mechanical processes occur concurrently.  The developed
              simulation technique will be applied to the fracture failure in the presence of
              chemical solvents and to the chemical polishing of materials.
***


