Title       : Multimedia Based Tools for Integration of Technology, Analysis and Design in
               Materials Handling Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a9980261

Award Number: 9980261
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $411923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sunderesh S. Heragu herags@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Graves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles J. Malmborg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,9299,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funding to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,  for the
              support of a Combined Research-Curriculum Development (CRCD) project entitled,
              "Multi-media Based Tools for Integration of Technology, Analysis and Design in
              Materials Handling Engineering Education," under the direction of Dr. Sunderesh
              Heragu.  The project's goals are to develop a multi-media based system for
              integrative instruction in materials handling engineering which can be
              distributed at a very low cost to U.S. universities via the web and CD-ROM
              media.  The system to be developed by a multi-disciplinary, multi-university
              team of technical content and multi-media technology experts, as well as
              communication, learning, evaluation and cognitive psychology experts, will
              contain modules on three major categories of analysis of these systems.  These
              modules will: a) introduce students to major categories of materials handling
              equipment, b) illustrate industrial applications of a major material handling
              device in each category, and c) teach the problem solving process through an
              extensive series of models, algorithms, problems and solutions which illustrate
              the creative application of quantitative tools and design problems in solving
              technology selection and technology analysis problems.  This will include tools
              for direct comparisons of the performance of alternative systems with an
              animated illustration of the effect of a decision on system performance.  The
              proposed system will be the first to directly link modern materials handling
              technology with the vast technical literature to which it applies.
