Title       : Aspects of Stochastic Differential Geometry in Function Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9980209

Award Number: 9980209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Salah-Eldin A. Mohammed salah@sfde.math.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9138,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This career advancement award is to enable the PI to study stochastic
              differential systems with memory, stochastic partial differential equations
              under geometric constraints, and their numerical aspects. Such models arise in
              engineering and physical applications. 

The award has several
              objectives:

The first objective is to offer the PI the opportunity to
              acquire new expertise  in differential geometry and numerical analysis. This
              activity will take the form of a study of the current literature on
              (stochastic) differential geometry, stochastic partial differential equations
              and stochastic numerics. The PI will consult 
with leading experts in these
              rapidly-developing areas.  

The second objective is to introduce new
              techniques from  differential geometry and numerics in order to  develop a
              theory of stochastic systems with memory and geometric constraints. In addition
              to its great relevance to physical applications, it is expected that the study
              of infinite-dimensional stochastic systems with constraints would  lead to very
              interesting connections with current and fast-growing research in stochastic
              differential geometry. 

The third objective is introduce a dynamical and
              differential geometric component into the existing and fast-growing theory of
              stochastic partial differential equations. The PI will study the ergodic theory
              of stochastic flows generated by  such systems.  
 
The fourth objective is
              to develop efficient algorithms  for the numerical simulation of stochastic 
              models with memory that arise in mechanical, control and electrical
              engineering, finance and economics, e.g. the 
option-pricing of financial
              securities whose evolution is governed by their past  history.

The fifth
              objective is to compile the results of the investigations into a graduate
              course targeting students majoring in mathematics, engineering and/or finance.
