Title       : Upgrade and Modernization of the Introductory Modern Physics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1999  
File        : a9980905

Award Number: 9980905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50694              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Peterson mpeterso@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Durso  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Sean Sutton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janice A. Hudgings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) This project is upgrading and modernizing the laboratory for the
              second year introductory course in modern physics. There are several
              motivations. First, a recent external Department Review committee singled out
              this laboratory in its recommendations. Second, a systematic series of visits
              to see what worked best at eleven nearby colleges revealed many new ideas to
              adapt and implement. Third, a new faculty member with expertise in
              electro-optics provides  the means to make this laboratory, early in the
              physics major, an exciting introduction to experimentation, incorporating
              current research. Finally, new models of pedagogy suggest this laboratory could
              be more inquiry-based and investigative. The project is equipping the new
              laboratory with optical tables, optical mounts and components, semiconductor
              lasers, a 1.0 meter spectrometer, and a CCD camera. The project is aiming at
              flexibility and reconfigurability of the laboratory, on the model of existing
              electronics and nuclear physics laboratories, so that experiments, once
              understood, can be easily modified to address new questions. The basic
              experiments of the laboratory are being reworked twice within the 24-month
              period of the grant, once during the school year and once in the summer, and
              they are being designed so that variations of them are easy to implement.
              Students are being encouraged to make such variations and publish the results
              of their investigations in webpage form, linked by the professor/referee/editor
              to the course homepage. It is expected this new lab to have a beneficial
              influence on students' later coursework in the major, especially the
              independent thesis projects of the senior year. It should also motivate
              students in the first year course to consider a major in physics.







