Title       : A Data Analysis Exercise Server for Introductory Statistics Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2000   
File        : a9980973

Award Number: 9980973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Todd Ogden ogden@stat.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Webster West  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21)

Almost no statistician would consider analyzing a
              data set by hand since the computer serves as the primary tool for every modern
              data analyst. While almost every introductory statistics course has some
              computer component, there have been numerous problems with providing students
              access to data and software, which have limited the impact of the computer in
              the area of statistical education.  The World Wide Web (WWW) can be used to
              solve many of the problems, which have impeded the full implementation of
              computer-based data analysis in basic statistical education. Students can now
              gain easy access to data and software to analyze it via the WWW. With this goal
              in mind, the PI's have created a statistical package called WebStat which runs
              as a Java applet. Using the platform independent features of Java, this package
              runs within all common WWW browsers and on every major computer platform. The
              project is designing a WWW site around WebStat software which will enable
              instructors from across the country to easily introduce students to modern data
              analysis using the full capabilities of the software. The site will feature a
              pool of meaningful exercises in data analysis from which instructors may setup
              assignments for their students. The site will have the capability to track,
              grade and accumulate student responses to a variety of questions testing their
              data analysis skills. The ultimate goal of the project is to enhance student
              comprehension of elementary statistics by supplying a flexible system of
              practice exercises which emphasize data analysis skills and the interpretation
              of results.





