Title       : Development of In Situ Gamma-Ray Spectroscopy Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9980934

Award Number: 9980934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55280              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Johnson wjohnson@ccmail.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13)
PROJECT SUMMARY


Radiation detection exercises in
              undergraduate physics laboratories have been traditionally limited to
              experiments examining the basic properties of radioactive decay, the effects of
              shielding, and detector characteristics. Applied undergraduate laboratories
              have often been designed with a curriculum that supports operational health
              physics. In this project, environmental physics experiments involving a
              portable gamma-ray spectroscopy system will be integrated into a senior-level
              laboratory and an environmental health physics course. Experiments designed to
              stimulate the interest of non-science majors in applied radiation protection
              and introduce the scientific method will be included in introductory science
              courses. The portable equipment will be also be used for teaching and
              demonstrations at a historically black college (FVSU) that has cooperative
              academic agreement with UNLV. Equipment involved in this project will be used
              to accommodate a growing number of undergraduate research projects in
              environmental radiation, which increasingly involve gamma-ray spectrometry of
              field samples. Over the next decade, many undergraduate physics programs will
              begin to revise curriculums to emphasize applied options. With this in mind,
              the experiments adapted, developed or improved under this program will be
              evaluated and the successes and difficulties reported to other science programs
              at national meetings and through literature.






