Title       : Integration Technologies for Optical/Flow Devices for Biomacromolecule Detection
               and Separation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2001     
File        : a9980828

Award Number: 9980828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $519998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Osgood osgood@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan C. West  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vijay Modi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Miguel Levy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rastislav Levicky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This emerging technology of "micro total analysis systems" (uTAS) is ideal for
              processing of small quantities of chemical or biological species in a
              miniaturized, chip-based format that is robust, superior in performance,
              economical, and portable.  This proposal focuses on broad scientific and
              engineering issues needed for integrated optical/microfluidic devices, with a
              strong component addressing fundamental concepts relevant to processing of
              liquid-phase materials in confined spaces (e.g. DNA solutions).  The program is
              foremost an effort to advance basic technologies and knowledge rather than a
              developmental project aimed at producing a specific device.  The research
              topics include: (i) on-chip integration of microfluidic structures with
              relatively short-wavelength optical systems for light sources, detectors, and
              waveguide routing systems, (ii) investigation of the transport of simple fluids
              and macromolecular solutions in submicrometer channels, (iii) fabrication of
              novel integrated mechanical actuators, and (iv) development of simulation and
              design tools for integrated microfluidic/optical uTAS systems.  Various test
              structures will be fabricated with regard to these goals, and the fabrication
              effort will vigorously pursue new materials and prototyping strategies for
              device production.  The program involves an interdisciplinary group of faculty
              from Columbia University's Departments of Applied Physics, Electrical,
              Mechanical, and Chemical Engineering as well as collaboration with other
              universities.


