Title       : Parents in poverty and science education reform: A relational systems approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a9980592

Award Number: 9980592
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $654069             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan B. Empson empson@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Angela C. Barton  (Principal Investigator former)
              Corey Drake  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jere Confrey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The focus of this research is on parents in poor urban communities and the
              relationships they establish and the roles they play in elementary schools that
              are active in implementing reform-based science education. We intend to move
              the research around parents and science education beyond the underdeveloped
              belief that parent participation is good for students.  We want to know what
              this participation looks like in centers of urban poverty involved in school
              science reform efforts, how parents negotiate their actions and understandings
              with others involved in school science reform, and how a relational systems
              model might help to shed new insights on the roles parents play in school
              science reform in poor urban areas. Because we are focusing on parents in urban
              poverty and because we intend to understand the complexity and depth of parent
              participation in school science reform, we will make a concerted effort to draw
              half of the parent participant pool from community, family homeless shelters.
              These questions are significant given that 20% of all children attend school in
              urban poverty, and the city represented in this study supports large numbers of
              homeless families.
   
Specifically, this REPP proposal outlines a program of
              research designed to analyze the nature, qualities, and impact of parental
              relationships and interactions in elementary schools serving poor urban
              children in Austin, TX that are working to improve science instruction within
              the scope and spirit of current science education reform initiatives.  While it
              is generally acknowledged that where you find good urban schools you will find
              caring and motivated parents, it has been difficult to construct an account of
              parental interaction, grounded in everyday practice, that goes beyond either a
              general belief that caring and motivated parents matter in effective school
              reform or a laundry list of things that "good parents" do for their children's
              education.  Using qualitative research methodology, we will research the
              following questions:

- BELIEFS AND ACTIONS.  How do parents in poor urban
              settings perceive "best practice" in science education in schools initiating
              science education reform, and what do they see as their role in helping to
              enact such a process? How do such parental beliefs "measure up" against
              expectations held by others in the science education reform process (children,
              teachers, administrators, community leaders) about best practice and parents'
              roles in such a process?  What do parents do to enact their beliefs: at home?
              in the community? at schools?
- SUSTAINING RELATIONSHIPS. How do parents in
              poor urban settings negotiate common understandings about beliefs and practices
              and build sustaining relationships with each other and with actors within the
              school (teachers, administrators, and their children) in school districts
              acting to reshape science education in line with current ideas of best
              practice, especially if and when their beliefs and practices differ from
              expectations held by these audiences?  What are the nature and qualities of
              these relationships? What kinds of support structures (institutional, material,
              intellectual) sustain these interactions and relationships?
- SCIENCE
              EDUCATION REFORM.  In what ways does documenting and analyzing the formation,
              nature, and qualities of sustaining relationships between parents and actors
              within schools- and the kinds of beliefs and actions those relationships
              support-shed light on what it means to enact school reform in science education
              for children in poor urban centers?  How might we develop, refine, and
              implement this model in science education reform?

