Title       : KDI: Simulation and Modeling of Organic and Inorganic Non-crystalline
               Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2001    
File        : a9980100

Award Number: 9980100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1700000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paulette Clancy pc@cheme.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin C. Kan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael P. Teter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George G. Malliaras  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael O. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1339,1348,9162,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9980100
Clancy
This is an award under the KDI initiative that is managed by
              DMR and CTS.  The PIs seek to describe structural and dynamical order during a
              phase transformation.  This order can range over the continuum between perfect
              order of a crystalline material and the nearly total absence of long-range
              order of the amorphous phase.  The large dimensionality needed to represent the
              total dynamical order of a system will be reduced to a small set of parameters
              to define the possibility of a transformation between phases.  Unified models
              will be provided which define a set of order parameters that can be applied to
              materials with various levels of order; an accuracy of distinction between
              phases of more than 90% will be attempted.  Test bed materials are both organic
              (small rigid thiophenes that are ideal for comparison to simulation studies)
              and inorganic (various morphological forms of silicon).  To model these
              accurately and to make large-scale dynamical simulations needed to study order
              transformations, a new quantum mechanical algorithm will need to be developed
              to allow calculations with at least the speed and accuracy of current
              tight-binding methods.  The PIs propose to develop such a quantum mechanical
              algorithm based on the Harris functional and plan to incorporate Voter's
              hyperdynamic techniques to increase accessible simulation times.  Reverse Monte
              Carlo techniques will also be used to develop a scheme for creating systems
              with a chosen extent of order.  
Using this suite of linked simulation tools
              that can describe processes from nanoscopic to macroscopic length scales, the
              PIs will establish co-relation and phase transformation probability of these
              material models subject to processing conditions (thermal cycles, nucleation
              sites, plasma-enhanced precursors, etc.) The proposed simulation methodology
              will be tested on a solidifying interface structure, examining and
              understanding the roles of molecular architecture and inter-atomic potentials. 
              Quantitative links will be developed that connect processing conditions and the
              resulting structure in complex materials.  The critical point at which the
              final structure of the solid is predictable or controllable given a metastable
              starting point of known order.  
%%%
This is an award under the KDI
              initiative that is managed by DMR and CTS.  The proposed work constitutes a new
              computational challenge.  Observing that the ability to tailor local and
              long-range structural order in materials is of great technological utility, the
              PIs seek to develop large-scale numerical simulation techniques that would be
              used to provide a fundamental description of structural order and processing in
              these materials.  Work will be performed in conjunction with experiments on
              model systems of commercial interest.  This work will contribute to the field
              of organic optoelectronics, creating polymers with controlled properties, in
              modeling the low-temperature processing of silicon, the integration of
              biosensors, and stacked 3D components. It will lead to a coupling of organic
              and inorganic systems for biosensors.
***


