Title       : Get Focused:Solving Real-World Problems Through Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1999  
File        : a9980815

Award Number: 9980815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53098              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherell K. Byrd   (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia P. Lindsey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip E. Shuler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fort Lewis College
	      
	      Durango, CO  81301    303/247-7661

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
This project addresses the need for more critical
              observational skills among college biology students and the need to have
              students see the microscope as a tool of inquiry, rather than a tool for
              observation only. The main objectives are to: develop and adapt inquiry-based
              modules using microscopy, improve students' skills of observation, encourage
              collaborative activities in the classroom, encourage use of electronic
              resources, and build a community of learners within the Biology Department and
              across campus.  Additionally, an opportunity for regional secondary school
              teachers to obtain credits for continued certification by offering an
              in-service institute on microscopy is being provided.  Expected outcomes are
              increased critical observation skills of the students, a tight-knit academic
              community and hence greater retention of students in the program, and an
              awareness by the students that they may use the microscope to ask questions and
              solve problems.  Five inquiry-based modules plus the in-service institute are
              being developed.  One module is being designed for each grade level, with
              exercises increasing in complexity as the students proceed to the upper
              division courses.  Each module is asking the students to participate in the
              formulation and/or testing of a hypothesis to reinforce the process of
              scientific investigation.  Exercises are structured so that they reflect "real
              world" problems, e.g., wood decomposition, importance of mycorrhizal fungi,
              bacterial contamination of work surfaces and intracellular calcium as a
              regulator of cellular function.  Some of the development is based on adaptation
              of microscopy lab teaching modules developed by faculty at Kent State U with
              NSF support. 







