Title       : Research-Curriculum Development in Tissue Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a9980298

Award Number: 9980298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $509602             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cato T. Laurencin laurencin@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wei Sun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank K. Ko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohamed A. Attawia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michele S. Marcolongo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,9299,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This CRCD program in Tissue Engineering at Drexel University,  is an outgrowth
              of  over three years of collaborative research and team teaching by Professors
              Cato Laurencin and Frank Ko in advanced biomaterials and  a combined
              laboratory-lecture course in tissue engineering wherein team work, laboratory
              skills and communication are stressed.  The research activities are organized
              into five key areas including: advanced biomaterials, cell-tissue-construct
              interaction, scaffold design and manufacturing, bio-surfaces, and computer
              aided tissue engineering.  The curriculum is designed to give maximum
              flexibility to be adopted to various engineering and science MS and BS/MS
              programs.  Of the six courses designed for the specialization in Tissue
              Engineering, three of them are new courses and three are modified from existing
              courses.  These courses are laboratory intensive with emphasis on team
              projects.  A web-based outcome assessment methodology will be employed to
              evaluate the curriculum.  The key and unique features of this curriculum
              development proposal are:1)The program utilizes web-based learning techniques
              which not only will encourage student initiated learning, but will allow rapid
              dissemination of components of the curriculum at the local and national level,
              once the efficacy of the curriculum is validated. 2)The program involves strong
              industrial support through the Ben Franklin Technology Partnership Program, a
              state funded academia-industry liaison organization, which has pledged seed
              funds to begin the industrial component of the curriculum program.  3) The
              program has an unusually strong commitment to developing underrepresented
              minority scientists in Tissue Engineering through links with Lincoln University
              in Pennsylvania, the nation's oldest historically Black college.               
                                    
