Title       : A True Undergraduate Life-Science Research Community: Classroom to Career
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1999  
File        : a9980669

Award Number: 9980669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott L. Kight kight@pegasus.montclair.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Gaynor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Smallwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dirk W. Vanderklein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montclair State University
	      Valley Road & Normal Avenue
	      Montclair, NJ  07043    201/893-4000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
Traditional programs designed to prepare
              undergraduates for discovery-based life science careers, such as biology
              education and academic/professional research, often do not provide complete
              exposure to the process of discovery. Faculty-directed student projects are
              generally limited to vertical and unidirectional information exchange rather
              than the horizontal and multidirectional exchange of a true academic community.
               The goal of this project is to address the problem through the adaptation and
              implementation of a curriculum that fosters a student-centered community of
              scholarship among undergraduate biology majors. Students are enrolling in a
              two-semester research course in one of three general areas: organism biology,
              molecular biology and ecology. The first semester in each sequence is providing
              both lecture and laboratory experience with the central goal that teams of
              students generate quality grant proposals for evaluation by their peers.
              Successful proposals are qualifying students to enroll in the respective
              subsequent course, in which the central goal is for students to conduct the
              proposed research and generate quality scientific manuscripts and paper
              presentations for evaluation by their peers. These collaborative and peer-based
              activities, coupled with an integrative department-wide undergraduate research
              symposium are pivotal in producing a true undergraduate academic community. 
              Preliminary evidence suggests that such an approach can provide invaluable
              experience and have a dramatic impact on comprehension, retention, performance
              and interest in biology. This program would represent a major curricular
              addition to the biology department and enhanced student interest and success in
              graduate study, science education and biological research is anticipated.  The
              effort represents an adaptation of a similar project that was piloted
              successfully at Skidmore College.


