Title       : The Antarctic Search for Meteorites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a9980452

Award Number: 9980452
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417851             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph P. Harvey rph@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9980452
Harvey

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for continuation of the
              Antarctic Search for Meteorites (ANSMET). Since 1976, ANSMET has recovered more
              than 10,000 meteorite specimens from locations along the Transantarctic
              Mountains. This award supports continued recovery of Antarctic meteorites
              during six successive austral summer field seasons, starting with the 2000-2001
              season and ending with the 2005-2006 season. Under this project, systematic
              searches for meteorite specimens will take place at previously discovered
              stranding surfaces, and reconnaissance work will be conducted to discover and
              explore the extent of new areas with meteorite concentrations. ANSMET recovery
              teams will deploy by air to locations in the deep field for periods of 5-7
              weeks. While at the meteorite stranding surface, field team members will search
              the ice visually, traversing on foot or on snowmobile. Specimens will be
              collected under the most sterile conditions practical and samples will remain
              frozen until returned to the Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. At
              the JSC, initial characterization and sample distribution to all interested
              researchers takes place under the auspices of an interagency agreement between
              NSF, NASA, and the Smithsonian Institution.

The impact of ANSMET has been
              substantial and this will continue under this award. The meteorites recovered
              by ANSMET are the best and most reliable source of new, non-microscopic
              extraterrestrial material, providing essential "ground-truth" concerning the
              materials that make up the asteroids, planets and other bodies of our solar
              system. The system for their characterization and distribution is unparalleled
              and their subsequent study has fundamentally changed our understanding of the
              solar system. ANSMET meteorites have helped researchers explore the conditions
              that were present in the nebula from which our solar system was born 4.556
              billion years ago and provided samples of asteroids, ranging from primitive
              bodies unchanged since the formation of the solar system to complex,
              geologically active miniature planets. ANSMET samples proved, against the
              conventional wisdom, that some meteorites actually represent planetary
              materials, delivered to us from the Moon and Mars, completely changing our view
              of the geology of those bodies. ANSMET meteorites have even generated a new
              kind of inquiry into one of the most fundamental scientific questions possible;
              the question of biological activity in the universe as a whole. Over the past
              twenty years, ANSMET meteorites have economically provided a continuous and
              readily available supply of extraterrestrial materials for research, and should
              continue to do so in the future.


