Title       : Molecular Biology Techniques: A Research-Integrated Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1999    
File        : a9980931

Award Number: 9980931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54339              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly Clendening biobzc@hofstra.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hofstra University
	      Office of the Provost
	      Hempstead, NY  115491440    516/463-6810

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Science  (61)  This advanced molecular biology laboratory course,
              which uses a project approach to learning and incorporates an independent
              research component, is designed to improve the preparation of biology students
              for careers in research, biotechnology and science education and to increase
              knowledge retention and integration of concepts among upper level biology
              majors. The students use enhancer trap techniques in Drosophila melanogaster to
              work on two related projects in a single semester. One project carefully
              proceeds through a set of experiments that take the students from a behavior
              mutant (flightless), to a cloned and sequenced gene (gene for muscle myosin
              heavy chain protein), and finally to a study of the protein. This part of the
              laboratory experience exposes the students to a wide range of the techniques
              and instrumentation commonly used in biotechnology and molecular biology
              laboratories and demonstrates the logical progression of a research program.
              The second project involves an independent research component. It starts with
              mutants which have already been isolated but for which the mutated gene has not
              yet been discovered.  Students use the techniques they have learned to clone
              and sequence the gene and to begin to study the protein. The integration of a
              research component into this laboratory course increases students' mastery of
              the principles of scientific inquiry and their ability to draw on their
              accumulated knowledge to solve research problems. Therefore, in addition to
              exposing students to specific techniques and instrumentation, this course also
              increases overall learning and helps students integrate concepts across
              disciplines. This course gives students who plan careers in research or
              biotechnology practical experience that mimics the realities of the laboratory
              setting. It provides students who are planning careers in education with the
              background necessary to bring modem technology and inquiry-based learning into
              the classroom. The project adapts ideas and teaching techniques outlined in two
              NSF supported projects:  that of Malcolm Campbell (DUE 9851242 as described in
              http://www.bio.davidson.edu/Biology/IDH.html) and of Jill Keeney (Career Grant
              9722274). 

