Title       : Magnetically-Controlled Microfluidic Devices and Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9980860

Award Number: 9980860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice P. Gast   (Principal Investigator current)
              Juan G. Santiago  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this Engineering Microsystems: "XYZ" on a Chip project is to
              investigate magnetic colloidal particles and their use in several micro-fluid
              mechanics applications.  The need to miniaturize and perform parallel chemical
              and biochemical processes for efficient drug screening, chemical detection, and
              combinatorial chemistry motivates interest in chemical processes on a
              microscopic scale.  Most of the current state of the art relies on
              pressure-driven and electrokinetic processes to transport analytes and products
              around device.  In this work another control parameter, a magnetic field, is
              added to the system.  The self-assembly of magnetic colloidal particles into
              chains is the key process.  When tethered to surfaces in microscopic fluid flow
              and suspended analytes.  The microscopic flow system, chemically patterning the
              surfaces, and linking the magnetic chains to surfaces will be designed, and
              then studying the resulting fluid mechanics and magnetic chain dynamics will be
              investigated.  The fundamental issues to be addressed include: the dynamics and
              mechanical properties of tethered and untethered chains of magnetic colloidal
              particles; the microscopic fluid mechanics; the filtering and sieving
              capabilities of magnetic bead arrays; and the micro-scale mixing performance of
              actuated micromagnetic stirrers.  Examples are presented for separation
              processes involving sieving or filtration of cells or particles, and the
              converse issue of effective mixing in a microreactor.

This project will be
              conducted in collaboration with the Stanford Nanofabrication Facility, a part
              of the NSF National Nanofabrication Users Network.


