Title       : Internet Congestion Control: Design, Modeling, and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9980552

Award Number: 9980552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald F. Towsley towsley@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Weibo Gong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Future high-speed networks will be significantly larger and more complex
              than any existing network.  The variety and interaction of the applications,
              the middleware and transport protocols, and the router/switch resource
              management algorithms will make the design, development, control, management
              and evaluation of these networks an exceptionally difficult task. One of the
              most critical components in the network control architecture is that concerned
              with congestion control. The Internet has relied till now on the additive
              increase, multiplicative decrease mechanism, found in most variations of TCP,
              for congestion control. There is increasing recognition, however, that new
              congestion control mechanisms, which will be able to coexist with TCP, are
              needed in future high speed networks. This is due to the increasing need to
              provide for heterogeneous application requirements and because of many future
              applications will rely on multicast. As is, TCP congestion control is
              inadequate for handling either heterogeneity or multicast.
     There is also
              a need for a better methodology for modeling and analyzing the TCP performance
              and the performance of coming congestion control algorithms. The development of
              such a methodology is especially needed to evaluate the behavior of a mix of
              TCP sessions and future non-TCP sessions so as to avoid any unpleasant
              surprises as they are deployed. This proposal describes new and fundamental
              research in two broad areas:
     (1)Formula-based congestion control. The
              researcher proposes research on a new approach to rate-based congestion
              control.   The project introduces a formula-based approach in which a session
              monitors its end-end loss rate and adapts its transmission rate accordingly.
              The research shows how this can be used to construct a TCP-friendly rate
              control algorithm and then outline a research agenda for exploring and
              exploiting the potential of this approach to support multicast applications,
              and to support heterogeneous applications.
     (2)Performance evaluation of
              congestion control algorithms. The researcher proposes research on the
              performance evaluation of different congestion control algorithms based on the
              use of 
stochastic differential equations.
     This proposed research
              represents a fundamentally important step in the understanding, design,
              analysis of congestion control algorithms needed by the next generation
              transport protocols.

