Title       : KDI: Visualization and Spatial Reasoning: Cognitive Models, Skill Acquisition
               and Intelligent Tutors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1999    
File        : a9980045

Award Number: 9980045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Finbarr C. Sloane                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $988730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. Fisher fisher@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian R. Grosse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith Rayner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly P. Woolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sundar Krishnamurty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1347,8877,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Visualization and spatial reasoning are integral components of intelligent
              systems.  They form the basis for understanding a wide variety of topics across
              science, mathematics and engineering, including molecular structures,
              topologies, motion and forces, and manufacturing processes.  Historically, many
              students, especially female students, have had difficulty acquiring
              visualization and spatial reasoning skills, creating potential barriers to
              advancement in science, mathematics and engineering.  Within engineering,
              faculty have found it both challenging and time consuming to teach topics that
              require strong visualization and spatial reasoning skills, topics such as
              product design, manufacturing, and engineering modeling and analysis. 
              Similarly, engineering students have found these topics unmotivating and
              difficult to comprehend.  With the advent of sophisticated computer graphics
              and animation, one might expect that the need for human visualization skills
              has been eliminated.  But this is not the case.  Computers cannot replace the
              need for these skills in science and engineering just as calculators have not
              replaced the need for quantitative skills.  Thus this project has three goals:
              l) to advance our understanding of human visualization and spatial reasoning;
              2) to use this knowledge to develop computer-based visualization instruction;
              and 3) to incorporate this instruction into intelligent multimedia tutors in
              ways that maximize their effectiveness for a broad mix of students while
              minimizing the development time and cost for the faculty involved.  The
              achievement of such goals has required that we put together a team of
              researchers with backgrounds in psychology, education, engineering and computer
              science.  

Although visualization and spatial reasoning are fundamental
              cognitive skills, the cognitive processes that govern them are poorly
              understood.  Thus, as our first goal, we will undertake during year l a series
              of experiments in our Eye Movement Laboratories designed to test alternative
              theories of how individuals represent mentally and reason spatially about 3-D
              objects and their transformations.  We will use the detailed eye movement data
              as a window on the underlying cognitive processes.  We have made similar use of
              such data in reading, visual search and scene perception (Rayner, l992, l998;
              Rayner & Pollatsek, l992).  We expect these data to reveal large, stable
              differences among individuals, not only between low and high spatial ability
              participants, but also within groups of participants of similar spatial
              abilities.

Visualization and spatial reasoning skills are critical to the
              understanding of many concepts within science and engineering.  Yet, we have
              little understanding of how we can best teach these skills.  Thus, as our
              second goal, we will develop during year 2 computer-based visualization skills
              instruction modules based on what we have learned during the first year about
              the problems that individuals have and the strategies that work successfully,
              modules that will take advantage of current advances in instructional theories
              and technologies.  Having developed the modules, we will then conduct a series
              of experiments in the second year designed to test theoretically motivated
              methods for delivering visualization instruction that improve the content of
              the instruction delivered to high and low spatial ability learners, optimize
              the mix of part- and whole-task training, and maximize the number of
              individuals that develop expertise.
