Title       : X-Ray Diffraction Analysis Throughout the Curriculum: a Powerful Tool for
               Understanding Molecular Structure and Bonding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1999  
File        : a9980921

Award Number: 9980921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74707              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen D. Hunter adhunter@cc.ysu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Youngstown St University
	      One University Plaza
	      Youngstown, OH  445550001    330/941-2377

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
Recent advances in hardware, theory, and software coupled with
              the rapidly improving price and performance of personal computers have combined
              to make single crystal diffraction methods simultaneously more powerful and
              easier to perform.  This is rapidly increasing their importance in fields as
              diverse as synthetic chemistry, materials science, and structural biology in
              both industry and academia.  For these reasons, diffraction methods are being
              integrated throughout the curriculum with the aid of materials produced in this
              project.  These include the production of  1) tested instructor and student
              background materials and documentation, 2) tested laboratory resources
              including module plans and laboratory exercises, 3) a tested comprehensive
              single crystal diffraction methods lab manual, 4) student diffraction analysis
              software and software documentation, 5) annotated diffraction data sets, and 6)
              a website with these materials posted. Both introductory and advanced materials
              are being generated.  At the introductory level, these materials focus on the
              relationship between experimentally derived structural data and bonding theory.
               At the more advanced level, these materials include a more comprehensive
              treatment of the structure/bonding relationship, modules on single crystal
              diffraction suitable for insertion into upper division courses of several
              types, and materials to support more extended treatments of these topics in
              dedicated courses and undergraduate research projects.  The introductory
              materials serve a broad student base, including all science and technology
              majors, health and human service majors and pre-service science teachers.  They
              are also being prepared in a form suitable for use with non-science and
              non-technology majors and high school chemistry students.  The advanced
              materials serve the needs of undergraduate students majoring in chemistry and
              allied disciplines (e.g., biology, geology, physics, materials science and
              engineering).  The new materials produced will be assessed comprehensively by
              using both peer reviewers, in a two cycle process, and by formal student
              assessment instruments.  These will include pre- and post-exposure student
              outcome studies including student learning and conceptual understanding.  Test
              sites include both university and high school laboratories and classrooms.   
              This project strongly emphasizes the theme of the integration of technology
              into education and has teacher preparation and faculty development components. 
