Title       : Experiential Signal Processing Laboratory (ESPLab) for Multiple Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2001    
File        : a9980927

Award Number: 9980927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199917             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter F. Swaszek swaszek@ele.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ying Sun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramdas Kumaresan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gloria F. Boudreaux-Bartels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Electrical (55)
 
This project is developing a collection of
              demonstrations and experiments for hands-on, active learning in digital signal
              processing. Its goals are to enhance student learning, reform teaching methods,
              and improve outreach efforts to K-12 and during on-campus tours. Within the
              University of Rhode Island's Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
              the Experiential Signal Processing Laboratory (ESPLab) provides a centralized
              facility for three different undergraduate curricula: electrical, computer, and
              biomedical engineering. The facility is supporting in-class demonstrations,
              regularly scheduled laboratories, and independent student projects. 

Those
              programs whose ideas being adapted are: (1) Georgia Tech and Rose-Hulman bring
              DSP concepts into much of their undergraduate electrical engineering curricula.
              Georgia Tech's effort, called "Technology First", mixes the use of computer
              technology with the theoretical and analytical skills normally developed in
              undergraduate courses.  (2) The Univ. of Colorado at Boulder provides an
              interdisciplinary learning arena (laboratory) across all four years of their
              curriculum. In the sophomore and junior years, theory courses are augmented
              with hands-on, open-ended explorations.  Implementation involves a three-year
              plan to develop demonstrations and experiments in digital signal processing.
              These will be employed to improve student learning in nine regular courses (two
              engineering college wide freshmen courses and seven junior and senior level
              courses in the electrical, computer, and biomedical engineering curricula) and
              through four special open-ended undergraduate courses.

 Specific experiments
              and demonstration projects being developed include variable-rate audio
              sampling, real-time speech processing, digital FM radio, audio/video streaming,
              real-time data compression, digital position control of a laser spot,
              accelerated processing of angiograms and mammograms, detection of QRS waves in
              electrocardiogram, digital control of neuronal membrane potential, and
              computerized imaging of kinetic experiments. By emphasizing experiential
              learning, the proposed ESPLab is impacting 13 existing courses across the three
              curricula. The common experimental platform is also helping students reinforce
              their problem solving abilities and develop marketable DSP hardware skills. The
              effectiveness of the project is evaluated with the help of a faculty associate
              with expertise in education and assessment. Dissemination of results from this
              project is accomplished through a dedicated web site, publications in relevant
              conferences and journals, and faculty development workshops.

