Title       : A New Geophysics Field Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9980689

Award Number: 9980689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William C. Beston                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Clayton clay@gps.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joann M. Stock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Simons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42)  
We have developed a field Geophysics course based on adaptation
              of teaching materials and techniques from other universities (U.C. Riverside,
              Lancaster University, Georgia Tech, U.C. San Diego, and M.I.T.) and integration
              with commercially available products for satellite image processing and
              mapping. The course has been implemented with standard commercial field
              equipment used in the geotechnical community. Each year the class is structured
              to focus on a different scientific problem attacked with a variety of
              observations.  This approach was used successfully at M.I.T. for a number of
              years. The specific goals of the course are to teach the students: 1) how to
              design a field experiment, 2) how to incorporate the techniques of modern
              satellite and GPS based methods, 3) how to use computers in synthesizing
              results, 4) how to work as a group to develop a consensus set of conclusions,
              and 5) how to present their results in a coherent manner.  The success of the
              students in achieving these goals is assessed on their performance in field
              camp, but primarily on the basis of a written report which we have structured
              to measure the objectives. We have developed this course by adapting tools used
              by other institutions: a magnetometer, an electrical resistivity system, a
              RTK-GPS survey system, a total station,  and an in-field computing system
              coupled with advanced analysis software (ER Mapper for satellite image
              processing, ISIS for processing seismic data, MatLab and SAC2000 for analysis,
              and ArcInfo for mapping) to acquire the capability of in-field analysis.  In
              the first year we started with simple analyses of gravity, resistivity, and
              seismic refraction data.  The gravity analysis was freeware from Lancaster
              University. The resistivity package was from UC Riverside.  For use with
              magnetics observations we have software that was obtained from U.C. San Diego
              (Scripps Institution of Oceanography).  In future years, we anticipate
              including seismic reflection and interactive image processing, as well as
              complete in-field interpretation of the results. The course syllabus, reading
              lists, and information related to specific field areas will be posted on the
              Web for anyone to use.  Scientific results that arise from the course will be
              submitted for publication.  Our experience with particular field areas, data we
              acquire in those areas, and software we use for in-field interpretation will be
              freely shared with other academic institutions.
