Title       : Multidisciplinary Science and Engineering Learning Communities for Students and
               Faculty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9980908

Award Number: 9980908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199694             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna M. Hughes dhughes@uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen F. Stein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa L. Harlow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joan Peckham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mercedes A. Rivero-Hudec  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)

This project seeks to improve science, mathematics,
              engineering, and technology (SMET) education through the creation of Learning
              Communities (LCs) for students and faculty. The goals of the SMET learning
              communities are: first, to attract more students, especially women, into SMET
              majors and courses; second, to increase retention of students, especially women
              in SMET majors; third, to foster confidence among students, especially women in
              SMET majors and courses; fourth, to connect women SMET majors to support
              networks of interdisciplinary faculty and peers; fifth, to aid faculty to
              increase student learning by training them to use of innovative, research-based
              teaching strategies; and finally, to increase faculty understanding of
              innovative pedagogy to facilitate student learning in highly technical SMET
              courses. The project is adapting and implementing similar LC efforts underway
              at the University of Washington, California State University at Sacremento,
              Illinois State University, and the University of Texas at El Paso (this last
              project has received funding from NSF for some of its work). Resources and
              expertise from other projects described in the FIPSE National Learning
              Communities Dissemination Project are also being used. The first LC, Computer
              Science Recruitment, involves 3 courses taken simultaneously by 25 freshman
              women interested in computers. The second LC, Quantitative and Research
              Psychology, brings 25 students together in a sequence of 3 courses to increase
              interest and understanding in methodological aspects of psychology. In the
              third LC, Writing and Natural Sciences, 25 non-science students are taking 3
              courses simultaneously each aimed at developing knowledge and confidence in
              science skills. The fourth LC, First Year Engineering, provides 2 bridge
              programs for 20 women between high school and college. Faculty involved in the
              LC program are being mentored in 2 year-long Faculty LCs, sharing strategies
              and support for SMET teaching. In all LCs, students and faculty connect with
              others across SMET disciplines. Results are being widely disseminated in 2
              regional conferences, as well as academic conferences and journal articles in
              several disciplines. 






