Title       : Formation Mechanisms of Self-Assembled Monolayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2000   
File        : a9980250

Award Number: 9980250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel K. Schwartz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 9161,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
              Program, addresses the formation mechanisms of self-assembled monolayer thin
              films.  Professor Daniel Schwartz and his group in the Department of Chemistry
              at Tulane University use a combination of methods to examine the detailed
              microscopic mechanism of monolayer growth, including two and three dimensional
              transport of molecules, the structure of the growing film, and the aggregation
              of molecules in the layer.  Scanning probe microscopy is used to monitor the
              morphology of the growing monolayer, and reflection absorption infrared and
              X-ray scattering methods are used to provide molecular structure information. 
              Phosphonic, sulfonic and carboxylic acid monolayers growing on mica and
              sapphire substrates are examined under a systematic variation of growth
              conditions.  The overall goal of the research is to develop a detailed and
              quantitative model of the formation of self-assembled monolayers from solution.
               

Organic thin films have important applications in material surface
              modification and as models for biological membrane systems.  The detailed
              understanding of the mechanisms of growth of these self-assembled monolayer
              materials is the goal of this research project, carried out in the Tulane
              University laboratories of Professor Daniel Schwartz.  With the support of the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, the goal of this research project is
              to obtain molecular level information about the growth of a range of molecular
              acid monolayers on oxide substrates, and to develop a detailed model of the
              growth process.  The results of this research will be useful in the
              understanding of these technologically important model systems, and in their
              subsequent design and application for the modification of material surfaces.
              



