Title       : Seismic Properties of Rocks from an Active Volcanic System: Long Valley Caldera,
               California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a9980548

Award Number: 9980548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146233             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara E. John bjohn@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Fountain  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1044,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-9980548:  
David M Fountain and Barbara E John 

	Advances in
              high-resolution seismic techniques indicate that it may be possible to image
              plumbing systems of active or dormant explosive volcanic systems. In order to
              interpret P- and S- wave velocity data obtained from these studies, it is
              important to thoroughly understand the variables that control seismic
              velocities (magma, hydrothermal  alteration, fractures, rock porosity, water
              and/or steam saturation,  elevated pore pressure of water and/or steam, and
              variations rock  composition). Toward this end, this research project will
              investigate the physical properties of rocks comprising the large Long Valley
              Caldera, California. Intensive geophysical experiments, geological studies, and
              drilling in the hydrothermal system provide an unparalleled view of the
              interior of a large caldera system. Samples from the numerous intracaldera
              drill-holes, including the Long Valley Exploratory Well, afford an opportunity
              to examine variations in seismic velocities of rocks within the upper three
              kilometers of the caldera. These drill-holes penetrate the main intracaldera
              components of this giant volcanic system: various post-caldera rhyolites and
              basalts, the Bishop Tuff, and Sierran basement rocks. 
	 
Laboratory
              measurements will be conducted on core recovered from intracaldera drill-holes
              and outflow deposits and include P- and S- wave velocities as a function of
              confining pressure, pore fluid pressure, and temperature. Companion analysis of
              mineralogical and chemical composition, pore geometry, pore volume, density,
              nature and degree of alteration, and other textural parameters will allow
              quantification of the controls on seismic velocity. This study will be the
              first systematic study of the seismic properties of the constituents of large
              explosive silicic caldera systems measured at elevated confining pressure, high
              temperature, and pore pressure. 


