Title       : Regulation, Scheduling, and Flow Control for Quality of Service Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a9980526

Award Number: 9980526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajeev Agrawal agrawal@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The proposed project will investigate a number of problems in the efficient
              support of different qualities of service (QoS). Due to the scarcity of network
              resources and the emergence of new applications, it is considered crucial that
              the current internet evolve from a best effort service to one that supports
              different QoS. This problem was explored in the IETF first in the context of
              integrated services and more recently in the context of differentiated
              services. One of the key problems with the work in integrated services was the
              lack of scalability of per-microflow scheduling in the core of the network, and
              the basic tenet of differentiated services has been to move per-microflow
              operations to the edge of the network and deal with only macroflows in the
              interior of the network. Nevertheless, some of the key traffic elements such as
              regulators (to shape, police, and mark microflows at the edge as well as
              macroflows at the boundary of different subnetworks) and schedulers (across
              different macroflows and service classes) are still needed to provide the
              different QoS. Higher multiplexing gains are also sought by looking at flows
              statistically rather than in the worst case. Moreover, schemes that use a
              combination of end-to-end flow control and policing/marking at the microflow
              level and dropping (RIO)/scheduling at the macroflow level have also been
              proposed to provide a combination of assured QoS along with the ability to use
              additional available bandwidth. The objective of this proposal is to engineer
              these key traffic control elements - regulators, schedulers, and flow control
              mechanisms - so as to not only deliver the different QoS desired, but to do so
              in a manner that maximizes the network utility.
     In order to accomplish
              this objective, the project will rely on a modeling and analysis framework that
              has recently been developed by the researcher and his collaborators. This
              framework provides a unified mathematical model (based on the notion of traffic
              envelopes/ service curves / service processes) for regulators and schedulers as
              well as an easy way to analyze fork-join networks of such elements with (or
              without window/rate flow control). In particular, the researcher's prior work
              has shown how the impact of the entire network may be reduced to that of an
              equivalent single element with an (end-to-end) service curve given in terms of
              the service curves of the individual elements using an easy composition rule.
              Furthermore, the worst-case and probabilistic end-to-end performance for such
              networks is then easily obtained in terms of this end-to-end service curve.
              Since the framework is analyzable, one can "invert" the results of the analysis
              to derive rules for the design of efficient traffic control elements. More
              interestingly, the framework allows for the representation of a sophisticated
              service curve for a single traffic control element, as a network of simple
              service curves.  This representation can then be exploited to synthesize
              complex but highly efficient regulators and schedulers. This modeling framework
              therefore provides a systematic way to analyze, design, and synthesize traffic
              control elements for differentiated services networks.
     In particular, the
              proposed project will lead to the following: It will result in the synthesis of
              more efficient regulators and schedulers. It will develop other guaranteed
              services (besides leased line emulation) in the context of differentiated
              services networks. It shall produce better admission control schemes for
              probabilistic service. For both guaranteed and probabilistic service, it will
              also lead to efficient allocation of network resources into service curves for
              different flows via pricing. In the case of adaptive service with certain
              minimum requirements, it will lead to a better understanding of the interplay
              between the in-profile and out-of-profile traffic, and how this interplay may
              be exploited to enhance existing adaptive mechanisms such as TCP.

