Title       : XYZ on a Chip: CMOS Compatible Self-Assembled ZnO Polymeric Nanostructures on
               Chip for Sensor Imaging and Light Emission Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2001     
File        : a9980794

Award Number: 9980794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $441259             (Estimated)
Investigator: Agis A. Iliadis agis@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Kofinas  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9980794
Iliadis

The goal of this Engineering Microsystems:  "XYZ" on a chip
              project is to investigate sound wave sensor imaging technology, and ultra
              violet (UV) light emission technology, by developing selective application of
              self-assembled diblock copolymer metal-oxide nanostructures on CMOS based chips
              for direct signal retrieval and signal processing.  The project is based on the
              development of novel devices consisting of a nanocomposite MOSFETstructure
              integrated with arrays of block copolymer oriented cylindrical (hexagonal) ZnO
              nanocrystalline structures of varying dimensions and spacing emulating the
              cochlea of the ear, and a nanocomposite light emitting Si/ZnO diode for UV
              surface light emission.  The sensing imaging capability of the proposed device
              and chip technology, is based on the enhanced piezoelectric properties of
              nanoconfined ZnO and its successful interfacing with the mature and well
              developed Si CMOS technology, while the UV light emission is based on the
              enhanced nanocavity emission of the ZnO nanocrystalline structures.

For the
              development of such technology they propose:

The development of the diblock
              copolymer with self-assembled ZnO nanocrystalline structures.

The
              development of processing technology compatible with that of Si and the
              copolymer chemistry, for the successful integration of the nanocrystalline
              structures in the devices.

The "proof of concept" development of the novel
              nanocomposite MOSFETsound wave imaging sensor device, and the novel
              nanocomposite UV-light emitting diode.


In the course of this investigation
              they expect to substantially enhance their knowledge in the:

Piezoelectric,
              electrical, and optical properties of nanoconfined crystalline structures, with
              and                 without the polymer matrix.

The processing of copolymer
              nanocrystalline structures on	Si, and the properties of composite Si           
                   devices.
***
