Title       : Anatomically Preserved Middle Miocene Flora at Yakima Canyon, Washington State:
               Floristic Composition, Evolutionary, and Phytogeographic Significance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2000  
File        : a9980388

Award Number: 9980388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29594              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen B. Pigg kpigg@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

9980388
Pigg

The middle Miocene Yakima Canyon flora (15.6 Ma)
              from central Washington state contains anatomically preserved seed, fruit and
              vegetative plant remains that are quite rarely preserved in the Neogene of
              North America.  These fossils provide taxonomic, evolutionary and
              phytogeographic data impossible to obtain from the more commonly preserved
              Neogene leaf compression floras.  Based on morphological and anatomical
              features, plants can be recognized at varying infrageneric taxonomic levels
              including: a pine, Pinus foisyi, assignable to Subsection Oocarpae, which
              includes extant California closed cone pines; an oak, Quercus hiholensis of
              Section Quercus, with acorn developmental features quite similar to those of
              modern white oaks; a sweet gum, Liquidambar, similar to several modern species
              of Section Liquidambar, and, among the filicalean ferns, essentially modern
              Woodwardia, probably assignable to the modern Virginia chain fern W. virginica,
              and Osmunda wehrii, which fits within the modern Subgenus Osmunda.  These
              plants represent the time interval when the mixed mesophytic forest reached its
              maximum geographic distribution and grew during what was possibly the warmest
              interval in the Neogene. In some cases, they represent the "last stand" of a
              widespread, diverse temperate flora that today is represented by plants with a
              disjunct Asian/eastern North American distribution. Further study will document
              an overview of the first temperate middle Miocene flora to be based on
              anatomically preserved fossil remains, and the presence of several extinct
              Miocene genera.


