Title       : KDI: 3D Free-Form Models for Geometric Recovery and Applications to Archaeology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a9980091

Award Number: 9980091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1247250            (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Cooper cooper@lems.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Mumford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Laidlaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin B. Kimia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martha S. Joukowsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1346,5914,5955,5988,8877,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr David Cooper and his colleagues will
              develop a technology for the recovery of 3D free-form object and selected scene
              structure from one or more images and video. The technique is based on the
              development of 3D shape representation and a semi-interactive, mixed-initiative
              system, along with machine decision-directed Bayesian surface-estimation. The
              main focus of the effort is the development of tools useful in archaeological
              site and artifact reconstruction and architecture. This will impact low level
              shape models and how they are assembled to form either more complex objects or
              complete ones. The latter condition often occurs at archaeological excavation
              sites where objects are found in pieces, or have been damaged from erosion.
              

Despite recent substantial progress in automated scene recovery in computer
              vision, the challenges presented by free-form shape extraction and assembly are
              still great. The researchers will employ an interactive approach in which a
              user can guide the recovery process or can be available when requested for
              assistance by the machine, e.g., in the complex task of assembling many
              fragments to re-create a large or complicated object. The intent is to develop
              the fundamentals of a user-controlled technology for the benefit of the naive
              user. The ultimate goal is to enhance productivity in interacting with large
              amounts of complex visual data by modeling the underlying 3D structure.

This
              project will provide new practical tools. It will also provide an effective
              testbed for 3D shape reconstruction and recognition, more descriptive local and
              global models for working with 3D shapes, a better understanding of
              human/decision-making-machine interaction for free-form geometric modeling and
              for extracting 3D geometry from one or more images and video, and associated
              computational complexity issues. As applied to the field of archaeology, this
              technology will provide improved surveying methods, an advanced archaeological
              record and a means to conduct high-level analysis not heretofore available. It
              will further permit the transfer of reconstruction capabilities from the artist
              directly to the archaeologist. Since the problems resolved in the
              archaeological context are to a significant degree generic and thus
              transferable to the fields of medicine, industry, defense etc, the potential
              impact is extremely broad.

