Title       : Student Authoring of Three-Dimensional Illustrations in Undergraduate
               Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9980935

Award Number: 9980935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $445240             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Bateman robert.bateman@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rudy F. Sirochman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
The goal of this proposal is to increase the three-dimensional
              molecular literacy of undergraduate students by having them create and present
              detailed three-dimensional molecular illustrations of biochemical structures
              and processes. These illustrations are used as the bases of inquiry-based
              projects designed to help prepare the students to understand and interact with
              molecular structures in graduate school as well as in careers as diverse as
              biotechnology, molecular medicine, forensics and high school teaching. To
              accomplish this goal, kinemage authorship is introduced into two biochemistry
              courses, one for majors in biochemistry and related fields, and one for science
              majors in other fields. Students prepare and present kinemages on topics
              covered in the classes, with both peer and instructor evaluation. As part of
              the assessment of effectiveness, a kinemage component is included in each
              examination in the courses. Concurrent with the curriculum efforts, the PREKIN
              (kinemage authoring) and MAGE (kinemage viewing) programs and documentation are
              being developed under the supervision of the software author to further
              facilitate ease of use by both teachers and students at this level. After
              refinement based on this experience of combined software and pedagogy
              development, the materials are disseminated electronically and via workshops.
              The development of a framework for undergraduate kinemage authorship serves as
              a national model for inquiry-based learning of molecular structure in
              biochemistry classes of all sizes and student compositions.

