Title       : Students' cognitive, affective, socio-demographic characteristics and
               school/classroom instructional contexts as factors in mathematics and science
               achievement: Analyses of TIMSS.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a9980597

Award Number: 9980597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195611             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kusum Singh ksingh@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students' Cognitive, Affective, Socio-demographic characteristics and
              school/classroom instructional contexts as factors in mathematics and science
              achievement:  Analysis of TIMSS.

The proposed research will develop an
              integrative and broad framework for understanding mathematics and science
              achievement in secondary school student.  The project is a three-year study of
              the critical factors related to mathematics and science laearning in secondary
              schools.  There is a persistent national concern about the mathematics and
              science achievement of the U.S. secondary students.  The major purpose of the
              proposed study is to identify, analyze and examine the interrelated factors
              that have been shown by research and theory to be related to mathematics and
              science learning by developing a more comprehensive conceputal framework. 
              Despite growing body of knowledge in the area of academic achievement, research
              findings in mathematics and science learning have been inconsistent and have
              produced limited understanding of the processes of achievement in these
              critical subject areas.  Research has linked mathematics and science
              achievement o several important domains: socio-demographic variables such as
              gender, ethnicity, race and social class; cognitive and affective variables
              such as prior achievement, ability interest, motivation, attitudes and beliefs;
              teacher, classroom and school variables such as opportunity to learn (OTL),
              instruction and social context of the classroom.  Using these constructs,
              theoretically sound and a priori models will be developed and estimated to
              understand the effects of these variables on mathematics and science
              achievement and their interrelationships with each other.   Multivariate
              analytical procedures such as Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) and
              Hierarchical Linear Models (HLM) will be used to analyze the data.  The two
              nationally representative data sets that would be used in the study are the
              Third International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) and Longitudinal
              Study of American Youth (LSAY).  These two data sets, being cross-sectional and
              longitudinal respectively, offer different analytical advantages. 

This
              project was proposed as a three-year secondary analysis of existing survey data
              for the secondary school students collected for the Third International
              Mathematics and Science study.  It would focus only on US students, but would
              luse the information collected in that study on their attitudes toward science
              and their gender, race, and social class.  The proposal also would use a
              longitudinal study, Longitudinal Survey of American Youth, to expand this
              analysis.  

