Title       : DLI-Phase 2: Research on a Digital Library for Graphics and Visualization
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a9980130

Award Number: 9980130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330278             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Scott Owen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Yanqing Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rajshekhar Sunderraman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 6857      SPECIAL PROJECTS (IIS)
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1086,9139,9178,HPCC,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 

IIS-9980130
Owen, G. Scott
Georgia State University
$0 - 12 mos.
              (Totally funded by the Division of Undergraduate Education in the amount of
              $165,244)

DLI-Phase 2: Research on a Digital Library for Graphics and
              Visualization Education	

This is the first year funding of a three year
              continuing award.  This project focuses on two areas of interest to the
              development of a national digital library:  testbeds and applications for
              undergraduate education and  human-centered and collections-based research. 
              The three goals of the project are 1) to provide a model for the reuse and
              repurposing of materials in a digital library based upon the Xtensible Markup
              Language (XML); 2) the improvement of navigation capabilities using information
              visualization techniques based upon XML and 3D Web graphics; and 3) the
              creation and development of a collaborative user community.   The project uses
              standard Web-based technologies and is platform independent.  It is part of the
              consortium lead by the COLLEGIS Research Institute (CRI) to develop a federated
              set of collections with a primary emphasis on education.  

The project
              builds upon past ACM Special Interest Group in Graphics (SIGGRAPH) - NSF
              cooperative efforts, current ACM SIGGRAPH Education Committee projects, and the
              industry effort to create tools for XML and related applications.  It will be a
              joint effort between ACM SIGGRAPH Education Committee (SEC) and the Hypermedia
              and Visualization Laboratory (HVL) at Georgia State University (GSU).  It
              focuses on the SEC Digital Library (SECDL) and its community of users.  The
              SECDL contains a large number of peer reviewed multimedia materials and is
              rapidly growing in size. It is a stable resource fully supported by SEC.  
              Using emerging technologies such as XML, this project enables SEC to realize
              its vision of a hypermedia learning environment that can be used by the
              community of students and educators from all disciplines interested in computer
              graphics and visualization.

