Title       : Microstructures for Experiments in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2001       
File        : a9980838

Award Number: 9980838
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Kenny kenny@cdr.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W J. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Spudich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1039,1602,CVIS,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI's Name, Institution: Thomas Kenny, Stanford University 
Proposal Number:
              9980838 
Proposal Title: Micromechanical Structures for Experiment in Biology
              
Project Abstract 
The goal of this Engineering Microsystems: "XYZ" on a Chip
              project is to investigate development of micromechanical structures for use in
              conducting biological measurements.  Many of the most interesting current
              problems in microbiology are related to the geometry and function of molecular
              and cellular structures. There is great controversy in the interpretation of
              measurements of protein folding and cellular adhesion, and also great
              opportunity for research based on new measurement approaches. Biological
              folding and adhesion problems may be viewed from a mechanical engineering
              perspective as a simple matter of forces and energies - all of which might be
              measured by direct mechanical means. Experimental matters are complicated by
              the small size of the forces at work in molecular biology - ranging from
              nano-Newtons to less than femto-Newtons. However, these are forces that can be
              measured with MEMS devices. We propose to look specifically at experiments to
              measure folding forces in ribosomal RNA, ligand receptor binding forces, and
              cellular adhesion forces. In each case, new micromechanical instrumentation
              will be designed and used to carry out these measurements. These experiments
              will provide new understanding of the mechanics, dynamics, and other
              characteristics of these fundamental biological interactions. Throughout this
              work, research will take place at the interface between engineering and
              biology, bringing excitement and expertise from both domains. Engineering
              students will learn about fundamental biological phenomena. Biology students
              will learn about the design and fabrication of MEMS structures for experiments.
              Together, they will design and carry out novel fundamental experiments and
              learn important engineering methods. Students emerging from this program will
              possess unique interdisciplinary skills suitable for leadership roles in the
              emerging area of "BioEngineering". Our primary goal for this program is to
              establish a world-leading program in the application of micromechanical
              structures for Biological measurements, and the world-leading source of young
              scientists trained in the issues and disciplines surrounding these experiments.
              


