Title       : SGER: Response of Suspended Helium Films to Pulsed Atomic Helium Beams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a9980329

Award Number: 9980329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Woods Halley woods@woods1.spa.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clayton F. Giese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9980329
Halley

This is an SGER project that addresses a fundamental issue in
              the physics of superfluid helium. The experiments are designed to test
              predictions that effects of long range quantum coherence in the fluid will lead
              to some very rapid transmission events, not associated with the time for sound
              propagation across the superfluid. Pulsed atomic beams of helium atoms impinge
              on a suspended film of superfluid helium. The experiments will measure delay
              times for helium atoms transmitted through the film. Transmission at two
              different delay times is predicted: the longer delay time is associate with
              production by the incident atoms of excitation of the phonon-roton spectrum of
              the fluid, followed by reemission of atoms from the surface. A second, shorter,
              delay time is predicted to arise from the momentary virtual displacement of the
              entire superfluid as a result of interaction with an incident atom, followed by
              reemission. This event is extremely fast, probably in the picosecond range.
              Only the longer delay (estimated at microseconds) transmission will be
              detected. The amplitude of the shorter delay transmission can be determined
              from the time delay information and knowledge of the initial flux. The results
              will be of fundamental interest in connection with the coherent character of
              the helium atoms in Bose-condensate-like state of superfluid helium. The
              experiments provide exciting educational opportunities for students to be
              involved in fundamental research using state-of-the-art research
              tools.
%%%
This is an SGER project that addresses a fundamental issue in the
              physics of superfluid helium. The project seeks to detect the 'coherent' state
              of superfluid in which all the helium atoms in the superfluid respond as a
              unit. The procedure will be to 'shoot' helium atoms off into a suspended
              vertical film of helium maintained near absolute zero. Some of the incident
              helium atoms will rapidly bounce off the coherent state of superfluid helium,
              some will interact with helium atoms and be delayed. The experiments seek to
              test theoretical predictions for these two events. The results are of
              fundamental importance for the general field of "Bose-Einstein condensates",
              which includes Bose condensates in the atomic gas state. The experiments
              provide exciting educational opportunities for students who are involved in
              fundamental research using  state-of-the-art research tools.


