Title       : XYZ on a Chip: Compact and Integrated Chemical Sensors for Aqueous Analytes
               Based on Surface Modifaction of Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9980758

Award Number: 9980758
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Kuech Kuech@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur B. Ellis  (Principal Investigator former)
              Luke J. Mawst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,1602,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9980758
Ellis
The goal of this Engineering Microsystems:  "XYZ" on a Chip
              project will develop chemical sensors and biosensors for nondestructive analyte
              detection in aqueous solution from micron-scale Ill-V semiconductor die chips
              that are commonly used in the construction of LEDs and photovoltaic cells.
              Preliminary experiments have demonstrated that both the photoluminescence (PL)
              and electroluminescence (EL) of these multi layer structures respond reversibly
              and robustly to amino acids in buffered aqueous solution. In Phase One of the
              project, die chips grown by metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) will
              be prepared with varying layer dimensions and chemical compositions in order to
              optimize EL and PL responses to a variety of aqueous test analytes, including
              amino acids, oligopeptides, and (metallo)porphyrins. Coatings will be applied
              to the surfaces of the die chips to enhance the selectivity of the response to
              certain anal ytes. In Phase Two, self-aligned structures will be prepared by
              chemically etching a trench of micron-scale width into the die chip. One side
              of this trench-divided structure can be placed in forward bias, yielding EL,
              and the other side of the structure can be placed in reverse bias to detect the
              EL as photocurrent. This creates a self-aligned integrated LED/Detector
              structure. Adsorption of aqueous analytes onto the uncoated or coated trench
              walls of these structures will be determined as a function of concentration and
              in the presence of various dissolved gases. Use of the structure for
              spectrophotometric analysis will be investigated. Numerical modeling of the
              electro-optical responses will guide the optimized construction of these
              integrated sensors. In Phase Three, a 5x5 array of the self-aligned
              LED/Detector structures will be prepared, and fluid flow of analyte solutions
              will be modeled. By using different coatings on the array elements, a
              multicomponent analysis of a mixture of analytes will be undertaken to
              demonstrate the versatility of the sensor structure. A variation of the sensor
              based on diode lasers will be investigated. Graduate and undergraduate students
              participating in this project will benefit from exposure to interdisciplinary
              research with sensor-driven applications that embrace chemistry and
              biochemistry, chemical engineering, and electrical engineering. A base of
              instructional materials derived from the materials and devices employed in this
              work will be expanded, and a website for the project developed.

