Title       : KDI: The Internet Learning Forum: Fostering and Sustaining Knowledge Networking
               to Support A Community of Science and Mathematics Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a9980081

Award Number: 9980081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Finbarr C. Sloane                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1473303            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sasha A. Barab sbarab@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Duffy  (Principal Investigator former)
              Rob Kling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. Cunningham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1347,8877,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project will design and evaluate the salient features of an
              electronic knowledge
network, the Internet Learning Forum (ILF), to support a
              virtual community of pre-service and in-service
mathematics and science
              teachers, allowing them to share and improve pedagogical practices. The
              ILF
design centers around the vision of a community in which teachers can
              virtually visit each other's classrooms
to observe and discuss approaches to
              teaching mathematics and science topics and to share artifacts. The ILF
is
              meant to support a distributed group of teachers in making the tacit knowledge
              involved in their teaching
explicit so that it can be shared with others and,
              in turn, to aid teachers in using that explicit knowledge a tacit part of their
              practice.

The research goal of this project is to understand the principles
              for fostering, sustaining, and scaling
communities of practice in which the
              value to participants of sharing their practice and entering in the
dialogue
              outweighs the "costs" of participation (e.g., time, technology access; the
              concerns of letting others
view one's teaching). While the effective use of
              technology (the ILF) in supporting a community of practice is
a focus of this
              research, it is clear that technological environments are only one component of
              an overall
community strategy. Thus, the research looks at the variety of
              variables that impact the dynamics of the
social networks through which
              teachers seek to improve and share their pedagogical practices. The intent
              of
this research will not be to produce abstract measures or scores, but to
              build a rich story of the historical
development of knowledge, resource use,
              practices, and community. The research issues converge at the
intersection of
              pedagogy, technology, social informatics, and learning theory and have
              important implications
for each. An interdisciplinary approach, reflecting
              this intersection, will characterize the research carried out to address each
              of the following categories of issues.
(1) How can networking and electronic
              technologies be used to represent and facilitate the sharing and
evolution of
              teaching practices?
(2) What are the taken-as-shared meanings that emerge in
              the ILF communities and how do those
meanings evolve and diffuse into
              classroom practices?
(3) How do the ILF members structure themselves into
              communities and how do we promote boundary
crossing?

