Title       : Molecular Workbench: Reasoning with Atomic-Scale Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2002    
File        : a9980620

Award Number: 9980620
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1364944            (Estimated)
Investigator: Boris Berenfeld boris@concord.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Tinker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Concord Consortium
	      10 Concord Crossing, Suite 300
	      Concord, MA  01742    978/369-4367

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Atomic-scale models are a set of mental and computer models that relate a wide
              range of macroscopic physical, chemical, and biological phenomena to basic
              properties of atoms and molecules and their interactions.  These models
              encompass more kinetic molecular theory because they include electrostatic
              forces, chemical bonds, and light interactions.  All atomic models are
              difficult for students to learn, and so educators are recommending delaying
              their introduction until the end of middle school.  But learning to reason witn
              atomic-scale models is a critical preparation for introductory science courses
              and absolutely necessary for modern approaches to biology.  Students must
              somehow acquire these challenging concepts between school and high
              school.

We propose to develop a rich interactive software micoworld called
              the Molecular Workbench that will help make the atomic level wolrd as familiar
              to students as the macroscopic world.  The software will be based on a few
              principles:  classical mechanics, the forces between atoms, rules for covalent
              bonding, and phonton interactions.  Using these basic principles, the
              computational model can exhibit a wide range of macroscopic phenomena.  The
              resulting software will be highly interactive, allowing students to experiment
              with an infinite variety of forces, atoms, molecules, and bond rules.  An
              optional force-feedback mouse will give students the sensation of interacting
              directly with atoms and molecules and feeding the forces that determine their
              interactions.  

The goal of this project is to build the Molecular
              Workbench, design excellent standards-based learning materials that exploit its
              capacity, and test the ability of typical students to use the resulting
              approach to learn to reason with atomic-scale models.  Our measures of success
              will be based on the quality of student reasoning about atomic-level phenomena
              and their manifestations at the maco level both with and without the software. 
              We will look for indications that students become more like experts by
              exhibiting a richer and more accurate web concepts and applying their
              understandings to new problems.  Concept maps, and electronic records of
              student performance on challenges that measure student tranfer, and structured
              interviews will provide the data for a series of studies of student
              learning.

This will be a three-year projects.  Software development will
              require the first two years.  Prototype software will be used in the first year
              to support clinical interviews designed to refine the software, learning
              materials, and research design.  An urban eighth grade class will be used for a
              detailed implementation study in the second year.  In the third year, a second
              research site will be established.  

To study both the teacher preparation
              needs for our approach and to gather data about student learning at different
              grades, we will offer a workshop for 20 teachers who will implement the
              materials in grades 6-10 in the third year of the project.  We will prepare
              these teachers to use and evaluate embedded assessments that include concept
              maps and transfer challenges.  These data will be available to the project.
