Title       : Fundamental Limits for Information Retrieval
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a9980416

Award Number: 9980416
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim A. Winick winick@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Coffey  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The fundamental limits of performance for a general model of information
              retrieval from databases are studied.  In the scenarios to be considered a
              large quantity of information is to be stored on some physical storage device. 
              Requests for information are modeled as randomly generated sequences with a
              known distributions.  The requests are assumed to be "context-dependent", i.e.,
              to vary according to the sequence of previous request.  The state of the
              physical storage device is also assumed to depend on the history of previous
              requests.

In general the logical structure of the information to be stored
              does not match the physical structure of the storage device, and consequently
              there are nontrivial limits on the minimum achievable average access times,
              where the average is over the possible sequences of user request.  The propose
              research will apply information-theoretic methods to establish these limits. 
              Preliminary results demonstrate the potential of such methods for this problem,
              giving very accurate results for some (relatively general) first
              cases.

Allowing redundancy in general can greatly lower the achievable
              access times, even when the amount added is an arbitrarily small fraction of
              the total amount of information in the dababase.  Preliminary results establish
              the achievable limits both with and without redundancy for some simplified
              cases; very many interesting problems arise in general.
