Title       : Satellite Communication Networks: New Curriculum Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a9980281

Award Number: 9980281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor A. Skormin vskormin@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Monish Chatterjee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,9218,9299,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funding to SUNY-Binghamton, for the support of a Combined
              Research-Curriculum Development project entitled, " Satellite Communication
              Networks: New Curriculum Development," Dr. Victor A. Skormin, Principal
              Investigator.  Proliferation of satellite communication network technology has
              stimulated basic and applied research in the relevant areas and impacted the
              job market creating the demand for a large number of appropriately educated
              researchers and engineers.  These trends present to universities not only
              potential sources for research funding but also stimuli for the development of
              new curricula.  This project proposes a new electrical engineering
              curriculum-Satellite Communication Networks (SCN). The proposed curriculum will
              include four undergraduate and entry-level graduate courses, namely, Technology
              and Devices for Communications Satellites, Digital Satellite Communications,
              Control System Technology for Communication Satellites, and Optical
              Communications for Satellite Networks.  Students enrolled in this curriculum
              will develop a background that will include relevant satellite technology,
              electronics and electro-optics, communications, signal processing, computer
              engineering, knowledge of control technologies, devices for laser beam
              steering, pointing-acquisition-tracking of satellites, and application of
              global positioning systems.  In addition to theoretical concepts, the students
              will gain strong laboratory experience and exposure to  advanced technologies
              and devices and will be well prepared to operate in high technology industrial
              environments as members of engineering and research teams.
