Title       : Porous Metal-Organic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a9980469

Award Number: 9980469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Omar M. Yaghi oyaghi@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9980469
Yaghi

Metal-organic materials with open framework structures have
              recently been much discussed in the chemistry literature for their promise as
              materials with designed pore architecture and function, and their consequent
              importance in molecular recognition, sorption and gas storage applications. 
              Strategies for the design of stable open framework that support permanent
              porosity and in particular that do not collapse in the absence of guests, have
              so far been largely unexplored thus limiting further progress in the field.
              This proposal is aimed at establishing synthetic strategies that utilize the
              well-established chemistry of metal carboxylate clusters for the design of
              extended-structure analogues.  Specifically, examples of how divergent
              dicarboxylate linkers such as 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate (BDC) can be used
              instead extended porous ligands such as acetate to polymerize multinuclear zinc
              carboxylate clusters into stable extended porous frameworks.  The rigid,
              planar, and divergent attributes of such linkers, when coupled with the
              rigidity and core bulk of the metal carboxylate clusters allow the design of
              non interpenetrating and rigid frameworks.

The stability of the proposed
              materials that provide opportunities for the full exploitation and study of the
              molecular recognition properties of the channels will be pursued using gas and
              liquid sorption techniques.  An understanding of these aspects of the chemistry
              is expected to pave the way for their use as sensors, gas storage materials,
              and as highly specific membranes for separations of polar organic molecules. 
              On the fundamental level, the proposed research ultimately will lead to
              synthetic strategies that allow the translation of molecular structure and
              reactivity into extended solid-state materials.  This is regarded as an area of
              priority for the integration of research and education for the training of
              students and postdoctoral scholars in areas of high interest to industry.

