Title       : RUI: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The Neoproterozoic and Cambrian of the Tethyan
               Himalaya: A Test of Models of Core Gondwanan Construction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a9980376

Award Number: 9980376
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Myrow pmyrow@coloradocollege.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado College
	      
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80903    303/473-2233

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR 9980376	Myrow
EAR 9980426   	Hughes

Collaborative Research: THE
              NEOPROTEROZOIC AND CAMBRIAN OF THE TETHYAN HIMALAYA: A TEST OF MODELS OF CORE
              GONDWANAN CONSTRUCTION

The nature and timing of the assembly of core
              Gondwanaland remains a matter
of vigorous debate. The traditional view is that
              East Gondwana, consisting
of India, Australia and Antarctica collided with the
              combined African
cratons (Kalahari and Congo) as one block sometime during the
              late
Neoproterozoic. An alternative model suggests that the accretion of
              East
Gondwana to the African craton was a two part process. In this model,
              India
broke off from Australia and Antarctic, swept across the Mozambique
              Ocean,
and collided with the African craton at approximately 680 Ma. This
              was
purportedly followed sometime later by collision of
              Australia/Antarctica
around 550 to 530 Ma. Our study of the Tethyan Himalaya
              will test tectonic
models of the assembly of core Gondwanaland using a
              combined stratigraphic,
macrofaunal and sedimentological approach. Of primary
              importance is the
stratigraphic signature of sediment input from adjacent
              orogenic belts. A
record of major increases of siliclastic sediment, with
              abrupt changes in
paleocurrents would accompany orogenesis. A key component of
              the proposed
models is that they have predictable patterns of detrital zircon
              ages. A
Late Cambrian-Early Ordovician tectonic event is recorded in the
              Tethyan
Himalaya and in other places in East Gondwanaland. The nature of this
              event
is unclear, but two possibilities include: (1) it represents a
              somewhat
delayed expression of the Australia/Antarctica collision in the
              two-stage
model, or (2) it represents the docking of an outboard
              microcontinent
(e.g., the Lhasa Block of Tibet) subsequent to the formation of
              core
Gondwanaland. The biostratigraphic patterns of trilobites provide the
              basis
of testable predictions of these hypotheses. In the first case, we
              expect
to find a stratigraphic increase in similarity in faunas between India
              and
the rest of East Antarctica throughout the Cambrian. If faunal
              similarity
with the rest of East Gondwana was constant throughout
              the
trilobite-bearing Cambrian, we may infer that Gondwanan construction
              was
complete prior to 520 Ma. In addition, if the ~500 Ma tectonic event in
              the
Tethyan Himalaya records microcontinental collision, then
              the
identification of the outboard terrane may be approached
              through
biogeographic patterns established in this study. Myrow's RUI proposal
              will
involve undergraduates at Colorado College as junior collaborators in
              all
components of the research. This will provide a much-needed opportunity
              for
students to experience scientific research in diverse geographical
              and
cultural environments. A key aspect of this proposal is the close
              research
collaboration with Indian and Chinese scientists.


