Title       : Introducing Polymer Science Across the Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9980948

Award Number: 9980948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16602              (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Darrell Iler ilerhd@emu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn M. Kauffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Mennonite Univ.
	      1200 Park Road
	      Harrisonburg, VA  228012404    703/433-2771

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
Polymer science and other materials related disciplines
              represent important areas of work and academic research for chemistry
              graduates. Also, due to their ubiquitous nature, even within fields where
              polymers are not the principal focus, an understanding of their chemistry,
              structure and properties is often important. Yet, many small college and
              university chemistry programs, lack the student numbers and resources to
              justify a course dedicated to polymer chemistry. The goal for this project is
              to establish a polymer emphasis across the chemistry curriculum that would
              provide students an appropriate knowledge base and experience for future work
              with polymer materials in commercial or academic settings. Based upon the
              professional backgrounds and experiences of the investigators as well as
              discussions with past NSF-ILI project investigators who have developed similar
              projects, it was decided that an effective approach for accomplishing this goal
              is through the adoption of a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) into the
              laboratory program. A variety of polymers related laboratory experiments using
              DSC is designed and adapted into freshmen through senior level chemistry
              courses. The implementation plan provides chemistry students the opportunity
              for introductory to advanced level study of polymer topics relating to
              structure, synthesis and physical properties. The acquisition of a DSC also
              permits the opportunity for more significant student contributions to original
              research. Non-chemistry science majors are also expected to be impacted by this
              project through laboratory exercises designed for the General and Organic
              Chemistry courses. The DSC also offers an additional tool for the illustration
              and study of fundamental chemical concepts, such as, enthalpy, heat capacity,
              phase transitions and kinetics at all levels of the chemistry program.



