Title       : Routing, Restoration and Reconfiguration in Lightwave Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2000 
File        : a9980783

Award Number: 9980783
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murat Azizoglu aziz@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The objective of the proposed research is to develop efficient solutions
              for routing, restoration, and reconfiguration of lightpaths in a
              circuit-switched wavelength division multiplexed (WDM) network.  Such a network
              is fundamentally important to the success of a next-generation Internet which
              will have the capacity to carry a much larger amount of traffic than today's 
              Internet at lower delays.  The network layer simply uses the lightpaths as the
              virtual links over which store-and-forward packet routing is performed.  The
              design of the optical layer architecture over which electronic packet transport
              takes place is a grant challenge for optical network architects.
     The
              proposed project aims to contribute to this optical layer design by improving
              the fault tolerance and adaptability of the optical network architecture. 
              There are two major components to this project.  The first component is to
              develop algorithms that efficiently restore lightpaths in the event of link
              failures.  These algorithms will not only utilize the network resources, namely
              wavelengths and switches, efficiently, but also provide rapid restoration
              capability.  This requires the design of service and restoration paths jointly
              at the time of resource allocation, thereby reducing the number of wavelengths
              required to reroute the lightpaths in the event of a link or node failure.  The
              researchers will consider mesh-based restoration algorithms and evaluate their
              performance both in terms of wavelength requirement and restoration speed.  In
              addition to determining service and restoration paths for each lightpath, the
              routing/restoration algorithms will also specify efficient signalling
              mechanisms to coordinate the switchover to the restoration paths and the
              allocation of wavelengths to such paths.  Restoration times and the
              computational complexity of the proposed signalling mechanisms will be
              analyzed.
     A lightpath-based Internet backbone provides a unique
              opportunity for the reconfiguration of the logical topology by changing the set
              of lightpaths.  Such reconfiguration must be based on real-time measurement of
              packet traffic on the logical links and can provide an additional degree of
              freedom in the capacity planning for packet networks.  The researchers will
              design algorithms that will be used to determine the frequency and the nature
              of topology reconfiguration.  The introduction of dynamic topological
              transformation at the optical layer to satisfy the dynamic traffic requirements
              at the network layer is a promising concept that is expected to open many
              interesting research directions.

