Title       : Curriculum Development for a Remotely Accessible Networking Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9980366

Award Number: 9980366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24165              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph D. Sloan jsloan@lander.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lander University
	      320 Stanley Avenue
	      Greenwood, SC  29649    864/388-8305

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project expands an existing networking laboratory to allow extensive remote
              access and control and adapts a set of laboratory modules for use in this
              context. Materials from current on-line curriculum repositories as well as
              recent data communications texts will be adapted for remote and asynchronous
              accessibility. By providing remote access, the laboratory becomes available to
              students working asynchronously or at remote locations. This has the added
              benefit that the laboratory is available twenty-four hours a day, seven days a
              week thereby maximizing utilization.

Assignments are stand-alone and
              tutorial so that they can be used independently of the lectures in a class.
              This allows equipment to be reused repeatedly in a sequential manner in the
              same course greatly reducing the need for duplicate equipment.  This approach
              should provide a model for other institutions wishing to introduce
              telecommunications instruction with a laboratory-based component. This project
              addresses the challenge of providing meaningful, hands-on instruction in data
              communications in a manner that is both cost efficient and compatible with the
              needs of students in asynchronous and distance learning programs.


