Title       : Enhancing Undergraduate Computer Science Curriculum through Image Computations:
               Proof-of-Concept
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1999  
File        : a9980832

Award Number: 9980832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew P. Bernat                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75205              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sudeep Sarkar sarkar@csee.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin W. Bowyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dmitry B. Goldgof  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31)

This proof-of-concept project is developing educational
              materials to integrate research progress in image related computation (computer
              vision, image processing and image analysis) into the undergraduate computer
              science and engineering core curriculum. Recent years have experienced an
              explosion of image gathering modalities along with a resultant increase in the
              demand for expertise in image related computation. Considerable progress has
              also been made in fields such as image processing, image analysis, and computer
              vision. It is no longer sufficient to address this need for image expertise
              through one upper level elective course in computer vision. The need to
              incorporate image related knowledge units in core undergraduate courses such as
              data structures, introductory programming courses, automata theory, computer
              ethics, databases, networks, coding theory, and computer algorithms, preferably
              without major change in the content of these courses is essential. 

The
              materials for these knowledge units are being developed so that they can be
              used by instructors who are not necessarily computer vision specialists. An
              added advantage of using image related knowledge units in various courses is
              that, because of their inherent visual nature and large sizes, images offer an
              excellent medium for the better understanding of underlying core computer
              science concepts.

As deliverables, the project is developing specific
              image-related knowledge units and instructional support materials, such as
              class handouts, transparencies, lecture materials, software, and descriptions
              of active learning contexts. Dissemination is being accomplished through the
              development of a textbook and freely available website.  The accumulated
              experience and evaluation results are being presented at major computer science
              education conferences, workshops, and through journal papers.
