Title       : Economically Optimal Spatial Scale for Integrated Assessment of Agricultural
               Production Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a9980225

Award Number: 9980225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Antle jantle@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sian Mooney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan M. Capalbo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith H. Paustian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1317,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Compliance with international agreements like the Kyoto protocol requires that
              policy outcomes meet accepted scientific standards and are verifiable. 
              Assessing policies to increase carbon sequestration in agriculture will require
              economic models that estimate the effects of alternative policies on land-use
              and management decisions of farmers and ecological models that estimate how
              their behavior affects soil carbon.  Because agricultural production systems
              are characterized by spatially variable economic and biophysical processes,
              their measurement is scale dependent.  The results of the same analysis
              therefore may vary depending on the areal unit or spatial scale chosen for the
              study.  An integrated assessment conducted at an inappropriate scale could
              furnish misleading estimates of economic and biophysical outcomes and lead to
              the development of inefficient policies.  This research project will provide a
              theoretical foundation for identifying an appropriate scale for integrated
              assessment modeling of agricultural production systems that can form the basis
              for formulating such policies.  The project also will investigate methods for
              comparing alternative specifications of integrated economic and bio-physical
              system models.  More specifically, the project will develop a conceptual and
              empirical framework for determining the economically optimal spatial scale for
              integrated assessment of agricultural production systems that are characterized
              by spatially variable economic and bio-physical processes.  The economically
              optimal spatial scale will be defined as the scale that maximizes the net
              benefits of information produced.  This framework then will be applied to
              examine soil carbon sequestration in the Great Plains region of the United
              States, with this example used to investigate methods to compare alternative
              spatial scale specifications of integrated economic and bio-physical models. 
              Field-scale econometric production models are used as the basis for the
              spatially explicit stochastic simulation models of land use and management
              decisions.  The simulation models are then linked to the Century ecosystem
              model (designed to estimate changes in soil carbon) on a site-specific basis to
              assess economic-environmental tradeoffs.  Net benefits for the alternative
              scale specifications will be compared to assess the optimal spatial scale for
              integrated analysis of carbon sequestration within agricultural production
              systems.  This research contributes to the scientific foundations needed to
              facilitate the participation of U.S. agriculture in policies designed to
              sequester carbon in soils.  The generality of the scale problem in integrated
              assessment modeling means that this research will have broader applicability
              and significance in bringing economic analysis to bear on a fundamental
              methodological issue in the environmental sciences.  A formulation of the scale
              problem within an economic framework will provide a theoretically consistent
              analysis of the tradeoffs associated with conducting integrated assessments at
              alternative scales.

