Title       : Collaborative Research: Design and Restoration Techniques for Fault Tolerant
               Wireless Access Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a9980516

Award Number: 9980516
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149240             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. W. Tipper tipper@tele.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The past decade has seen an increase in the deployment of wireless networks
              supporting mobile communication and an exponential growth rate in the number of
              users. The majority of wireless networks function as wireless access networks
              to provide a means for untethered access to resources that reside primarily in
              a wired network. Such wireless access networks include analog and digital
              cellular phone networks, Personal Communication Systems networks, many wireless
              local area networks, and mobile data services. In general, the novelty of
              mobility has satisfied users of current wireless access networks, despite the
              decrease in the quality and scope of service offerings as compared to wireline
              networks. As ongoing research extends the capabilities of wireless access
              networks to include multimedia services at higher data rates, an increase in
              the public's demand for and dependence on mobile services will result.
              Ultimately, users will demand the same reliable service guarantees, that is
              characteristic of wireline based telecommunications and data networks. 
    
              The critical importance of providing communication service in the face of
              failures has been recognized in the public switched telephone network and a
              great deal of attention has been paid to making these networks survivable and
              self-healing. However, little emphasis has been placed on understanding or
              improving the survivability of wireless access networks. The unique aspects of
              wireless access networks (e.g., user mobility, wireless channel environment,
              power conservation, etc.) implies that survivability techniques for wired
              networks have limited applicability.  The objective of this project is to
              develop a comprehensive treatment of survivability for wireless
access
              networks.
      The project will have two main thrusts. First is survivable
              network design and analysis. Techniques for analyzing the survivability of
              wireless access networks will be developed.  This includes identifying metrics
              that are useful for quantifying mobile network performance during normal and
              abnormal (failure) operating modes and determining a methodology for 
              estimating the metrics. Given appropriate metrics, wireless access network
              topology design and capacity allocation algorithms which incorporate
              survivability strategies will be developed. This includes the cell-site
              architecture and the topology of the network interconnecting the cells to the
              fixed infrastructure. Both initial topology design and the problem of modifying
              an existing topology to improve the survivability will be addressed. Secondly,
              traffic restoration  algorithms will be developed which aim at making the best
              use of available network resources after a failure. This work will concentrate
              on the design and analysis of priority based traffic  restoration techniques to
              provide users service continuity while minimizing network congestion. A
              multi-layer approach involving a coordinated strategy among network layers will
              be developed. The restoration algorithms will be suitable for automatic
              invocation by network components, resulting in a self-healing network. Special
              emphasis will be placed on the analysis of transient network congestion
              immediately following failures and
incorporating its effect into the network
              design and traffic restoration algorithms. An additional focus will be placed
              on minimizing the effects of wireless access network failures on the attached
              wired transport and signaling networks. The work will initially address current
              wireless access networks (i.e., PCS), but will later address evolving wireless
              access architectures including mobile data services (e.g., CDPD, GPRS) and next
              generation systems (e.g., wireless ATM).
     The research will be conducted
              using techniques from optimization, queueing and communication theory.
              Additionally, due to the complexities involved, simulation combined with the
              use of empirical data and heuristic algorithms will be used. The significance
              of this research will be its contributions to the limited base of knowledge of
              wireless access network survivability. The results of the work should benefit
              the future design and deployment of survivable wireless access networks. 

