Title       : Teaching Systems Courses with an Open Source Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9980803

Award Number: 9980803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69912              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark L. Claypool claypool@cs.wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig E. Wills  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Finkel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31) This project develops courses in operating and distributed
              systems as part of revision to the systems curriculum at Worcester Polytechnic.
              The project adapts NSF supported work at several institutions and develops a
              laboratory and software modeled after the projects on which the adaptation is
              based.  This includes the development of a laboratory of machines running the
              Linux operating system along with projects to use these machines. The working
              name for this laboratory is the Free/Open Source Laboratory, or Fossil Lab for
              short.

The development of the Fossil Lab is improving the systems courses
              because students have the opportunity to work with the internals of an
              operating system in a secure environment, providing experience that would be
              impossible in a general-purpose computing environment with a commercial
              operating system. A principal theme in developing the course projects is a
              "performance supplement" to examine performance issues of different system
              designs and implementations. There is a real need expressed by industrial
              contacts for students to have such experience while at the same time little
              related work was found at other institutions.

The Fossil Lab is being used
              by students enrolled in the newly revised Operating Systems and Distributed
              Computing Systems courses, each offered twice per year, and by students
              choosing to use its facilities for their senior projects. It is estimated that,
              over 200 students each year are making use of this lab. This work is not only
              having a strong positive effect on its students, but serves as a cost-effective
              model that can be replicated at other institutions.


