Title       : KDI: Can Knowledge Be Distributed? The Dynamics of Knowledge In
               Interdisciplinary Alliances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a9980182

Award Number: 9980182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1400000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bertram C. Bruce www.uiuc.edu/ph/www/chip  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alaina G. Kanfer  (Principal Investigator former)
              Joseph F. Porac  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey C. Bowker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Caroline A. Haythornthwaite  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1346,7180,8877,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There is a current move  towards collaboratively constructing knowledge using
              multidisciplinary teams supported by an electronic communications
              infrastructure.  The exponential growth of knowledge has made it virtually
              impossible for any organization to exist in isolation.  The networked
              organization, or alliance, is an increasingly common structural form within and
              between science, government, business, and non-profit organizations.  An
              alliance is a collection of organizations that have entered into collaborative
              relationships usually involving multiple channels of communication and
              knowledge diffusion across disciplinary boundaries. The proliferation of
              alliances has been stimulated, in part, by emerging electronic technologies to
              support collaboration, ranging from email and intranets to desktop
              videoconferencing and collaborative data mining and visualization.  Across
              business and government organizations, tremendous resources and significant
              financial investment have been devoted toward these efforts.  The NSF funded
              national initiative to prototype the advanced computational infrastructure for
              the 21st century is based on an alliance model.

Alliance organizations
              depend on effective virtual collaboration.  However, emprical research
              exploring collaborative knowledge processes and the function of elecronic
              infrastructures in distributed work groups reveals an important contradiction. 
              This contradiciton emerges, on the one hand, from observations that authentic
              knowledge processes are somehow embedded within specific practices and
              interpersonal exchanges.  On the other hand, successful use of electronic
              infrastructures to support knowledge processes among distributed teams depends
              on knowledge being made mobile, that is, transferable across people located in
              different places.  Thus, it may be very difficult to transfer authentic
              embedded knowledge beyond the specific setting and set of people in which the
              context for that knowledge is consensually understood.  This contradiciton will
              be investigated in this research: the nature of knowledge processes in groups
              and the goals of electronic infrastructures to support distributed knowledge
              processes may be in direct conflict with one another.  

This project
              examines the construction and sharing of knowledge among multidisciplinary
              scientific teams in the National Computational Science Alliance (Alliance). 
              The Alliance is one of two NSF-funded partnerships out of the PACI program in
              the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering,
              consisting of over sixty educational, government, and industry partner
              organizations with the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA)
              at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign as the leading edge site. 
              Research investigators from social science, computer science, history,
              business, psychology, philosophy, and information science will explore the
              knowledge processes that are involved in virtual collaborative work.  The
              project is a multidisciplinary, multi-level and multi-method study into how
              electronic technologies are used to support knowledge production and sharing in
              this alliance and how such technologies can be used in other alliances as well.
               The multidisciplinary research team itself reflects the research subject, and
              will derive the benefit of observing its own multidisciplinary distributed
              knowledge processes.  An additional outcome of the project's multidisciplinary
              approach, along with online dissemination efforts, will be a prototype social
              science workbench for studying knowledge processes in groups.








