Title       : Carborane-Stabilized Mixed-Valence Metallooligomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2002   
File        : a9980708

Award Number: 9980708
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell N. Grimes RNG@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              supports research by Russell N. Grimes, Chemistry Department, University of
              Virginia, on mixed-valence metallo-carboranes.  Selected families of dinuclear
              and polynuclear transition metal metallacarboranes will be synthesized.  These
              are soluble paramagnetic complexes featuring two or more transition
              metal-carborane units connected by covalently bonded linkers designed to permit
              intramolecular metal-metal communication.  Small carborane ligands will be used
              to stabilize the complexes, permitting directed synthesis of a range of
              molecular architectures in stable, soluble form.  The primary goal is to
              explore the dependence of metal-metal communication on structural geometry,
              choice of metals and metal oxidation states, the number and nature of the
              linkers, and the mode of binding of the linking groups to the metallacarborane
              cluster units.  The architectures to be investigated are chains with metals at
              the ends, internally metallated linear systems, and branched chain compounds. 
              The connectors will include alkynyl, alkenyl, and phenylene units.  The
              compounds will be characterized by a variety of methods, including X-ray
              diffraction, EPR, NMR, and cyclic voltammetry.

New synthetic methods will be
              developed to obtain compounds with specific architectural designs.  These
              compounds obtained will be used to explore interaction between metals in
              systems that contain metals that have a mixture of oxidation states.  The
              results will be relevant to design of materials with specified electronic,
              magnetic, or optical properties.  Graduate students will receive training in a
              variety of advanced methods and challenging synthetic work.

