Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Investigating Surface Initiated Polymerization
               of Amino Acid Derivatives by Ion Assisted Deposition: Polymer and Film
               Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2000       
File        : a9980398

Award Number: 9980398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rigoberto C. Advincula   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jimmy W. Mays  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5921,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9980398
Advincula

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor Rigoberto Advincula of the University of Alabama and
              Professor Hiroaki Usui of the Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology in
              Japan.  The researchers will be investigating surface initiated polymerization
              of amino acid derivatives by ion assisted deposition: polymer and film
              characterization.  Ion-Assisted deposition (IAD) is a novel extension of the
              vacuum evaporation method.  Recently there has been growing interest in
              polypeptide films on solid substrates.  IAD offers the potential for aligning
              dipoles during synthesis, holding much promise for the creation of tethered
              polypeptide chains having controlled orientation.  An important question is
              whether the orientation parameters affect primarily the deposition of the
              polymerization process.  Polymers usually do not evaporate easily, so the
              researchers will explore the fundamental differences between polymers produced
              by three different methods:  1) direct evaporation of simple polymers,  2)
              step-growth polymerization and  3) addition polymerization. 

The project
              brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
              expertise and research capabilities.  The U.S researchers are experts in the
              mechanism of polymerization, polydispersity, microstructure and film
              characteristics.  Their Japanese collaborator is a pioneer in the use of the
              vacuum evaporation method for fabrication of polymeric ultrathin films. 
              Polymer ultrathin films have important applications in microelectronics,
              electro-optics and biotechnology.  The project advances international human
              resources through the participation of a several graduate students including
              underrepresented groups.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
              project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.   Results of the research will be published in
              international scientific journals and also presented at scientific meetings in
              the U.S. and abroad.

