Title       : Rural Systemic Initiative Research Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a9980574

Award Number: 9980574
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernice T. Anderson                     
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda S. Warner lsuewarner@yahoo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Suahbetainu Kahni, LLC
	      3121 W. State Street
	      Milwaukee, WI  532083494    /   -

NSF Program : 7261      PROGRAM EVALUATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal seeks to examine the effects of the Rural Systemic Program
              in
Category I and Category II. The evaluation methods include the careful
              selection of a
team of senior evaluators and doctoral/post-doctoral students
              whose expertise is cross-sectional.
We propose that the team design
              instruments using GPRA format, wherever feasible, to provide a
              summative
evaluation of The Program. Because the RSI program is the most
              recent, we propose that each project is
targeted for participation in one or
              more studies, including the current planning sites and
the unsuccessful
              planning/implementation sites. The program design allows the team to
integrate
              expertise and to share findings in a timely manner. The project relies on
              data
gathered as Core Data I and Core Data II as well as the collection of
              evaluation specific
observations, interviews, and surveys. The project also
              provides for wide dissemination of the results through professional
              organizations, scholarly publications, and local, state, national news media.
