Title       : Integration of Fourier Transform-Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy and Gas
               Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry into the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2000   
File        : a9980670

Award Number: 9980670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64845              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis J. Gravert dgravert@smumn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James G. Vogel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Mary's College
	      
	      Winona, MN  55987    507/452-4430

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) This project works to revitalize and transform the chemistry
              curriculum through the implementation of a problem-solving, project-based
              laboratory program for Organic Chemistry. This program provides students with
              enriching "hands on" experiences, especially those using a Fourier Transform
              Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (FT-NMR) spectrometer and a Gas Chromatograph-Mass
              Spectrometer (GC-MS). Students actively learn the concepts of organic chemistry
              using FT-NMR and GC-MS to solve problems adapted from published, successful
              laboratory experiments, largely from the Journal of Chemical Education. 
              Several student projects are planned that engage students in the acquisition
              and interpretation of NMR and GC-MS, such as the structural elucidation of
              alkanes by proton-decoupled and distortionless enhancement by polarization
              transfer (DEPT) 13C NMR spectroscopy and the identification of the fragrant
              components of wine by GC-MS. In addition to Organic Chemistry, these
              instruments are being incorporated into other laboratory courses such as
              Advanced Organic Chemistry, wherein students characterize an organotin compound
              to explore heteronuclear spin coupling by NMR and isotope distribution patterns
              by GCMS, and Analytical Chemistry, wherein students analyze complex mixtures
              from Ginko extracts. Expected outcomes for students include the development of
              marketable skills in the operation of FT-NMR and GC-MS, improved ability in the
              interpretation of spectral data, increased awareness of the utility of
              chemistry in society, and heightened enthusiasm for chemistry. Incorporation of
              FT-NMR and GC-MS into the chemistry curriculum also encourages faculty
              development via training in order to design new student experiments and to
              conduct research with undergraduates. Proficient operation of the NMR and GC-MS
              computer workstations by students also serves to integrate technology into
              education.

