Title       : Using Ground-Penetrating Radar to Teach Subsurface Principles in Geology and
               Geophysics to University Students and High School Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a9980881

Award Number: 9980881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57402              (Estimated)
Investigator: Detlef A. Warnke   (Principal Investigator current)
              Calvin F. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Hayward Fdn
	      25976 Carlos Bee Blvd
	      Hayward, CA  945421602    /   -

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)

This adaptation and implementation project addresses
              the following key problems facing earth science education:  1) geological and
              cultural features buried in the subsurface provide the bulk of geologic
              investigations, whether in mineral exploration, environmental remediation,
              engineering or anthropology; 2) many states are adopting more rigorous teaching
              standards for science teachers, with an emphasis on hands-on learning; and 3)
              new National Science Education Standards encourage active student participation
              in their learning experience.  It adapts equipment and data-gathering
              techniques used by industry for classroom use within the context of a hands-on,
              inquiry based pedagogical approach. 

This project sets up a
              geophysics/environmental sciences field-mapping laboratory that includes a
              ground penetrating radar system (GPR)  and reflection/ refraction software.  A
              GPR provides rapid acquisition of shallow subsurface images of strata,
              geological structures, and cultural features necessary for geological,
              hydrological, environmental, engineering, and anthropological studies.  It is
              easy to learn to use and is lightweight and portable, thus making it ideally
              suited for student handling and use in the field.  

Specific activities
              include modifying existing undergraduate and graduate courses to incorporate
              GPR,  establishing a summer field program incorporating geophysical techniques,
              creating a summer workshop in earth science laboratory and field techniques for
              K-12 teachers, and sharing the GPR with other colleges and universities in the
              local area.  This equipment is being made available to the diverse student and
              teacher population found in the local area.  Evaluation is being conducted by
              an external evaluator to assess the effectiveness of the curriculum changes,
              the use of the laboratory equipment, and the teacher training effort. 
              Dissemination is being accomplished by conference presentations, teacher
              workshops, and an active website containing both materials and student
              projects. 
  


