Title       : KDI: Unsteady Flows with Dynamic Boundaries: Experiment and Computation
               Interacting in the Virtual Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9980069

Award Number: 9980069
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2400000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Peskin peskin@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Denis Zorin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Wettlaufer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Shelley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Stephen Childress  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1348,8877,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Peskin
9980069
     Unsteady fluid flows driven by dynamic boundaries are
              among
the most difficult flows to simulate and visualize.  Whether
drawn from
              polymer rheology, microflight, or cardiac fluid
dynamics, these problems
              involve structures on many length and
time scales, strong coupling between the
              fluid and a deformable
boundary, and complex geometry.  The investigator and
              his
colleagues, taking the problems of insect flight and heart
function as
              focal points for a multidisciplinary collaboration,
seek a new paradigm for
              understanding boundary-fluid dynamics.
This new paradigm involves both
              numerical simulation and
experimental investigation, brought together through
              the emerging
technology of virtual reality.  On the numerical side,
              they
develop new adaptive and hierarchical numerical techniques, as
well as
              improve existing methods (immersed boundary and adaptive
grid), to enable
              interactive simulation experiments and steerable
computation.  The
              experimental program focuses both on methods
that can be used to validate and
              complement the results of
numerical simulations, and on novel techniques for
              the study of
unsteady flows with dynamic boundaries.  Computational
              and
experimental approaches are integrated within a virtual
environment that
              enables a researcher to modify interactively the
parameters and geometry of
              the simulated system, steer
computational processes, flexibly visualize
              experimental data,
and use experimental data to guide computation.
     When
              unsteady three-dimensional flows interact with dynamic
boundaries such as
              heart valves and insect wings, the resulting
fluid dynamics defy easy
              representation and conventional
analysis.  The tight coupling between boundary
              and fluid, the
differing and interacting length and time scales, and
              the
complexity of turbulent motions make these problems a
              formidable
theoretical and computational challenge.  Breakthroughs
              in
understanding this class of problems will enable important
advances in
              fields such as medicine, biology, aeronautics, and
chemical engineering. 
              Achieving such breakthroughs is the goal of
a collaboration between
              researchers from NYU's Courant Institute
of Mathematical Sciences (CIMS) and
              the University of Washington
(UW), with combined expertise in mathematics and
              computation,
experimental laboratory investigation, and
              scientific
visualization.  Heart valve function and insect flight cannot
              be
explained by classical arguments based on steady flow.  Millions
of years
              of evolution have produced shapes, feedback mechanisms,
and boundary
              properties in response to the complexity of the
boundary-fluid interaction.  A
              greater understanding of these
interactions between boundary and flow will
              open the door to new
generations of artificial heart valves, small and
              highly
efficient flying machines, and other devices carefully designed
to
              interact with the complex but repeatable behaviors of boundary
dominated fluid
              flows.  A key goal of this project is the
integration of experiment and
              computation in a virtual
environment that facilitates the involvement of the
              human
investigator.  The project strives to change the paradigm of
research
              in this area.  A researcher should be able to modify the
parameters and
              geometry of a simulated system while the
simulation is running; to steer, for
              a given simulated system,
the computational process itself; to use
              experimental data to
guide the computation; and to process and interact with
              the
experimental data, while visualizing it in three dimensions as
well as
              over time.  While the focus is on the core studies of
insect flight and heart
              function, extrapolation from these core
examples should enable breakthroughs
              wherever fluids (including
gases) interact with structures of complicated and
              possibly
dynamic geometry.  This KDI project is supported by the Division
of
              Mathematical Sciences, the Division of Integrative Biology and
Neuroscience,
              and the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems.

