Title       : The Effects of Impurities on the Flow of Polycrystalline Ice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a9980379

Award Number: 9980379
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Baker ian.baker@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is for support for three years of funding to study the effects of
              impurities on the flow of poly-
crystalline ice.  It has been known for thirty
              years that both hydrofluoric acid (HF) and hydrochloric acid (HCl) dramatically
              decrease the strength of ice and recent work by the author's group has shown
              that sulfuric acid (H2SO4) produces a similar reduction in strength.  However,
              these data are for single crystals at strain rates and stresses that far exceed
              those found in glaciers and ice sheets, and often at concentrations that far
              exceed those in natural ice.  Therefore, it is not known how impurities found
              in nature affect the flow of polycrystalline ice at slow strain rates.  In this
              research, the effects of nitric acid and sulfuric acid (which are naturally
              occurring impurities in ice) on the microstructure (dislocation structure,
              grain boundary structure and location of the acids) and creep of
              polycrystalline ice (at a range of temperatures and stresses) will be
              determined.  The ice's response to creep deformation will be studied using a
              combination of x-ray topography, optical microscopy and scanning electron
              microscopy.  X-ray microanalysis in an environmental scanning electron
              microscope will be used to study the location of impurities.  The structure and
              creep behavior of the acid-doped ice will be compared with those of both
              high-purity laboratory-grown ice and ice from Byrd Station, Antarctica.  The
              end-result of this project will be to elucidate the effects of
              naturally-occurring acid impurities on the mechanical properties of
              polycrystalline ice under conditions relevant to the deformation of glaciers
              and ice sheets, including and understanding of how impurities affect the
              underlying deformation mechanisms.

