Title       : Integration of Research into Geosciences Laboratory Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2000     
File        : a9980930

Award Number: 9980930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36282              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan K. Filer jfiler@towson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rachel J. Burks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42) Equipment implemented for environmental monitoring in this project
              allows  for interweaving research experiences from periodic and long-term
              observation  of geologically dynamic sites into curricula developed and adapted
              from techniques  used at The College of William and Mary in their sedimentology
              and stratigraphy, environmental geology, and hydrogeology courses (as with
              Ibsen, 1995, Baseline hydrologic study of Beaverdam Creek, New Kent County,
              Virginia, unpublished senior thesis). Students in both introductory geology and
              in  upper level environmental geology and hydrogeology classes use this data.
              Examples of data collection and monitoring occur in watersheds impacted by
              development such as at Towson Run on campus and Minebank Run in Cromwell Valley
              Park.  These sites are monitored for stream discharge, groundwater levels,
              water quality, bank stability and erosion/sedimentation.  In the sedimentology
              and stratigraphy course the estuarine shoreline at Cove Point, a migrating cusp
              on the Chesapeake Bay coast, is being monitored for erosion and sedimentation. 
              The databases obtained from successive years of data collection at these sites
              provide access for students to a meaningful time series of data that is then
              integrated into student projects.  This provides them with a larger data set
              than could be collected during a single course. They are then better able to
              interpret and analyze environmental change.  In upper level environmental,
              hydrogeology, and sedimentology and stratigraphy courses, students prepare a
              research report concerning monitored sites as a class requirement.  Geology
              majors have these experiences in at least one course prior to their final year,
              and  experience the process of interpreting and drawing conclusions from
              significant, real-world data sets, culminating in the preparation of a formal
              scientific senior research report.  
