Title       : Multiclass Scheduling and Congestion Control in Communication Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9980544

Award Number: 9980544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299616             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Hajek b-hajek@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Research on multiclass scheduling and congestion control for computer
              communication networks
is proposed.  Emphasis is placed on multiple qualities
              of service, including throughput and delay,
and on multiple classes of packet
              data.  Two complementary research topics are addressed.  The
first topic is
              causal scheduling of packets with multiple priority classes and deadlines.  The
              goal
is to investigate a new scheduling criterion and related algorithms for
              dealing with conflicting
requirements for throughput and delay for multiclass
              traffic with deadlines.
     The second topic is multiclass implementations of
              end-to-end congestion control, with pricing
based on explicit congestion
              notification.  Recently Gibbens and Kelly proposed the idea of
              charging
network users for marks placed on packets by network routers.  A mark
              on a packet is an indication
that the packet caused congestion.  This research
              explores the use of this pricing mechanism with
the addition of a small number
              of packet classes and a multiclass service discipline at the routers,
based on
              the classes.  Limited or no use of per flow state information will be made at
              the routers.
     The approach will be to perform modeling, analysis, and
              design.  Models will be based on current and anticipated future technology, and
              cover a broad spectrum of user demands and network
topologies.  The analysis
              techniques will include simulation, asymptotic analysis based on fluid limits,
              diffusion limits, and large deviation theory, and stability analysis based on
              Lyapunov functions
derived from convex analysis.  Methods for optimization,
              such as convex programming methods and
combinatorial optimization, and
              classical scheduling theory will be used.  Nonstochastic methods
such as
              investigation of sample path optimality properties and competitively optimal
              scheduling
will also be considered.
     Successful completion of the
              proposed research will provide (1) improved algorithms for scheduling
              multiclass traffic with strict time constraints, (2) an improved understanding
              of the implementation choices and the value of congestion based pricing using a
              small number of packet classes for the purpose of end-to-end congestion control
              in large scale networks, and (3) new mechanisms for end-to-end congestion
              control in large-scale computer communication networks.  

