Title       : KDI: Mathematical Foundations for a Networked Scientific Knowledge Base
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a9980036

Award Number: 9980036
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel W. Lozier dlozier@nist.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank W. Olver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles W. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald F. Boisvert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NIST
	      Building 226 Rm B226
	      Gaithersburg, MD  20899    301/975-2000

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1346,8877,9139,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9980036

This project addresses the problems of generation, validation,
              organization, distribution and use of a Web-oriented knowledge base of
              mathematical concepts.  The field of coverage is the special functions of
              applied mathematics.  The investigator and his colleagues develop a Digital
              Library of Mathematical Functions (DLMF), a Web-accessible knowledge base of
              validated mathematical data obtained by a completely new survey of the archival
              literature.  The DLMF delivers reference information in the concise style of
              the classic NBS Handbook of Mathematical Functions (Abramowitz and Stegun,
              eds.), but within a rich structure of semantic-based representation, metadata,
              interactive features, and internal/external links.  It supports diverse user
              requirements such as simple lookup, complex search and retrieval, formula
              validation and discovery, automatic rule generation, interactive visualization,
              custom data on demand, and pointers to software and evaluated numerical
              methodology.  As successor to the NBS Handbook, the DLMF provides an
              authoritative source of mathematical concepts traceable to a NIST definition. 
              The basic research issues are associated with content, representation, and
              interaction of humans and other agents with the DLMF knowledge base.  Such
              issues include identification and validation of relevant material; development
              of semantic-based representations of mathematical information; structure of
              metadata; search and retrieval in mathematical databases; and conversion of
              mathematical data between formats suitable for composition, display, and
              computation.  These problems are being solved by an international team of
              experts, overseen by an editorial board.  The DLMF will be disseminated in a
              print edition with CD-ROM as well as from a free Web service that will be
              maintained indefinitely at NIST.

The project personnel are constructing a
              Digital Library of Mathematical Functions (DLMF) which provides NIST-certified
              reference data and associated information for the higher functions of applied
              mathematics.  Such functions possess a wealth of critically important and
              highly technical properties that are used by engineers, scientists,
              statisticians and others to aid in the construction and analysis of
              computational models of materials and processes in a wide variety of
              applications.  TheDLMF assists its users in locating formulas, algorithms and
              software; in understanding complex relationships through interactive graphics
              and typical applications; in tracing mathematical definitions and properties to
              a NIST standard; and in transcribing intricate mathematical information into
              documents and computer programs with complete reliability and accuracy.  For
              example, software companies will be able to use the DLMF to produce vastly
              improved libraries and software packages.  This is very significant because
              software provides the most effective means for practitioners to employ
              mathematical methods easily and reliably.  The current standard reference for
              mathematical functions, developed by NIST with NSF support in the 1950s, is
              seriously out-of-date.  A myriad of new properties, functions, applications and
              computational techniques have come into importance since then.  This gap needs
              to be filled, and done so in a way that takes full advantage of modern
              information technology.  The data are presented at a state-of-the-art World
              Wide Web site that will become a focus for the community of researchers and
              users of mathematical function technology, as well as in a book with CD-ROM. 
              It is expected that the DLMF will be a model for other projects of similar
              type.  This KDI project is supported by the Division of Mathematical Sciences
              and the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems.

