Title       : Agile Manufacturing: Integrated Manufacturing Technology Roadmapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1999 
File        : a9980195

Award Number: 9980195
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Neal   (Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Brosey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oak Ridge National Lab
	      Bethel Valley Road
	      Oak Ridge, TN  37831    865/574-9798

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5223,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides continuing funding for a multi-agency effort to develop a
              set of enabling technology roadmaps that identify key cross-cutting advances
              and capabilities required to meet near and long-term goals of the U.S.
              manufacturing community.  This project will continue to build on the
              roadmapping effort of the National Academy of Engineering Next Generation
              Manufacturing study.  During the first phase of this effort, roadmaps were
              developed in three areas: information systems, modeling and simulation, and
              manufacturing processes and equipment.  The primary objectives of this phase
              are to complete the baseline roadmapping initiative including the development
              of a technology roadmap for enterprise integration, completion of the baseline
              gap analysis, development and validation of a consolidated report, and
              initiation of implementation.  The information produced in this effort will be
              published as it is produced and maintained on the Internet as a readily
              accessible resource for government and industry in support of strategic
              planning.

There has been relatively little effort or collective focus to
              address the technical challenges associated with the next generation of
              manufacturing.  Many of these challenges go beyond the capabilities of a single
              company or a single government agency to address.  This effort brings these
              parties together in a forum within which information for strategic planning can
              be developed and made available.  This is especially crucial in the current
              environment where the level of manufacturing R&D funding is declining.  The
              results of this project should help to provide a mechanism for agencies and
              industry to pool their resources in areas of mutual interest.
