Title       : Liquid Metal-X Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a9980363

Award Number: 9980363
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $865000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart A. Rice s-rice@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Stuart Rice of the University of Chicago is funded by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program  for a combined experimental and theoretical
              approach to study the interfaces between pure metals and alloys and other
              species of condensed matter.   The studies are directed primarily at interfaces
              between liquid and vapor, liquid and solid, and between liquid and an adsorbate
              on the liquid surface.  The experimental studies will use grazing incidence
              x-ray diffraction, grazing incidence differential anomalous x-ray diffraction,
              x-ray reflectivity, x-ray reflectivity fine structure and surface sensitive
              EXAFS measurements.  The theoretical studies will employ self-consistent
              quantum Monte Carlo simulations.  The longitudinal and transverse structure in
              the liquid-vapor interface of alloys will be studied with particular attention
              to the heterovalent alloys.  The longitudinal and transverse structure in the
              liquid-solid interfaces of pure metals and alloys will be examined for the
              influence of the field of the solid on the structure of the liquid at the
              interface.  The variation of the interface will be studied as a function of the
              alloy composition and temperature.

Very little is known about the structure
              of the interface between two immiscible phases. Many chemical phenomena depend
              on the nature of this interface.  Professor Rice is using a combination of
              theoretical and experimental methods which have only recently become available
              to explore the detailed structure of these phase boundaries and the factors
              which influence this structure. 

