Title       : Developing an Integrated Curriculum in Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9980911

Award Number: 9980911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42592              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea H. Lloyd lloyd@middlebury.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Helen J. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sallie P. Sheldon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlebury College
	      Old Chapel Building
	      Middlebury, VT  05753    802/388-3711

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)  This project is integrating experiences in ecology in
              the Biology department, which has a strong representation of ecology in its
              course offerings and faculty, to address two deficiencies in the present
              curriculum:  the current course offerings are treated as separate units, and
              the laboratory experiences are focused on observational studies. The project is
              modifying the current curriculum to increase the cohesiveness and continuity of
              experiences for students and to introduce a more mechanistic, experimental
              approach to ecological issues.  This is done through the presentation of
              important topics (such as experimental design and statistical analysis) in all
              ecology courses, through the sharing of ecological data collected from common
              field sites, and through more laboratory experiments emphasizing physiological
              responses of organisms to their environments. The ideas for this project have
              been adapted from two sources.  First, Lloyd was involved as a teaching
              assistant in an effort to improve the global change curriculum at the
              University of Arizona.  In conjunction with Dr. Lisa Graumlich, she helped
              revise a one-semester, upper-division course in global environmental change
              that integrated active learning pedagogies and opportunities for student-driven
              investigations.  Second, Lloyd's involvement as a researcher in the NSF-funded
              LTER program (at the Bonanza Creek LTER) led to an idea, developed jointly by
              Lloyd and Dr. Steve Trombulak of Middlebury to organize the lab curricula of
              ecology courses around a set of shared field sites, much as research at an LTER
              site is integrated around a set of shared research sites.  Through progressive
              education about ecological principles and methods and through numerous research
              experiences in the laboratories of all ecology courses, students are gaining an
              appreciation of ecology as a broad and interdisciplinary science.  The goals
              are to provide a more coherent and comprehensive coverage of ecology in these
              courses, to present ecology as a more mechanistic and experimental science, to
              increase the number of students choosing to do ecologically-based independent
              research and senior theses, and to encourage students to continue on in
              ecology-related graduate programs and careers.


