Title       : Spectroscopic Studies of Copper, Iron Sulfur and Heme Electron Transfer Active
               Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a9980549

Award Number: 9980549
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $820000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward I. Solomon Edward.Solomon@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              supports research by Dr. Edward I. Solomon, Chemistry Department, Stanford
              University, on metal-mediated electron transfer in systems of biological
              interest.  The systems to be investigated are blue copper, copper A,
              rubredoxin, the 2, 3, and 4 iron-sulfur clusters, and the cytochromes.  A
              combination of spectroscopic methods will be used to: 1) explore the roles of
              the axial ligands in determining the electronic and geometric structures of the
              blue copper and copper A centers and their contributions to ET reactivity; 2)
              define covalent pathways in blue copper and copper A centers for long range
              electron transfer; 3) define specific electronic structure contributions to the
              low reduction potential of the Fe(SR)4(1-/2-) center, and the change in
              electronic structure of the iron sulfur clusters with oxidation using variable
              energy photoelectron spectroscopy; 4) probe differences in bridged sulfide
              bonding that can contribute to differences in electron delocalization in 2, 3,
              and 4 iron clusters and heterometal clusters and the effects of the protein on
              the electronic structure of the clusters using sulfur K-edge X-ray absorption
              methodology; and 5) define the covalent delocalization of the redox active
              orbital into the porphyrin ligand in the cytochromes using metal L-edges. The
              studies will utilize a wide range of spectroscopic methods, including EPR,
              polarized single crystal electronic absorption, resonance Raman, circular
              dichroism, PES, and X-ray absorption edge spectroscopy.  Electronic structure
              calculations will be used to interpret spectral features and their associated
              electronic structures.

These studies will help determine the contribution of
              electronic structure to long range electron transfer and the role of the
              protein in determining the geometry and electronics of the active site.  The
              proteins studied are important in biotechnology, nitrogen fixation, respiratory
              metabolism, and photosynthesis.  Spectroscopic methods developed will have
              applications in biology and catalysis.  Postdoctoral and graduate students
              involved in this research will be trained in a wide range of spectroscopic
              methods, ligand field and molecular orbital calculations, and enzymology, and
              will be well prepared for positions in academia or industry.  Instrumentation
              will be made available to members of the bioinorganic community, many from
              locations outside the U.S.

