Title       : Electrokinetic Flow Design for Micro-Laboratories on a Chip
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a9980745

Award Number: 9980745
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399994             (Estimated)
Investigator: David T. Leighton dtl@darwin.cc.nd.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Hsueh-Chia Chang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this Engineering Microsystems: "XYZ" on a Chip project is to
              investigate biochemical assays on a microscale.  Funds are awarded to support a
              collaborative project between Notre Dame University and Caliper Technologies to
              develop chips for rapid, well controlled, low-reagent biochemical assays on
              nanoliter-sized samples. Applications of such chips include rapid combinatorial
              screening of pharmaceuticals, measurements of temperature and
              concentration-dependent reaction kinetics, and genetic typing and screening.
              These applications are executed by moving liquid samples through micro-etched
              channels through electro-osmosis. While fluid flow controls such as sample
              dilution, heating/cooling, stream mixing, and partitioning have been
              demonstrated successfully, there are several issues that limit the throughput
              and prevent the full realization of a multi-function, integrated, computer
              controlled, networked biochemical laboratory on a chip. Specific issues which
              need to be addressed to fully realize the potential of the laboratory on a chip
              are: dispersion reduction through channel profiling, dispersion enhancement
              through channel patterning and profiling, enhanced heat transfer, and solute
              sampling via encapsulation. All designs will be tested on actual fabricated
              chips in collaboration with Caliper Technologies.

 

