Title       : XYZ on a Chip: Incorporation of Biological Components into Microsystems via
               Biomimetic Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a9980795

Award Number: 9980795
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $373554             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurie B. Gower lgowe@mse.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9980795
Gower
The goal of this Engineering Microsystems:  "XYZ" on a Chip
              project is to combine rapid prototyping techniques with biomimetic processing
              for the fabrication of engineered microsystems that contain biological
              components. The biomimetic processing technique, called the Polymer-Induced
              Liquid-Precursor (PILP) process, is currently being developed by the PI for the
              deposition of mineral films under low-temperature and aqueous-based conditions.
              These benign processing conditions should be amenable to the incorporation of
              thermally sensitive ingredients, which will be capitalized on in the proposed
              methodology. The novelty of the PILP process is that an acidic polyelectrolyte
              (polyaspartic acid) transforms a traditional solution crystallization process
              into a solidification process by sequestering ions and inducing phase
              separation of a mineral precursor. This precursor is in the form of a
              moderately viscous liquid, and can be molded and shaped by a compartment. The
              hallmark of biomineralization is the ability of organisms to "mold" inorganic
              crystals within vesicular compartments, thus it is hypothesized that this PILP
              process may play a fundamental role in the morphogenesis of calcitic
              biominerals. Therefore, the first goal of the proposed work is to demonstrate
              "micromolding" of calcite using microfabrication techniques.

Patterning of
              the inorganic phase will be investigated by the following two approaches: 1)
              soft lithography" micromolding of a PILP precursor, or 2) solid freeform
              fabrication of ceramic precursor generated by a Temperature Induced Forming
              (TIF) process. The channels of the patterned inorganic layer will subsequently
              be filled in by polymerization of a secondary phase for planarization of the
              layer (polycinnamic acid is chosen as the testbed). Rapid prototyping will then
              be used to sequentially deposit numerous thin layers, in order to construct a
              three-dimensional composite structure of controlled architecture, the second
              goal of the project. In many ways, this layer-by-layer fabrication scheme is
              similar to the processes that occur naturally in biomineralization; whereby
              computer-aided design (CAD) allows for the spatial control of the sequential
              depositions, which is accomplished by cellular processes in biological
              systems.

A third goal of the project is to demonstrate the incorporation of
              biological components into scaffolding structures, and in a spatially uniform
              and controlled fashion. The Urease-urea enzyme system will be used for a
              testbed, in order to determine if the process denatures the protein. The
              spatial distribution of the protein will be examined by fluorescent and
              immunogold labeling of protein. The work proposed herein will demonstrate
              feasibility of the approach, and begin to acquire the tools necessary for
              developing a generalized methodology for customized composites for a variety of
              applications, such as the following:

Bio receptor Microsystems: a high
              degree of spatial regulation of biological components will be a necessary
              feature for the future of hybridization of microelectronics with bioreceptor
              species.

Drug Delivery- a biodegradable mineral phase with optimal
              biocompatibility for the slow release of agents encapsulated within the mineral
              phase.

Microencapsulation of Cells and Tissue Engineering: a porous
              framework of a biodegradable phase containing bone morphogenetic proteins for
              application as osteoinductive bone-graft substitutes, or for encapsulation of
              osteoprogenitor cells for in vitro hard-tissue engineering (or other tissues).
              Likewise, a porous framework could provide a cage for Islet cells, enabling
              through flow of physiological media and biologically-controlled release of
              insulin for treatment of diabetes, while isolating the foreign cells to prevent
              immunogenic response.

Bioseparations: structuring of the framework in
              three-dimensions will enable controlled porosity and porosity gradients for
              size-specific separations and chromatography, that along with the capability of
              incorporation of bioconstituents, will be particularly amenable to
              bioseparations.

Biocatalysis: Using the benign biomimetic process, enzymes
              could be incorporated into the framework to fabricate a porous catalytic media,
              and possibly with controlled orientation of the protein through surface
              interactions with framework for optimal presentation of catalytic site.


