Title       : Robotic Renaissance: Bridging Engineering, Art, and Science via Web Robotics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a9980873

Award Number: 9980873
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49533              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl F. R. Weiman weiman@optonline.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chih-Shing Wei  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Adrianne Wortzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cooper Union
	      Albert Nerken School of Engrg
	      New York, NY  100037120    212/353-4177

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Electrical (55)

The essence of this project is to adopt mobile
              robotic technology from engineering and implement it in a fundamentally
              interdisciplinary education environment involving the performing arts and
              design. The project is adapting the proven educational use of off-the-shelf
              robots and their previous successful use of custom robots in theatrical
              performance. Traditional robotic pedagogy progresses from mechanisms and
              software to functional vehicles. Little time is left for application
              development, and many talented non-engineering students cannot participate. 
              This innovative undergraduate robotics application environment by using
              off-the-shelf mobile robots, controlled via Web page interfaces requires no
              specialized systems experience.  It is providing productive cross-disciplinary
              participation and mutual enrichment of engineering and arts students.  Users
              access HTML control panels via standard Web browser such as NetScape(c) or
              Internet Explorer@. Mobile robots, wireless communication links, and PC
              computers with suitable server and software is being used.

The educational
              aim is to provide an open development environment - free of operating system or
              platform expertise requirements - for students and faculty in all academic
              disciplines to develop creative applications for mobile robots. By analogy,
              this is what browsers did for the Internet, revolutionizing both commerce and
              culture while fueling further technical progress.
Outcomes are enrichment of
              cross-disciplinary curricula in engineering and arts, faculty development, and
              exciting applications including WWW robotic theatrical performances directed by
              a professional artist. Results are being disseminated via Web and
              publications.




