Title       : Integrated Undergraduate Computational Biology Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2000     
File        : a9980943

Award Number: 9980943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162522             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitsunori Ogihara ogihara@cs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Animesh Ray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Huelsenbeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) ; Biological Sciences (61) ; Computer Science
              (31)

Scientific inquiries overlapping the traditional boundaries will be a
              hallmark of educational experience in the next millennium. This project is an
              initiative towards investigating optimal dissemination of interdisciplinary
              science. The immediate goal of the project is to design an undergraduate
              computational biology curriculum as a model of interdisciplinary education. (1)
              We are drawing the attention of beginning undergraduates through an exploratory
              course with no prerequisites on computational molecular biology; (2) we are
              providing students of biology and chemistry a background in computer
              programming, and the students of computer science in the fundamentals of
              molecular biology; and (3) we are teaching the students the fundamentals as
              well as the current progress of computational biology through a
              multi-instructor course. The second concurrent goal is to establish a Web-based
              out-reach program for educational institutions that lack an equivalent
              concentration of instructors in computational biology.

Since participation
              in research is an integral part of science education, we are encouraging
              undergraduate students in the program to work in "independent research"
              programs with participating faculty members during their senior year. This
              experiment in educational technology is providing a unique contribution towards
              enrichment of undergraduate education in cutting edge multidisciplinary fields.
              The project is adapting from the science education literature teaching methods
              that emphasize in class discussion and peer-led workshop formats.

As a part
              of the cost share the University has committed to supply LAN-connected PCs to
              facilitate the laboratory for the program. Donation of additional equipment is
              being negotiated from Microsoft Corporation.



