Title       : Thermal Analysis: Material Science Facilities for Undergraduate
               Teaching/Research in Chemistry and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9980925

Award Number: 9980925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert K. Boggess                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48680              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah L. Stoll sarah.stoll@oberlin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Manish A. Mehta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen FitzGerald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oberlin College
	      
	      Oberlin, OH  44074    440/775-8461

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) This project uses thermal analysis instruments to develop
              materials science experiments in chemistry and physics laboratories as well as
              to conduct  undergraduate research in this area.   For thermal analysis, three
              complementary instruments (a Differential Scanning Calorimeter (DSC) and a
              Thermogravimetric Analysis/Differential Thermal Analysis (TGA/DTA) instrument,
              with Evolved Gas Analysis capabilities, coupled to a  dedicated FTIR
              spectrometer) are used to characterize solid state materials including ceramics
              and polymers. Experiments are adapted from both the educational and the
              research literature.  In the physical chemistry course the instruments are used
              to measure the thermal properties of polyurethane and to determine the specific
              heat capacity and enthalpy of protein folding. In inorganic chemistry, students
              study Ring Opening Metathesis Polymerization (ROMP) using a well-defined
              ruthenium carbene complex, and measure the thermal properties of the resulting
              polymer. In an upper level physics laboratory course, students study the
              orthorhombic-totetragonal phase transition in the superconductor YBa2CU307-x by
              DSC and oxygen stoichiometry by TGA. The transition temperature is a sensitive
              function of oxygen content in this cuprate superconductor. A second experiment
              involves the study of the phase transition of C60. The instruments are used in
              undergraduate research in materials science in both the chemistry and the
              physics departments. In chemistry, thermal analysis is used to evaluate
              precursors used to form nanoparticles of magnetic semiconductors by
              thermolysis.  The role of water in the adsorption of peptides and proteins to
              mineral surfaces using thermal analysis is also being studied. In physics, the
              properties of fullerenes and cement based materials are being investigated. 

