Title       : Incorporating Agent-Based Computing into Computer Science and Engineering
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9980375

Award Number: 9980375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew P. Bernat                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74327              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yi Shang yshang@cecs.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hongchi Shi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31)

In recent years, agent-based computing is increasingly
              being used in information management and distributed computing.  In
              undergraduate computer science education the technical aspects of agent-based
              computing are closely related to other areas of the discipline.  This
              proof-of-concept project incorporates agent-based computing across the computer
              science and engineering curriculum.  The objectives of the project are to
              design and develop course materials, including examples and exercises for an
              introductory course, Foundations of Agent-Based Computing, and a series of
              in-depth course modules, including teaching materials and agent software, that
              can be integrated into other computer science courses such as artificial
              intelligence, distributed computing, networking and distributed computing.   
              

The project is being evaluated internally with help from the College of
              Education and externally in collaboration with five other sites.  The
              evaluation is based upon the feedback from the collaborating sites regarding
              the effectiveness of the agent-based teaching materials for the introductory
              course as well as the modules for other courses.  Results are being
              disseminated through a website, professional conference presentations and
              journal articles. 

If the evaluation of the prototype produces positive
              results, future plans include full development of the agent-based concepts in
              collaboration with professors from the external sites, extending the course
              materials to Spanish-speaking audiences, and the publication of a textbook on
              agent-based computing.

