Title       : Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMs) Based Power Generation for Portable
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a9980837

Award Number: 9980837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Richards richards@mme.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ben Q. Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David F. Bahr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terri S. Fiez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cecilia D. Richards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kartikeya Mayaram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1602,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this Engineering Microsystems: "XYZ" on a Chip project is to
              investigate the fabrication of a micro heat engine, which will use commonly
              available liquid hydrocarbon fuels, to efficiently generate electric power to
              be used by Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) and microelectronic devices.
               This micro heat engine is expected to deliver electric power in the range of
              milliwatts to watts while supplying voltages from 1 to 30 volts. The research
              involves the creation of a totally new class of heat engine, which takes
              advantage of thermophysical phenomena unique to small scales. 

The result
              will be a heat engine that is efficient and that can be mass-produced with
              techniques developed for microelectronics and MEMS.  The proposed engine is an
              external combustion engine, in which thermal power is converted to mechanical
              power through the use of a novel thermodynamic cycle which approaches the ideal
              vapor Carnot cycle. Mechanical power is converted into electrical power through
              the use of a piezoelectric generator.  The generator, which takes the form of a
              flexible membrane, can be readily manufactured using MEMS fabrication
              techniques but still delivers high conversion efficiency.  This approach
              eliminates the requirement to manufacture complex micromachines such as rotary
              compressors and turbines, resulting in a very simple but highly efficient
              device. In addition, since the micro heat engine is an external combustion
              device, it will have broad fuel flexibility, making it useful in a wide range
              of applications including military, space, biomedical, and consumer
              products.


