Title       : Iterative Methods for Multiuser Detection: Impulsive Noise, Coded Channels, and
               Multiple-Antenna Sytems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a9980590

Award Number: 9980590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold V. Poor poor@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Multiple-access communication channels arise in a great 
variety of
              applications, among which are some of the most 
rapidly growing areas of
              technology development today:
cellular telephony, wireless "last mile''
              systems, indoor wireless 
LAN's, nomadic computing, high-speed digital
              subscriber lines, etc. 
New performance requirements are constantly being
              imposed 
on  such systems in order to provide high-quality, multimedia
              services 
to an exponentiating user population.  A major approach
to meeting
              these requirements is through the use of advance 
signal processing techniques
              to mitigate the manifold physical 
impairments arising in such channels.  This
              research addresses 
a number of key issues in this field.

Multiple-access
              channels arise in the above-noted systems as the
result of  several physical
              conditions, including non-orthogonal 
multiplexing in CDMA systems, cross-talk
              in xDSL systems, 
multipath in TDMA systems, and co-channel interference in
              most
types of cellular systems.  Multiuser detection, developed over the
              
past fifteen years, has provided a very useful theoretical basis for 
the
              study of optimal signal processing problems in multiple-access
channels.  This
              research is concerned with problems in which 
multiuser detection must be
              combined with other signal processing
functions, such as beamforming, channel
              decoding, impulse-noise
mitigation, etc.  The basic approach is to apply
              algorithms that
iterate between signal-processing functions.  In particular,
              this
research examines the general structural and performance properties
of
              such algorithms, their implementation, and their application  in
three
              specific technologies:  indoor wireless networks, digital 
subscriber lines,
              and underwater acoustic modems. 
