Title       : Parsimony Trees, Best-Fit Fences, and Consensus Sequences: Integrating
               Cladistics and Biostratigraphy at High Resolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a9980372

Award Number: 9980372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Sadler peter.sadler@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nigel C. Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9980372
Sadler

Tree-shaped diagrams summarize evolutionary relationships
              between species or higher taxa.  With species labels at the tips of branches,
              the rest of the tree depicts ancestry.  Computer algorithms much for a
              branching pattern in the tree that most simply explains a large array of
              morphological and biochemical comparisons between the species.  Similarities
              may be inherited from a common ancestor, or they may represent convergence of
              appearance between less closely related taxa - this complicates the
              search.
Time correlations between strata at different localities are
              represented by fence-like diagrams.  With the sequence of strata at each
              locality drawn on its own fence post, "wire lines' connect horizons of the same
              age from locality to locality.  Many of the wire lines represent the time of
              origination of a fossil taxon.  Because of imperfect preservation and
              collection of fossils, the localities tend to contradict one another in detail
              concerning the order of originations.  Computer algorithms search for the fence
              that best resolves these contradictions.
Searches for the best fences and
              trees typically find more than one equally good solution.  The searches use
              different evidence; but trees and fences both include inferences about the
              order of appearance of morphological traits.  This project will develop ways to
              combine the two search procedures so that each can help reduce the range of
              equally good solutions found by the other.



