Title       : XYZ on a Chip: Engineering of Innovative Molecular Sieves on a Chip by Nanoprint
               Lithography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9980814

Award Number: 9980814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $459931             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Austin rha@suiling.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Y. Chou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9980814
Austin

The PI's propose to develop a pioneering technology which
              exploits specifically a combination of nanotechnology, new physics in
              fractionation technology and single-molecule molecular biology.  They believe
              that only by breaking away from conventional techniques can the true potential
              of chip technology be exploited.  The two principle investigators for this
              project are superbly qualified to carry out this work.  Professor Stephen Chou
              (Department of Electrical Engineering) is a world leader in nanofabrication
              technologies and has pioneered the development of nanoimprint lithography while
              Professor Robert Austin (Department of Physics) has been a pioneer in the
              applications of microfabrication in molecular and cellular biology.

Most
              efforts at using chip technology to do sequencing of DNAmolecules have
              concentrated on the shrinking of capillary electrophoresis channels onto the
              surface of silicon wafer.  The problem with this technology is that without
              creating explicitly on the chip a change in the basic polymer physics by which
              the molecules are fractionated the resolving power of the devices is limited by
              the short length of the channels on the wafer.  In other words, these efforts
              do not take full advantage of the design freedom that lithographic techniques
              offer to an imaginative designer.  A more powerful aspect of chip technology is
              also the potential to do single molecule genomic analysis in a massively
              parallel manner using nanoscale engineering and nanoimprint lithography.

The
              proposed work consists of 3 related projects: (1) nanofabrication of obstacle
              arrays with characteristic spacings of 30-600 manometers to be used for the
              construction of synthetic gels for fractionation of oligonucleotides; (2)
              nanofabrication of asymmetrical arrays which use rectified brownian motion for
              the continuous fractionation of biological molecules; (3) nanofabrication of
              near-field excitation slits and channels for ultra-high spatial reading of
              tagged genomic DNA.

This proposal offers the next step forward in the
              engineering of nanostructures on chip for the fractionation of biological
              molecules and the sequencing of single molecules.  The technology described
              could become the basis for the future evolution of nanobiology and
              nanoengineering of a biology lab on a chip.
***


