Title       : Highly Effective USI Schools: An Outlier Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a9980509

Award Number: 9980509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernice T. Anderson                     
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1175010            (Estimated)
Investigator: Beatriz C. Clewell tclewell@ui.urban.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine L. Darke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia B. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Urban Institute
	      2100 M St NW
	      Washington, DC  20036    202/223-1950

NSF Program : 7261      PROGRAM EVALUATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposed study plans to examine different characteristics from two groups
              of USI schools;  the exemplary and the typical.  The goal is to assess how math
              and science reform is being implemented in the more effective schools, by
              identifying their activities, policies and practices. The proposal outlines a 
              methodology to examine the correlation between the NSF drivers for systemic
              reform and student achievement. This focus on student outcomes will also
              include analysis of subgroups of students, those traditionally 
              underrepresented in science and math.  The target population will be fourth
              graders from schools in two USI sites: El Paso and Philadelphia.

A mix of
              linked qualitative and quantitative data will be gathered to examine the
              following research questions:
1. What are the activities, policies and
              practices of exemplary USI elementary schools that differentiate them from
              typical USI elementary schools?
2. How are the practices that the most
              effective related to each of the NSF drivers?
3. Are there other practices
              that are not related to the drivers but that characterize exemplary USI
              schools?
4. Are the more exemplary activities, policies, and practices equally
              effective across sub-populations of students?  If not, which set of practices
              works best for specific sub-populations?
5. How can the characteristics that
              result in the more exemplary schools inform systemic reform efforts in other SI
              schools as well as non-SI schools?

