Title       : Dissertation Research: Interspecific and Ontogenetic Variation in Positional
               Behavior and Habitat Use in Cebus apella and Cebus olivaceus in Guyana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1999   
File        : a9980238

Award Number: 9980238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1999  
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marian Dagosto m-dagosto@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              One of the major goals of primate evolutionary biology and biological
              anthropology is to understand the relationships between form and function in
              the primate musculoskeletal system, thereby gaining insight into how such
              traits provide adaptive benefits in the natural environment.  Knowledge of how
              environmental factors influence changes in locomotor and postural behaviors
              throughout an animal's life can uncover important information concerning how
              adults of a given species are adapted  to their particular environment.  The
              researchers propose an integrative study that will combine field observations
              of positional behavior of two species of South American monkeys (Cebus apella
              and Cebus olivaceus) with detailed analyses of forest structure and skeletal
              anatomy in order to answer questions concerning the differences in locomotor
              behavior, habitat use and postcranial morphology in sympatric brown and weeper
              capuchin monkeys in Guyana.  They will investigate between-species differences
              in adults and age-group differences within each of the two species.  These two
              capuchins are ideal subjects for a study such as the one proposed here.  First,
              their presence together in the same forests in Guyana allows an assessment of
              differences in behavior and habitat use while controlling for factors such as
              available habitat and seasonal variation in resource availability.  Second, of
              all the anthropoid monkeys, capuchins exhibit life history traits most similar
              to apes and humans.  Their long life span affords a greater possibility of
              observing discreet, age-based changes in behavior and habitat use over the
              course of this study.  This project is designed as a general test of the
              relationships among behavior, environment and morphology within a developmental
              framework.  The work proposed will provide a major contribution to a growing
              body of research which focuses on the role of development in the evolution of
              primate musculoskeletal systems and will address ideas concerning the
              behavioral and morphological bases for locomotor and postural adaptations in
              primates.
