Title       : Collaborative Undergraduate Education Using Enhanced NMR Technology in Northeast
               Indiana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9980968

Award Number: 9980968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert K. Boggess                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73327              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald E. Linn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen P. Coburn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent M. Maloney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth L. Stevenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) Undergraduate education in FT NMR theory and operation, from
              lower to upper level courses, presents a challenge to many institutions. This
              challenge is addressed in this project by adapting and implementing a
              consortium model previously used in an NSF supported project.  Six area
              colleges and universities are involved. At present, the principal
              investigators' site (lead institution) is the only institution in the region
              with ready access to this technology. This project is resulting in the
              first-time integration of FT NMR technology throughout five regional
              undergraduate chemistry programs. The FT NMR technology is distributed from a
              principal site via a remote access network to these five institutions with no
              current access to FT NMR .  This project is improving the quality and quantity
              of NMR activities (teaching and research) at all of the above campuses and
              includes improvrments in a variety of classes at all of the schools.  It is
              also  making undergraduate research opportunities available at a  number of
              sites where it was not previously possible.   Enhanced access to this
              technology is occuring, in part, through increased NMR sample throughput via
              automation using an automated sample changer. The initially available 200 MHz
              instrument was upgraded, at the start of the project, to one with broadband
              (multinuclear) and variable temperature capabilities.  New high quality,
              discovery-based experiments of less common NMR nuclei, and experiments of
              longer duration are now being adapted from other projects. Examples include the
              number average molecular weight of polymers, two dimensional spectra, the
              resolution of stereoisomers using chirotropic reagents, the determination of
              the molecular origins of organics using deuterium NMR, gas phase equilibria,
              probes of both molecular structure and dynamics, as well as organometal
              complexes.  Many of these experiments are derived from the chemical education
              literature (J. Chemical Education), while some come from the research
              literature.  The principal investigator serves in a managerial role, which is
              crucial to the effective implementation of this distributed technology. This
              project employs on-site training to help faculty at the remote sites receive
              the appropriate level of support to succeed. New courses on NMR training are
              being developed. A collaborative paper will be published in the undergraduate
              chemistry education literature as part of an evaluative report of this
              partnership. It will include the successes, the problems and their solutions.  
              The evaluation and assessment phase of this project is being facilitated by the
              use of two faculty from outside the chemistry departments and who have
              expertise in the design and measurement of student learning activities.
