Title       : Using Writing as a Heuristic for Scientific Problem-Solving in a
               Computer-mediated Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9980867

Award Number: 9980867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75179              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Carlson patricia.carlson@rose-hulman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)

BROCA (Basic Research, Observations, and Critical
              Analysis), a computer-mediated learning environment, is being used in an
              innovative, introductory writing course for science and engineering students.
              The highly-interactive, web-delivered multimedia software is based on recent
              cognitive theories extended into a robust pedagogy for teaching effective and
              efficient writing. The new ABET requirements, changing realities of the
              workplace, and growing awareness of language in the learning process place
              added emphasis on writing in the modern science/engineering curriculum. Yet
              students enter into such curricula ill-prepared to undertake the types of
              instrumental writing required in their majors. The traditional Freshman
              Composition course has neither the content nor the time-expanse to address
              these deficiencies. Additionally, (while definitive evidence has not yet been
              gathered), many researchers -- both in learning styles and in composition
              studies -- posit that women and certain ethnic minorities are less adept at
              forms of writing that require discerning patterns in bodies of information,
              decision-making, staged problem solving, analysis, synthesis, and inferencing.
              BROCA is making extensive use of NASA databases, imagery, and scientific
              expertise to provide both the materials and the context for a series of
              "problem-based" units. A set of highly interactive modules present the
              fundamental mental manipulations of observing phenomena, performing elemental
              mental processing (e.g. detecting and classifying recurrent patterns), and then
              drawing conclusions or explanations through inferencing, interpretation, and/or
              application of enumerative generalizations. Using this rich context and
              guided-inductive mediation in the writing process, students are learning
              powerful cognitive strategies for gaining intellectual control over the
              thinking/writing process.
