Title       : Developing a Research-Rich Undergraduate Degree Program in Computational Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a9980940

Award Number: 9980940
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123335             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rubin H. Landau rubin@physics.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henri J. Jansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) Computational Science is a developing interdisciplinary field that
              combines science, mathematics, and computer science to solve realistic and
              often complex problems. Computational Physics is a sub-field of both
              Computational Science and Physics, with the computational techniques and
              problem-solving orientation giving it a broader viewpoint than normally found
              in physics. This project builds on a computational physics laboratory and
              web-enhanced course to develop a four-year undergraduate curriculum in
              Computational Physics. The computational courses, texts, and seminars are
              research- and Web-rich, and culminate in a Senior Computational Laboratory
              derived from graduate thesis work in physics and engineering, and from
              application priority areas of the National Partnership for Computational
              Infrastructure. Because the research laboratory for computational physics is
              actually a virtual world created by the computer, it is easier and quicker to
              have undergraduates start working in this "lab" and involved with research than
              if they were in "wet" labs. This new degree reflects the integrated nature of
              the program, helps motivate students for the serious commitment needed for
              interdisciplinary study, and advances the integration of high performance
              computation and communication into undergraduate education. By leading to a
              better awareness of the strengths within the Physics Department, this degree
              can attract students who are best suited to this program, and provide
              recognition by professional schools and employers of their extraordinary
              achievement. In addition, this undergraduate program can be used as a stepping
              stone for further interdisciplinary programs at the graduate and undergraduate
              levels.



