Title       : The Search for Subducted Components in the Mantle: A Boron and Lithium Isotope,
               and Fluid-Mobile Element Study of Mount Erebus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a9980421

Award Number: 9980421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39640              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey G. Ryan ryan@chuma.cas.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports research examine volcanic rocks from Mount
              Erebus, Antarctica, for evidence of previously subducted materials that might
              be mixed into the mantle source region beneath this volcano. Many workers have,
              over the years, suggested that the radiogenic isotopic signatures of basaltic
              volcanic rocks from intraplate volcanic centers reflect the development of
              heterogeneities in the Earth's mantle brought about largely by the chemical
              processes of subduction at convergent plate margins.

Generally, however,
              data for incompatible trace elements, which should reflect to some degree the
              variability recorded by the isotopes, suggests little heterogeneity in
              intraplate mantle sources relative to one another, or to the mantle source of
              mid-ocean ridge basalts (MORBs). While part of the difference between the
              isotopic and trace element record of intraplate sources may certainly relate to
              the time factor involved in "growing-in" a radiogenic isotope signature, it is
              reasonable to expect that given the unique chemical signatures of subducted
              materials, and the profound changes that basaltic crust and sediments on the
              slab undergo during subduction metamorphism, that some recognizable
              "fingerprint" of subduction-related material recycling should be left on some
              portion of the mantle. A problem in seeing such a signature may lay in the
              evolutionary history of intraplate lavas, as trace element signatures in
              particular may be obscured by crystallization and assimilatory processes
              occurring as intraplate magmas evolve in crustal magma chambers.

This
              project is a focused study that uses new and sensitive tracers of subduction
              effects - boron and lithium isotopes, and the abundances of "fluid-mobile"
              elements (B, Cs, Rb, Pb, U, As, Sb) - to examine the volcanic products of a
              single intraplate site - Mount Erebus, in Antarctica - as a means of
              discovering the influence that subduction has had on the development of
              intraplate mantle sources. Mount Erebus is a well characterized intraplate
              volcano of HIMU isotopic affinities, and its different lava series are
              documented as recording the effects of both closed and open system evolution of
              parental magmas. Erebus lavas ranging from primitive basanites to evolved
              phonolites and trachytes, along with a selection of associated anorthoclase
              phenocrysts are available for study.

Boron isotope and B abundance
              systematics during subduction-zone processes are well understood, and
              intraplate lavas record both boron abundance and B isotope anomalies,
              reflecting a mantle source distinct from that of ocean ridge basalts or lavas
              from volcanic arcs. The systematics of Li during subduction are well understood
              also, and Li isotopes, while a relatively new system, show great potential as a
              means of resolving among mantle sources, especially those with subduction zone
              affinities. Both to, we shall conduct 

High precision B and Li isotope and
              abundance measurements, and high precision analyses of "fluid-mobile" elements
              will be undertaken in order to characterize the mantle source region of Erebus
              and to search for distinctions between the mantle source of Erebus and the
              mantle source of other basaltic volcanoes. These data should allow the effects
              of magma differentiation and assimilation in Erebus lavas to be determined so
              that source signatures can be identified and key questions can be addressed
              about whether or not subduction processes (and/or subducted materials) were
              involved in the development of this intraplate mantle source region.

This
              project will contribute to the training of undergraduate students and will
              contribute to a greater understanding of the sources of basaltic magmas in
              general.


