Title       : Adapting and Implementing Conceptually-Based Mathematics Instructional Materials
               for Developmental-Level Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1999  
File        : a9980760

Award Number: 9980760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana Underwood-Gregg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21)

Traditionally, college developmental-level
              mathematics instruction focuses on reviewing computational algorithms in
              arithmetic and performing routine equation solving in algebra. The reform
              movement in K-12 mathematics has produced ample evidence indicating that such a
              skills based approach to instruction fails to provide students with
              opportunities to construct the knowledge and develop the disposition needed for
              conceptual understanding.

The goals of this project are to develop
              reform-guided instructional materials and an instructor development program for
              college developmental-level mathematics courses. The activities to accomplish
              the project goals require investigating students' initial level of conceptual
              understanding of the targeted topics, developing instructional materials,
              incorporating appropriate technology, and preparing instructors who are able to
              facilitate an inquiry approach to instruction. These instructors include
              faculty, graduate assistants, and superior undergraduate interns.

A key
              component of this project is the adaptation of instructional materials from two
              research-based projects developed for middle school mathematics: Mathematics in
              Context (MiC) and the Connected Mathematics Project (CMP). These materials
              promote an inquiry approach to mathematics instruction, which emphasizes
              explanation and justification. The end results of this project includes the
              creation of instructional materials for students, support materials for staff,
              and an instructor development model which will be appropriate for use at other
              colleges and universities that teach mathematics courses to developmental
              -level students.

The viability of this framework is currently being tested
              in a pilot program. At present, no systematic investigation has taken place to
              determine the appropriateness of the instructional materials development or the
              instructor development model. This project is providing further impetus and
              critical evaluation of the evolution of this program.


