Title       : KDI: Executing Genetic Algorithms Using DNA Genetic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1999    
File        : a9980092

Award Number: 9980092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Junghuei Chen Junghuei@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harvey Rubin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bertrand Lemieux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1112,1348,8877,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              There are several varieties of "evolutionary computation" based on analogies
              from the theory of natural evolution. In molecular biology, similar analogies
              are the basis of experiments on "in vitro evolution."  From the beginning of
              DNA computing there has been an obvious appeal to the idea of marrying these
              two approaches. This KDI project brings these two approaches together. It
              provides DNA implementations for executing and assessing two classes of Genetic
              Algorithm computations, using population sizes larger than is usually practical
              with conventional computers. This project has two major goals addressing two
              problem types from the practice of Genetic Algorithms. The first goal is to
              demonstrate a DNA computation of a classic Genetic Algorithms test problem
              known as "Max 1s." This test problem evolves a given initial population of
              bitstrings until some bitstrings match a predetermined target. Two-dimensional
              denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) is used in the laboratory to
              physically separate candidate strands of DNA according to how well they match
              copies of a prespecified target strand.  Molecular biological techniques are
              adapted to perform crossover, random mutation, and amplification of candidates.
              The second major goal demonstrates a class of Genetic Algorithms computations
              known as "Cold War problems." These problems do not involve prespecified
              matching targets; hence they produce outcomes which are not obvious in advance.
              In a Cold War problem, DNA strands encode two populations of "offers." In every
              generation these encoded offers are separately evolved by each of two proposers
              according to their own private preferences. When the two populations are
              combined, DGGE physically separates the most nearly matched pairs of
              offers.
Partially matched offers are returned to their respective proposers to
              become the "parents" of the next generation. Cold War problems are two-party
              specializations of multi-party coalition games with sidepayments. This project
              contributes to two disciplines. Evolutionary computation gains access to
              populations billions of times larger than are practical with conventional
              computers. Molecular biology is enhanced by laboratory techniques which combine
              both crossover and random mutation.

