Title       : An Investigation of Pedagogical Factors Influencing Student Understanding of
               Geometric Proof
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a9980476

Award Number: 9980476
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Finbarr C. Sloane                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409371             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon S. McCrone smccrone@math.ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tami S. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the three-year study is to develop an empirically grounded
              theoretical model that relates pedagogy to student understanding of geometric
              proofs.  By engaging in the logical reasoning that is associated with
              mathematical proof, students develop vitally important critical thinking
              skills. In addition, proof is fundamental to the discipline of mathematics
              because it is the convention that mathematicians use to establish the validity
              of mathematical statements.  This study focuses on geometric proof because
              geometry is traditionally the course in which students are first required to
              construct proofs.  Despite the fact that student difficulty with proof has been
              well established in the literature, existing empirical research on pedagogical
              methods associated with the teaching and learning of geometric proof is
              insufficient.  This research study, focuses on the effects of curriculum and
              pedagogy on student understanding of geometric proof.

In order to assess the
              effectiveness of the pedagogical methods used by participating teachers, the
              project focuses on two components of student understanding of proof, namely,
              students' beliefs about what constitutes a proof and students'
              proof-construction ability.  Specifically, the project has four objectives:
1.
              To document student understanding of proof in order to update and expand
              existing research in this area;
2. To characterize evolving student beliefs
              about what constitutes a proof (using Dreyfus and Hadas' (1987) six principles)
              in proof-based geometry classes and to link these characterizations to aspects
              of the pedagogy including sociomathematical norms, nature of the activities,
              and teacher beliefs;
3. To characterize students' evolving proof-construction
              ability in proof-based geometry classes and to link these characterizations to
              aspects of the pedagogy including sociomathematical norms, nature of the
              activities, and the teacher's instructional philosophy; and
4. To describe the
              effects of participation in a research study focused on their classrooms on
              teachers' practice and perspectives that guide their practice.
 
In order to
              achieve these objectives, the principal investigators will spend two years in
              the classrooms of several teachers recording the beliefs and proof construction
              ability of the students as well as the beliefs held and the pedagogical methods
              used by the teachers.  Teachers will read and reflect on the existing research
              on geometric proof, will work collaboratively with the researchers to develop
              instructional materials, and will implement these materials in their
              classrooms.  In addition, the study will focus on the sociomathematical norms
              established in each of the classrooms, as these norms relate to students'
              understanding of proof.  Data will be analyzed as it is collected as well as in
              the third year of the study in order to develop models that describe how
              pedagogical interventions influence student understanding.
Findings from this
              project will be disseminated to the mathematics education research and teaching
              communities.  Research findings will have implications for curriculum,
              pedagogy, and teacher enhancement

