Title       : KDI: Intelligent Computational Genomic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1999    
File        : a9980088

Award Number: 9980088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1700000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon Kasif   (Principal Investigator current)
              Owen White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Grossman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Salzberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1112,1348,8877,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In the twenty-first century, biology will increasingly become an information
              science.  Recent startling advances in DNA sequencing technology have spurred
              dozens of major sequencing projects, ranging from important bacterial genomes
              to the Human Genome Project.  In between are projects to sequence the genomes
              of laboratory animals such as mice, plants such as the flowering plant
              Arabidopsis and various important food crops.  Enormous increases in the amount
              of available sequence data have produced a strong  demand for computational
              high throughput analysis.  Genomic sequence data will provide the basis for
              many important discoveries as we move into the next century, and new algorithms
              are vital to maximizing the scientific knowledge gleaned from this data. The
              fact that biological data is distributed all over the world presents additional
              problems for algorithms that need to be able to use all available knowledge
              sources to construct consistent theories.  The computer scientists working on
              this project have expertise in machine learning, computational biology,
              probabilistic reasoning, scientific databases and high performance computing. 
              The biologists include several key investigators  who have sequenced and
              analyzed eight completed bacterial genomes.  Their expertise covers DNA
              sequencing technology, sequence databases, molecular biology, genetics and
              biophysics.  This project will develop novel computer systems to support
              scientific discovery in large-scale genomic sequence databases. These systems
              will make sophisticated computational analysis an integral part of the process
              of developing, integrating and disseminating new scientific knowledge.  The
              results will enable new discoveries from the rich source of information
              embodied in genomic databases.

