Title       : Support Participation in International Scientific Meetings by U.S. Astronomers,
               Including Participation in the XXIVth General Assembly of the International
               Astronomical Union
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2001   
File        : a9980200

Award Number: 9980200
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin B. Marvel marvel@aas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Astronomical Soc
	      2000 Florida Ave N.W.
	      Washington, DC  200091231    202/659-0134

NSF Program : 1798      Special Projects (AST)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST- 9980200
Marvel

Astronomy is a fully international endeavor. Astronomers
              in the United States must interact, collaborate and meet with researchers from
              around the world. To participate fully in the international scientific
              community, American researchers must attend international scientific meetings,
              not just travel for observing. International meetings provide a forum for
              interacting with other researchers, forming collaborations, presenting new
              results and participating in the international scientific community.

The
              attendance at international scientific meetings is prohibitively expensive for
              many U.S. researchers. Further, funding strictly for travel to international
              meetings can be difficult to obtain. This is especially true for astronomers
              from small and/or less-endowed institutions or for individuals at the beginning
              of their careers. Researchers often must choose between observing trips and
              travel to scientific meetings, and may avoid international meetings due to the
              high costs of attendance.

Because of the increasingly international nature
              of astronomical research, the American Astronomical Society (AAS) feels it is
              especially important to enable American astronomers to participate in
              international scientific meetings.

The American Astronomical Society will
              administer a three-year international travel grant program for the years 2000
              to 2003. The AAS Council will appoint a committee to review applications and
              the program will be administered by the AAS executive office. During the year
              2000, the year of the 24th General Assembly of the International Astronomical
              Union, the program will accommodate a larger number of grants (considered
              separately from normal international scientific meetings) to enhance the strong
              U.S. presence at this important function.

The program would benefit American
              astronomical research by fostering international collaboration and interaction
              by enabling U.S. astronomers, especially early-career astronomers and those
              from less-endowed institutions, to attend international scientific
              meetings.

Grant recipients will be required to submit a report summarizing
              their travel along with appropriate NSF required accounting information. The
              report will describe their interactions with foreign astronomers and any
              subsequent collaborative efforts. An assessment of the program will be
              undertaken by an ad hoc committee of the AAS and will be published in the
              Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society, as a part of the AAS Secretary's
              annual report and will be included in the final project report to
              NSF.
***




