Title       : Curriculum-Based Resources for Teaching Ethical and Social Issues of Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9980768

Award Number: 9980768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95264              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Huff huff@stolaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Olaf College
	      1520 St. Olaf Avenue
	      Northfield, MN  55057    507/646-2222

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31) 

This educational materials development project is
              creating a set of teaching materials to help instructors in computer science
              integrate ethical and social issues into the computer science curriculum.
              Ethical and social issues in computing is an area of great importance to the
              field of computer science, and is included as a central topic area in Curricula
              1991's recommended curriculum (ACM/IEEE Task Force, 1991). The materials
              consist of a set of extensive historical cases and a Social Impact Analysis
              (SIA) Resource Kit of methods and tools for doing social impact analysis. This
              project uses the curriculum guidelines suggested in the ACM/IEEE Computer
              Society Computing Curricula 1991 and developed more fully under the NSF-funded
              ImpactCS Project.  It continues the work of a proof of concept project by the
              development of more cases, extension of a rudimentary faculty resource toolkit,
              more extensive classroom testing of the materials, and collaboration in faculty
              workshops with the project being directed by Keith Miller at the University of
              Illinois - Springfield (NSF DUE-9952841).   

The cases are detailed
              presentations of the social contexts and ethical issues associated with
              historical cases in computing. Their design and accompanying materials involve
              the student in an active role as a computing professional in identifying the
              issues, investigating them, analyzing ethical choices, and negotiating
              solutions. The SIA Resource Kit is a guide to instructors and students who wish
              to investigate the social and ethical issues surrounding an actual or projected
              implementation of a computing system in an organization. It includes methods
              for planning the investigation, tools and procedures for collecting data,
              suggestions for making the data useful for designers and decision makers, and
              samples of social impact analyses done by students.   
     
The cases and
              SIA Resource Kit are being reviewed by a panel of computer scientists, social
              scientists, and ethicists, and they are being classroom-tested at multiple
              sites with diverse student populations.  The materials are being introduced to
              the computer science faculty through a series of summer workshops to be
              conducted by the collaborating CCLI project DUE 9952841.  The materials from
              this project are being included with the materials from the other project to be
              disseminated via an interactive web site and as part of a commercially
              published textbook on computer ethics and social impact.  

 
