Title       : KDI: Virtual Environments to Elucidate Strategies in Complex Spatial Problem
               Solving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a9980122

Award Number: 9980122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Tendick tendick@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,7256,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Although spatial cognition has been studied in a variety of domains,
there is
              still little known about the integration of spatial skills in
solving complex
              problems.  In this research program, virtual
environment technology (VET) will
              be used to study complex spatial
skills and, from the results of this study,
              to develop effective
virtual environments to train these skills.  With their
              interactive
and compelling nature, virtual environments can become an
              essential
tool for training, visualization, planning, and communication in
              an
unlimited variety of applications.  But if VET is to reach its
potential,
              there must be a better understanding of how humans acquire
and integrate
              multi-sensory information in three-dimensional space.

The focus application
              of the work will be surgical training, which
provides a challenging
              environment for studying spatial cognition.
The performance of surgical tasks
              requires a broad range of spatial
processes in order to plan, navigate, and
              reason using complex
representations of space.  The surgeon must develop a
              mental image of
three-dimensional anatomy based on a surface view or cross
              sections
from X-ray, CT, MRI, or ultrasound images.  From this model and a
              goal
state based on experience and anatomical knowledge, he or she must
plan
              a strategy to gain exposure of the important anatomy and obtain
the desired
              result.  With the advent of minimally invasive techniques,
the surgeon relies
              on a video image of the internal anatomy and use
instruments constrained by a
              fulcrum at their passage through the
skin.

This work has two synergistic
              thrusts.  The first aims to advance
fundamental knowledge in cognitive science
              by examining how spatial
cognitive skills are integrated in the performance of
              complex tasks.
Specifically, the project will study navigation in
              small-scale
three-dimensional environments, mental simulation of
              mechanical
interactions between deformable structures, and how these spatial
              and
mechanical reasoning processes are integrated in solving complex
spatial
              problems.  This work will be guided by computational models of
the
              construction of 3-D spatial models from multiple views.  The
second thrust is
              to advance the state of the art in human-computer
interaction by designing
              intelligent systems to train and assist human
performance in spatial problem
              solving.

