Title       : Secure Communications for Ad Hoc Networking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a9980521

Award Number: 9980521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300580             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zygmunt J. Haas haas@ece.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   An ad hoc network is communication paradigm that does not rely on a
              pre-existing communication infrastructure.  Rather, the network is established
              on-demand.  Thus, the network needs to be deployed without prior planning and
              needs to operate in a variety of different and differing network propagation
              conditions, traffic demands, and user mobility patterns.   Nodes in an ad hoc
              network frequently join and leave the network, without prior notice. 
              Furthermore, the nodes are mobile and communicate by accessing a shared
              wireless channel.  Consequently, the topology of the network is constantly
              changing i.e., connections between neighbor nodes (nodes that can communication
              directly) are established and torn down all the time.  Since the diameter of
              the network may be significantly larger than the transmission range of a single
              node, communication between non-neighbor nodes is by multi-hop routing.        
                                                               Probably the most
              characteristic feature of ad hoc networks is that there is no central entity in
              the network.  This is radically different than most other wireless networks,
              especially the cellular networks. Thus, nodes in an ad hoc network rely on
              peer-to-peer communications.  Consequently, all network protocols need to be
              implemented in a distributed manner and need to be extremely efficient, as to
              ensure that the overhead caused by the frequent reconfiguration of the network
              is not prohibitively large.                    Application of ad hoc networks
              has been for a  long time limited to the military communication environment
              only.  However, recently, the commercial sector is increasingly interested in
              this technology, evidence of which is the establishment of the Intenet
              Engineering Task Force, MANET Working Group.  ALthough it is still not clear
              what the main application of the commercial ad hoc network will be,
              applications for LAN, sensor networks, and virtual classrooms have been
              proposed.                                                                One of
              the main difficulties in promoting the concept of ad hoc networks is that,
              inherently, ad hoc networks are extremely vulnerable to security attacks.  Not
              only do  these networks rely nearly exclusively on unreliable and insecure
              wireless communication, but also the nodes in the network do not,  in general,
              belong to the same administrative domain.  Thus the standard security measure
              may not be readily applicable to ad hoc networks.  But above all, the lack of
              centralized entity makes design of security protocols that much more difficult.
               In particular, due to possibly low availability of any network node, no one
              node can serve as a trustful entity in the network.  Moreover, as an ad hoc
              network may consist of thousands to tens of thousands of nodes, it is essential
              that any solution be highly scaleable.  Furthermore, it is imperative that the
              security protocols address the highly dynamic communication environment, for
              example, by frequent rekeying of the system.  Finally, because of the nature of
              the nature of these networks and their intended application, high degree of
              reliability and survivability to node and link failures is necessary. 
              Fortunately, many protocols that protect against intentional security attacks
              also guard the system again (unintentional) system failures.       As part of
              the proposed research, the researchers plan on investigating a number of
              central schemes that will allow secure communication in the ad hoc networking
              environment.  Secure communication needs to address the following attributes: 
              availability, confidentiality, integrity, authenticity, and non-repudiation. 
              Some of these attributes can be addressed through conventional security
              protocols, such as ensuring privacy of information through encryption. 
              However, for other attributes, the standard security measures do not suffice. 
              For example, authentication in an ad hoc network cannot rely on a signle
              central trustful entity.              The researchers propose to use two main
              principles in securing the communication in an ad hoc network: use of
              redundancies in the network topology and distribution of trust.  The main idea
              is that availability can be improved by relying on multiple routing paths in
              the network.  So, if compromised paths can be eliminated, other paths can be
              used reliably.  The second principle - the distribution of trust - is based on
              the assumption that as no single node is worth unlimited trust of other network
              nodes.  However, a large enough quorum of nodes can be trusted, as the
              probability of compromising large number of nodes simultaneously is rather
              small.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                   This research proposes to investigate the above mentioned issues of
              supporting secure communications in the ad hoc network by proposing and
              designing fundamental framework for such a communications.  The researchers
              will use both analysis and simulation to evaluate our protocol and we intend to
              implement these protocols to demonstrate their behavior in a practical network.
