Title       : Advancing Computational and Visualization Skills in Geosciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2000   
File        : a9980958

Award Number: 9980958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52148              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Hall-Wallace hall@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter L. Kresan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert T. Downs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jon D. Pelletier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Butler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Earth Systems Science (40) We are adapting and implementing learning activities
              that improve the visualization, modeling, and computational skills of
              undergraduate students in introductory through advanced level geoscience
              courses. Our project has three components: (1) introducing GIS and image
              processing analysis in courses for majors; (2) incorporating modelling and
              visualization tools in upper division courses for majors, and (3) implementing
              computational activities into our courses for non-science majors. The courses
              directly impacted by this implementation plan include Natural Sciences
              (freshman year), Introductory Geology (freshman year), Computer Applications
              (sophomore year), Mineralogy (junior year) and Geomorphology (senior year).
              
Implementing GIS and image processing analysis in our undergraduate
              curriculum is proceeding in phases and uses existing materials developed as
              part of a previous NSF curriculum development grant to the PIs as well as new
              materials. Curriculum materials are available at
              (http://www.geo.arizona.edu/geomorphology/geos450/geos450.html) and
              (http://www.geo.arizona.edu/sage/gis/). Students use GIS and spatial analysis
              tools to investigate problems ranging from site analysis studies, to hazard
              mitigation, to managing water resources. These materials are used in our
              Introductory Geology, Computer Applications and Geomorphology courses. 
In
              Mineralogy, students use a variety of applications to investigate the
              properties of minerals and crystal structures. Software includes XTALDRAW, an
              interactive program that draws images of crystals at the atomic scale in
              several ways, METRIC to compute crystal chemical parameters, XPOWPLOT which
              creates images of theoretical powder diffraction patterns. The software and the
              classroom activities are available at
              http://www.geo.arizona.edu/xtal/person.html.
We are also integrating problem
              solving and system analysis in Computer Applications and Geomorphology courses
              using Rivertools, XGobi, Stella II and Excel. Students use Rivertools and
              digital elevation models to extract a channel network and analyze the
              hypsometry, number, length, slope and other characteristics of the channels.
              They also use Xgobi and Stella to investigate characteristics of individual
              rivers and the relationships between suspended and dissolved loads. 
In our
              Natural Sciences courses for non-science majors, we utilize a variety of
              interactive programs which allow students to explore basic concepts, visualize
              geologic processes and evaluate situations. We have adapted materials from our
              Introductory Geology course that use TASA Graphics Topographic Maps and Plate
              Tectonics, Geostructures, ArcView and the Planet Earth series of software.

