Title       : Multi-Scenario Searches: Implementing Uncertainty Management in Integrated
               Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a9980337

Award Number: 9980337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Lempert Robert Lempert@rand.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rand Corporation
	      1700 Main Street
	      Santa Monica, CA  904072138    310/393-0411

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1317,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Tremendous amounts of information have been gathered to assist in addressing
              questions associated with global climatic change, but this information has not
              been sufficient for answering some of the most basic questions, such as the
              seriousness of the climate change problem and how much it might cost to prevent
              it.  Answers to such questions are fundamentally unpredictable and depend on
              the divergent value judgments of many individuals.  The challenge facing those
              engaged in integrated assessments of climate change therefore is to best make
              use of the available information in the context of extreme uncertainty and
              highly variable social values.  This Methods and Models for Integrated
              Assessment research project will continue the development of methods associated
              with exploratory modeling to address this challenge.  Simulation models will
              create a large database of plausible future scenarios.  Search engines and
              human decision makers employing advanced visualization techniques then will
              extract from the database information that is useful to distinguish among
              policy choices.  The research design will look for robust strategies and those
              that are reasonably successful over a wide range of plausible futures. 
              Bayesian decision theory is used to capture uncertainties in model structure,
              priors, and loss functions.  These methods also will examine some of the best
              features of scenario-based planning, including the ability to combine
              quantitative and qualitative information, the use of multiple perspectives for
              transmitting and receiving information about risk, and the language of managing
              extreme uncertainty through flexible strategies using signposts and hedging and
              shaping actions.  New capabilities in computer search and visualization
              techniques have greatly facilitated this type of approach.  This study will
              contribute toward a general framework for managing uncertainty in integrated
              assessment, using robust strategies as a framework for handling risk and
              uncertainty and database searches of multiple scenarios as a means for finding
              these strategies and for combining diverse types of information.  This project
              will enable the investigators to generalize the methods developed in their
              previous work; to implement the special search algorithms required for this
              application; and to demonstrate the use of these methods with stakeholder
              groups, in particular as a means to consider robustness against multiple social
              values.  The project therefore will help develop methods and analytic tools
              with broad utility for treating uncertainty and combining different types of
              information in a wide variety of other integrated assessment frameworks and
              models.

