Title       : Measurement-based Traffic Characterization and Resource Allocation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2002     
File        : a9980561

Award Number: 9980561
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274370             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Chen tchen@engr.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Compared to traditional voice and data networks, next generation networks
              will present more difficult challenges to traffic control because (1) the
              carried traffic will be much more diverse and complex in nature, (2) traffic
              rates will be faster, and (3) network performance levels must be protected for
              certain applications requiring a quality of service (QoS).  Traffic analysts
              attempt to gain an understanding of the stochastic nature of the traffic from
              volumes of collected traffic measurements, and derive traffic models and
              control algorithms to manage network resources (such as connection admission
              control in ATM networks). Unfortunately, traffic analysis is typically a time
              consuming process and requires a high level of statistical expertise.  Many
              stochastic traffic models have been studied but methods for evaluating their
              validity for real traffic are generally lacking.  The objective of the proposed
              research is to improve understanding of real network traffic by developing
              systematic methods for processing raw traffic measurements, deriving traffic
              characteristics, and applying these characteristics to real-time resource
              management.  The approach is based on a modular library of traffic models and
              statistical estimation techniques to fit and test each
model to observed
              traffic.
     The proposed research project will be carried out in three
              phases.  The first phase will develop a modular library of traffic models
              including the well-known Markov on-off model, Markov modulated Poisson process
              (MMPP), Markov modulated fluid, autoregressive process, and fractional brownian
              motion or other self-similar models.  Each model consists of a number of
              estimatable parameters and a set of structural properties.  Research in the
              first phase will derive parameter estimation methods for each traffic model
              using maximum likelihood estimation or Bayesian estimation, and evaluate the
              validity of each model using hypothesis testing, chi-square goodness of fit
              tests, and other tests depending on the particular properties of each model. 
              Given raw traffic measurements, the best-fit traffic model in the library can
              be methodically selected at any time.
     The second phase of the proposed
              project will derive efficient sequential estimators from the first phase and
              implement these estimators in software for real-time traffic analysis and
              visualization.  The software will work with a hardware traffic collection
              system to infer general statistical characteristics (such as burstiness) and
              display the best fitting traffic model. The traffic model will reveal the
              underlying behavioral properties of the traffic.
     Finally, the third phase
              will study real-time resource allocation using the estimation methods and
              software from the earlier phases.  Instead of assuming a traffic model a priori
              for resource allocation, the proposed method will dynamically select the best
              fitting traffic model from a library and adapt resource allocation decisions in
              real time.  This approach may eliminate the uncertainty and inaccuracy in the
              traditional static approach.  The method will be studied by means of OPNET
              simulations for the specific problem of ATM connection admission control.
    
              Successful results from the proposed project will be software tools and
              algorithms to help network
administrators gain insight into the nature of
              network traffic and fine-tune their control of network resources.  The project
              will also be useful to researchers, educators, and students by providing tools
              to examine real traffic and understand underlying behavior.

