Title       : An Integrated Monolithic Capillary Electrophoresis System with Electrochemical
               Detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1999 
File        : a9980831

Award Number: 9980831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Baldwin   (Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Naber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin M. Walsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Keynton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this Engineering Microsystems: "XYZ" on a Chip project is to
              investigate a capillary electrophoresis system coupled to microelectrodes for
              the detection of chemical compounds.  For lab-on-a-chip systems,
              microelectrodes will be patterned onto glass and silica substrates for
              detection of substances separated by capillary electrophoresis. The 
              microelectrodes will be used for both amperometric and potentiometric detection
              of analytes.  This electrochemically-based technique is proposed as a
              replacement for laser-induced fluorescence, the predominant detection scheme
              currently employed in microanalytical devices; however, laser-induced
              fluorescence is not well suited for micro-manufacturing techniques since it
              cannot be easily reduced in size to the chip level. Capillary electrophoresis
              has the advantages of high separation efficiencies, short analysis times,
              minute sample and reagent consumption, high sample throughput, and easy
              automation.  Various fabrication techniques including bulk micromachining,
              surface micromachining, and micro-milling will be investigated to optimize the
              operation and manufacturability of the device.  Electrodes will be on the order
              of micrometers for incorporation onto the microchip.  The experimental
              techniques required to incorporate the electrodes involve essentially the same
              patterning, etching, and deposition procedures used for fabricating the
              capillary electrophoresis device.  To optimize channel geometry and electrode
              placement, electric field and electrokinetic flow modeling will be used for
              chip design and characterization of electrophoretic processes.  The integrated
              device may offer capabilities for use in conjunction with rapid DNA sequencing
              and high-throughput drug screening.
