Title       : KDI: Amorphous and Crystalline Ice Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9980125

Award Number: 9980125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Hannes Jonsson hannes@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel C. Fain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lucien N. Brush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Wettlaufer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Craig Carter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1348,8877,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A multidisciplinary group, led by Hannes Jonsson from the Chemistry Department
              at the University of Washington, will undertake a study of amorphous and
              crystalline ice growth.  This group is supported through the NSF-wide KDI
              Initiative by a grant from the Chemistry Division and the Office of Polar
              Programs.  The project involves the development and application of methodology
              for performing simulations on multiple time and length scales as well as the
              data mining of large data sets on molecular ordering.  The simulations will
              focus on ice growth, both amorphous and crystalline, and will be coupled with
              laboratory experiments using atomic force microscopy, molecular beams and IR
              reflection spectroscopy.  The project will involve long time scale simulations
              at the molecular level by employing and further developing accelerated dynamics
              techniques.  A new semiempirical interaction potential function for water
              molecules, based on a polarizable multipole expansion, will be used to
              accurately represent the intermolecular forces in a wide range of environments.
               Long length scale simulations will be achieved by using information from the
              molecular scale simulations to develop and parameterize continuum models
              describing surface morphology on mesoscopic and  macroscopic scales.  

Some
              of the observations to be explained include: 1) A transition from high density
              amorphous ice to low density amorphous ice to crystalline ice as surface
              temperature is increased during growth and/or vapor flux decreased; 2)
              nucleation and growth of crystalline ice when amorphous ice is heated; 3)
              variations in surface morphology with temperature; 4) effect of various
              substrates (hydrophobic/hydrophilic, neutral/charged) on ice film growth; and
              5) diffusion and defect mobility in ice.   

Improved understanding of ice
              growth and properties of ice will have an impact in many fields, for example in
              astrophysics where amorphous interstellar ice plays an important role, and in
              atmospheric sciences where nucleation and growth of crystalline ice particles
              in the upper atmosphere is of central importance for cloud formation, global
              energy balance and dynamics of ozone depletion.  Studies of amorphous ice can,
              furthermore, give valuable insight into the many perplexing properties of
              liquid water.  With an interdisciplinary team including expertise in chemistry,
              physics and materials science, theoretical and experimental, the project will
              employ and develop a variety of approaches focused on one central topic.
              

Since this multidisciplinary team is dispersed in five different cities,
              state of the art communication techniques will be used, including electronic
              notebooks accessible over the WWW and video conferencing.   A software tool
              combining and integrating tightly:  1) systematic structure analysis;  2) 3-D
              graphics;  and 3) classical dynamics will be developed and made available over
              the WWW.
