Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Detection and Identification of Maize
               in Absorbed Pottery Residues: Development and Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a9980294

Award Number: 9980294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolaas J. van der Merwe vanderme@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Nikolaas van der Merwe, MS Eleanora Reber will
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. The goal of her research is to
              develop a technique to determine whether maize was consumed at specific
              prehistoric sites. Maize was domesticated in highland Mexico and spread through
              large portions of both North and South America. Today it is widely planted in
              both the Old and New Worlds and is the second largest harvested crop (after
              sugar cane). Because of the yield in relation to labor and its relative
              dependability maize provided the subsistence base from which complex society
              arose throughout much of the New World. Archaeologists believe that it was the
              development of maize-based agriculture which underlies the early cultural
              explosions in the US Southwest, Midwest and Southeast. However because floral
              remains are poorly preserved in most archaeological sites, often evidence for
              maize is indirect and scientists have been forced to rely, for example, on
              subtle chemical signatures in human bone. MS Reber is developing a technique
              with the potential to identify maize residue on cooking pots. Ethnographic
              evidence suggests that Native Americans boiled corn for extended periods in
              ceramic vessels and because clay is porous it has the potential to absorb food
              residue. MS Reber will utilize both a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer and
              gas chromatograph-combustion-mass spectrometry to analyze chemical residue
              extracted from ceramics to search for a maize signal. Specific chemical
              compounds will be identified and the carbon isotope ratios of each determined.
              In many areas of the world maize has a distinctive isotopic signature in
              relation to other plants and it is this which shall provide the distinctive
              clue.

MS Reber will first conduct controlled experiments in which a
              traditional variety of Native American maize is cooked in ceramic vessels.
              These will then be buried in soil for varying lengths of time to approximate
              archaeological situations. Residues will then be extracted and analyzed. On the
              basis of these results, the process will be fine-tuned and then applied to
              archaeological specimens. Finally MS Reber will apply the technique to a
              specific archaeological question. At approximately the time that complex
              society arose in the American Midwest, a shift in pottery types took place and
              thin walled vessels replaced their thick walled counterparts. Archaeologists
              have postulated that this change coincides with the introduction of maize and
              that thin walled vessels were more efficient for preparing corn stews. Through
              analysis of both thick and thin walled vessels, MS Reber will evaluate this
              hypothesis.

This research is important for several reasons. It will help to
              develop a technique which, if successful, will be applicable in many
              archaeological sites in many regions of the world. The work will provide
              insight into the prehistory of the United States and will assist in training a
              promising young scientist.

