Title       : Integrated Electronic Curricula in Fractals and Chaos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9980715

Award Number: 9980715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $351758             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry S. Liebovitch liebovitch@walt.ccs.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heinz-Otto Peitgen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katarzyna Katarzyna-Nowak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99); Mathematical Sciences (21)
Undergraduates do not have a
              course supported by electronic curricula materials that: teaches the concepts
              of mathematics, what mathematics is really about, rather than the technical
              skills in manipulating equations, and shows its relationship to scientific
              applications. The objective of this project is to develop such a course and
              electronic curricula that support a diversity of learning and teaching methods
              and styles. The electronic materials include: videotapes, HTML lecture notes,
              hypertext textbook and discovery interactive Java applets and spreadsheet
              exercises. These materials are making it possible for other instructors to
              teach this new interdisciplinary course, and units from the course are being
              used as supplements to existing mathematics and science courses. Student
              learning is being evaluated by the use of homework assignments, questionnaires,
              group interviews, concept mapping, and student journals. Activities:
              Preliminary versions of the course and electronic materials have been
              developed. The electronic materials are being further developed, refined, and
              fully integrated into a teacher-friendly package for dissemination. Some units
              are being developed into stand alone units for other courses. These materials
              are being used in courses at 2-year and 4-year colleges. A faculty advisory
              committee is reviewing the student assessments of the course and materials and
              suggesting modifications of the materials. Special Audiences: This project
              targets students studying to be pre-college teachers and non-science majors who
              do have not an appreciation of the substance or role of
              mathematics.










