Title       : Phylogenetics of Termites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  2000  
File        : a9980253

Award Number: 9980253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivas Kambhampati srini@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9980253
Kambhampati

Termites (Order Isoptera: Class Insecta) are social
              insects like ants and bees.  Over 2000 species of termites are known at present
              and many of them occur in the tropics.  Some termite species are considered
              pests in the United States and other parts of the world because they damage
              houses and crops.  However, a vast majority of termites perform an extremely
              valuable role in ecological communities.  Dead wood (e.g., fallen logs in
              forests) cannot be digested by most organisms because it contains cellulose, a
              polymer that requires special enzymes to break it down.  If the wood is not
              broken down, the nutrients trapped in it will not be released into the soil for
              use by other animals and plants.  Termites are by the far the most important of
              the wood degraders because of their numbers and their ability to produce the
              enzyme cellulase, the enzyme needed to break down cellulose.  It is fair to say
              that many tropical rain forests would not exist as we know them but for the
              action of termites.  In addition to this role, termites are interesting from an
              evolutionary perspective because they are social insects. 

Despite their
              obvious importance, little research has been done on termite evolution,
              relative to, for example, other social insects such as ants, bees and wasps. 
              The proposed studies are an attempt to understand the evolutionary
              relationships among different groups (families, subfamilies and genera) of
              termites.  We will use DNA sequencing technology to infer the evolutionary
              relationships among the various termite groups.  The existing proposals for
              such relationships are either based on outdated methodology or on unreliable
              characters and therefore need reexamination.   The resulting phylogenetic tree
              will be an invaluable resource for future evolutionary studies on termites
              because various traits pertaining to behavior, development, etc., can be mapped
              onto the tree.   The proposed research will lead to a better understanding of
              the evolution of a large group of eusocial insects and their life histories.
              


