Title       : Creation of Web Program Prototypes for Developing Awareness and Understanding of
               Social Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2000      
File        : a9980920

Award Number: 9980920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christian K. Nelson cnelson@comm.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Hart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Psychology - Social (72)
Currently, there is no affordable technology which can
              enable more than small numbers of undergraduates to carefully observe and
              analyze the details of social interaction--a necessary prerequisite for the
              development of interactional skills as well as the awareness necessary to
              become more ethically reflective concerning interactional acts. This project
              aims at the development of such skills and awareness in an affordable manner
              through the development of a suite of Internet server-resident programs which
              is allowing students to view, transcribe, and analyze digital, server-archived
              recordings of social interaction, as well as evaluate their knowledge of
              interactional phenomena and interpretive concepts presented in their classes.
              (As such, it addresses the NSF theme of integrating technology in education.)
              To produce such programs, the project is employing a programmer to develop the
              programs for playing, transcribing and qualitatively analyzing, and also to
              interrelate these programs with an automated evaluation system already
              developed and operating. Thus, this project is being developed both by a
              teacher of social interaction and by the executive director of the Center for
              Computer-based Instructional Technology (CCBIT) at the University. This center
              developed and operates the above-mentioned computer-assisted evaluation system.
              While this project is meant to fill the immediate needs of teaching social
              interaction at the introductory undergraduate level at the University, a wide
              range of scholars in the fields of communication and communication disorders
              have expressed an interest in its development, and it should also prove
              desirable to teachers of social interaction skills in professional schools,
              such as nursing schools, medical schools, and management programs. 



