Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: AC Electrical Power Applications of
               High-Temperature Superconductors: AC Loss Measurements and Analysis, and
               Conductor Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9980688

Award Number: 9980688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37300              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Clem clem@ameslab.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5921,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9980688
Clem

This award supports a three-year collaborative research project
              between Professor John Clem of Iowa State University and Professor Osami
              Tsukamoto of Yokohama University in Japan.  The researchers will be undertaking
              a study of AC loss measurements and analysis, and conductor development.  There
              currently is worldwide interest in the development of high-temperature
              superconducting composite conductors for various electric power applications,
              such as ac power transmission cable, transformers, generators, and motors.  The
              subject of ac losses is a matter of growing concern to those involved in R&D in
              electric power applications of high-temperature superconductivity.  It is
              important to find ways of minimizing the ac losses through good design of both
              the conductor and the device in which the conductor will be used.  The specific
              objectives of this study are:  1) to develop apparatus to measure ac losses in
              electromagnetic environments that simulate large-scale electrical power
              devices; such as power transmission cables and electrical transformers.   2) to
              develop analytical and numerical methods to calculate ac losses in HTS
              conductors and electrical power devices;  3) to study the temperature
              dependence of ac losses in the temperature range 27K - 90K;  4) to investigate
              the relationship between the ac losses and the metallurgical micro- and
              macrostructures in the conductors; and  5) to assist in development of
              conductors with reduced ac losses utilizing the knowledge from these studies.  
               

The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have
              complementary expertise and research capabilities. Expected future benefits of
              applications of high-temperature superconductors in electric power systems
              include:  1) increased energy efficiency;   2) improvement of atmospheric
              quality by reducing CO2 emission via enhanced efficiency and by eliminating the
              possibility of accidental toxic discharges, which can occur with present
              devices; and  3) reducing the size of power transmission cables, transformers,
              motors, and generators resulting from the greatly increased current-carrying
              capacity.    This research advances international human resources through the
              participation of postdocs and graduate students.  Through the exchange of ideas
              and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and
              promote international understanding and cooperation.  The researchers plan to
              publish results of the research in scientific journals.

