Title       : Microanalytical Studies of Extraterrestrial Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a9980394

Award Number: 9980394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440071             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ghislaine Crozaz gcw@howdy.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ernst Zinner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine Floss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Bernatowicz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-9980394 
Crozaz


This proposal has two aspects that rely on the
              application of micro-analytical techniques we developed to study
              extraterrestrial materials. These techniques also have applications in
              geochemical studies of terrestrial samples. Part of our effort is directed to
              the study of presolar grains formed in the atmospheres of stars.  They survived
              the formation of the solar system and are found in minute quantities in
              primitive meteorites.  So far, we have made TEM/ion microprobe studies of the
              largest of these particles (> 1 micrometer) but will soon acquire a new type of
              ion microprobe - the NANOSIMS - which has unprecedented sensitivity and spatial
              resolution. This new equipment will allow us to make combined elemental and
              isotopic measurements at the 0.1 micrometer level, a size that better
              characterizes the majority of presolar grains and is ideal for TEM structural
              studies.  It is expected that this work will advance our understanding of grain
              growth in various stellar atmospheres and of element formation in stars.  It
              will also likely lead to the discovery of new presolar phases. A second major
              aspect of our work is the measurement of the microscopic distribution of minor
              and trace elements in petrographic thin sections of a variety of meteorite
              types to unravel their histories.  Some of the meteorites are the results of
              asteroidal/planetary processes while others have components that formed in both
              nebular and asteroidal environments. Delineating these origins and the
              relationships between meteorites gives insights into the processes active in
              the early solar system, some 4.6 billion years ago.


