Title       : Using Handheld Computers in the Computer Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a9980790

Award Number: 9980790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84610              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Jipping jipping@cs.hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/395-7190

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31)

This project combines efforts to enhance student
              learning and collaboration with the new technology of handheld computers. This
              combination enhances the student's ability to learn both inside and outside of
              the classroom and laboratory environments, to better collaborate with other
              students, and to more easily and effectively communicate with the instructor.
              The project is being implemented after extensive planning and research into
              ways to combine the new handheld computer technologies with new programming
              languages and pedagogical strategies made possible by the portability of the
              low cost equipment. 

The project prototypes tools to enhance the learning
              environment and to leverage technology across the computer science curriculum.
              Students and faculty are equipped with handheld computing devices used to
              enhance the computer organization and assembly language programming course as a
              proof-of-concept for use in other computer science courses. Student progress is
              being assessed by surveys, interviews, and mastery of the material.
              

Outcomes from the project include a body of research and information to
              support learning enhancement using handheld computing devices, a set of
              concrete educational tools and lessons to leverage the use of these devices in
              the context of computer science curriculum, and a specific example of
              implementation in the computer organization course. The results are being
              disseminated through a series of papers and national and regional conference
              presentations. The tools, lessons, and lab exercises are being made available
              over the internet. If the projects succeeds with the successful implementation
              in a single course, a plan will be developed for implementation of the use of
              handheld computing devices across the other courses in the computer science
              curriculum to be tested at other institutions.

