Title       : Design Principles for Wideband Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a9980616

Award Number: 9980616
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525155             (Estimated)
Investigator: Toby Berger berger@ece.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Venugopal Veeravalli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Broadband wireless communications has been identified as a
              national
imperative; it is deemed essential for maintaining the
              country's
premier position in information technology and accelerating
              the
advance of the information age.  This research is aimed at enhancing
the
              performance of wideband wireless multiaccess systems by optimizing
tradeoffs
              between coding and spreading, capitalizing on advantages
afforded by spatial
              diversity, and developing techniques for
accommodating multirate users.

A
              goal of this research is to establish, through a careful modeling of
time
              dispersion and angular dispersion effects in wideband channels,
that signals
              spread continuously over the available time interval and
frequency band can
              send data with high reliability.  When spatial
macrodiversity also is
              available, the investigators contend that
signals should be coded over spatial
              and spectral dimensions and their
energy spread "continuously" over time,
              frequency and space.

Linear signal space separation schemes have received
              considerable
attention as approaches for providing good tradeoffs
between
              throughput and system complexity in single-cell multiuser
environments.  The
              efficacy of linear signal space separation schemes
diminishes substantially,
              however, when one generalizes to
multiple-cell environments.  The goal in such
              realistic multicell
interference channels is to maximize a certain extension
              of classical
spectral efficiency herein called area-spectral efficiency.  This
              research
investigates the validity of the contention that signals
              widely
dispersed in time, frequency and space (TFS-wide signals) are
              nearly
optimum in such environments and do not require the use of
              linear
signal separation at the receiver.

The investigators study various
              techniques for creating 
TFS-wide signals in the wideband wireless
              environment, with an
emphasis on multicarrier signaling approaches. Provided
              the
forward channel does not fade quickly relative to the capacity of
              the
channel available for feeding back information from the receiver(s)
              to
the transmitter(s), DMT (discrete multitone) with dynamic bit
              loading
should prove to be a viable data transmission technique. 
              Combined
with spreading that enables multiple access, DMT can be made
              to
provide both user separation and Shannon-optimal power
              distribution
relative to the short-term spectrum of the wideband channel
              with
fading and interference seen by each user. For cases where dynamic
              bit
loading proves infeasible, OFDM (i.e., DMT with an equal number of
bits
              in each subchannel) is being explored as a candidate modulation
scheme for
              broadband wireless signaling.

