Title       : XYZ on a Chip: Integrated Biochip Microfluidics Using Supported Lipid Bilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9980799

Award Number: 9980799
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis W. Frank curt@chemeng.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Plummer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1402,1602,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9980799
Frank
The goal of this Engineering Microsystems:  "XYZ" on a Chip
              project proposes to develop a series of miniaturized, bioanalytical process
              modules that will be integrated into a "biochip" on a glass substrate; the
              biochip will be capable of exquisite manipulation of fluids in the nanoliter or
              picoliter range and have potential applications in proteomics, characterization
              and screening of pharmaceuticals, and protein selection and purification. 
              Novel aspects of the proposed research involve the use of hydrogel actuators
              for microvalves and peristaltic micropumps and the functionalization of
              microchannel walls or high surface-area chromatographic packing material with
              tethered phospholipid bilayers. This surface modification offers the
              possibility of incorporating membrane-integral or membrane-associated
              functional units such as receptors, enzymes, and ionophores to allow monitoring
              of reaction products and to achieve protein separations through molecular
              templating.

The proposed research is divided into three themes. In the
              first, the PIs will develop the enabling technology that will extend the
              understanding of hydrogel response to external stimuli, such as temperature,
              electric field, or pH, to the case where the hydrogel is both dramatically
              reduced in dimension and mechanically constrained by covalent attachment to a
              surface. In addition, they will develop procedures for promoting and verifying
              the self-organization of the tethered membrane components in the constrained
              geometries of the straight microchannels and on chromatographic packing.  While
              the structure and dynamics of phospholipid bilayers freely suspended on a solid
              substrate have been rather extensively studied, the more mechanically robust
              tethered membranes are only recently being explored. Moreover, the totally
              self-organized route to their formulation has barely been touched.

The
              second theme involves the development of a series of bioprocess modules that
              will be necessary for the ultimate creation of a complete "lab-on-a-chip". The
              individual classes of modules to be developed, as defined by functionality, are
              as follows.

Microfluidic Flow Control:	Thermo- and electro-responsive
              hydrogels will be used as actuators in microvalves and, with the help of an
              elastomeric barrier membrane, peristaltic micropumps. In more complex systems,
              phospholipid bilayer membranes, covalently bound to the surface of the hydrogel
              actuators and adjacent channel surfaces, will serve as diffusion barriers, thus
              facilitating direct pumping and metered
              delivery.

Microreactors:	Phospholipid bilayer membranes, tethered on the
              inner surface of a cylindrical microchannel or on surfaces of particles in a
              packed bed, will be used to support integral-membrane or associated-membrane
              proteins such as receptors, enzymes, and ionophores. These
              bilayer-functionalized tubular and packed-bed reactors will be studied under
              continuous flow conditions.

Separation Devices: Straight microchannels will
              be functionalized with tethered membranes and evaluated for electrophoretic
              separation efficiency of membrane-bound proteins. In an alternative approach,
              they will tether bilayer membranes to high-surface-area column packing supports
              to create a stationary lipid membrane chromatography phase. Both types of
              substrates will be explored for protein selection based on phase transition
              chromatography. Detection schemes for the different modules will be based on
              optical (surface plasmon or waveguide spectroscopic), confocal microscopic, and
              absorption/fluorescence spectroscopic methods.

The third theme will involve
              the integration of these functional modules, which constitute a micro "tool
              kit", into a bioanalytical device capable of a combination of process
              operations including sample introduction, perfusion, reaction, separation, and
              analysis. Development efforts will be coordinated and staged in order of
              increasing complexity. Microscaling of each of the enabling technologies
              (responsive hydrogels, functional tethered bilayers, derivatized packed beds)
              and, where appropriate, development of the simpler modules, will occur in
              parallel. This will allow the development of the more complex modules in which
              two or more technologies overlap.


