Title       : Chemically Modified Surface Clusters: Formation and Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2000    
File        : a9980222

Award Number: 9980222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gert Ehrlich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9980222
Ehrlich

The aim of this project is to study the role of chemical
              composition and its influence on the physical and chemical properties of
              clusters.  The extent to which doping with foreign atoms can be used to affect
              cluster behavior will been explored.  The formation of chemically modified
              surface clusters will be examined on the atomic level, in order to devise
              methods for introducing chemically different atoms into well-defined locations
              in a cluster of known structure.  Through the use of the field ion microscope,
              which can reveal the location and behavior of individual atoms, metal clusters
              will be assembled on iridium (111), a model surface for which considerable
              background information is already available.  Clusters will be constructed with
              well characterized defects in them.  There after, foreign atoms, such as
              rhenium or tungsten, will be deposited on the surface and their incorporation
              into the cluster will be followed in atomic detail.  Attempts will also be made
              to grow doped clusters by first depositing chemically different atoms and then
              allowing them to assemble into a cluster.  Once reasonable techniques for
              chemical modification have evolved, the effect of chemical doping on cluster
              behavior will be explored, with the initial emphasis on how the presence of a
              foreign atom affects the diffusion characteristics of clusters.

Metal
              clusters formed on solids play an important role in chemical technology as
              catalysts for chemical reactions.  More recently, their importance in affecting
              the growth of crystals and films has also been recognized, and as a result of
              studies on the atomic level, it is now clear that these clusters constitute
              interesting chemical entities whose properties are strongly affected by the
              overall atomic arrangement.  This area is of high importance to industry. 
              There are good job opportunities for students trained in this integrated area
              of education and research.

