Title       : Temperature Compensation in Antarctic Pteropods: An Integrative Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2002   
File        : a9980360

Award Number: 9980360
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164180             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Dudley r_dudley@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Life in polar waters requires physiological specialization to overcome thermal
              limits on reaction processes.  The long-standing hypothesis of metabolic cold
              adaptation, which proposes upregulation of basal and active metabolic rates in
              polar taxa relative to temperate-zone counterparts, remains contentious and has
              been taxonomically limited in evaluation to fish and benthic invertebrates. 
              Polar pteropods (Mollusca: Gastropoda) represent an abundant and metabolically
              active taxon with potentially substantial thermal compensation of the
              physiological processes underlying locomotion.  This research will examine
              metabolic cold adaptation in two pteropod taxa, with particular reference to
              the thermal dependence of locomotor performance.  Hypotheses of cold adaptation
              will be tested by comparing representative temperate zone and polar species and
              by evaluating possibly coordinated thermal compensation of metabolic,
              biomechanical and neural underpinnings to locomotor behavior.  The proposed
              research comprises three parts:  1) comparison of basal and metabolic rates of
              sister pteropod species from polar and temperate zones, together with
              comparisons of mitochondrial energetics; 2) comparison of locomotor
              biomechanics for the same pteropod taxa, with particular reference to the
              differential effects of reduced temperature and concomitantly increased
              viscosity on locomotor performance and 3) comparison of the responses of swim
              system neurons to variable temperatures, with particular reference to resting
              potentials, firing thresholds, action potential durations and ion channel
              kinetics.  The overall hypothesis of temperature compensation in polar
              pteropods will be tested by evaluating similarities and linkages in metabolic,
              biomechanical and neural responses to variable water temperature.  This
              research will provide fundamental physiological and behavioral information for
              this taxon, will systematically evaluate the hypothesis of cold adaptation
              across organizational levels in pteropods, and more generally will evaluate the
              nature of thermal and locomotor constraints for the many invertebrate taxa
              living and moving within polar waters.
