Title       : KDI: Large-Scale Inversion-Based Modeling of Complex Earthquake Ground Motion in
               Sedimentary Basins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9980063

Award Number: 9980063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2131000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacobo Bielak jbielak@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven M. Day  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Omar Ghattas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. O'Hallaron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan R. Shewchuk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1348,1576,8877,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of this research program is to develop the capability to
              generate realistic inversion-based models of complex basin geology and
              earthquake sources "by computer simulation" and to use this capability to model
              and forecast strong ground motions during earthquakes in Los Angeles Basin and
              the San Francisco Bay Area.  This problem is of great importance to earthquake
              hazard mitigation, since assessing the ground motion experiences by structures
              during their lifetimes is an essential first step in designing
              earthquake-resistant facilities, and retrofitting existing structures: ground
              motion modeling and forecasting are a necessary precursor to the design
              process.  This project involves collaboration between researchers at Carnegie
              Mellon University, University of California at Berkeley and San Diego State
              University.  The research team, centered at Carnegie Mellon University,
              consists of earthquake engineers, seismologists, geologists, computational
              mechanists, computer scientists, and computer graphics and visualization
              specialist.

Computer modeling and forecasting earthquake ground motions in
              large basins, is a challenging and complex task, with the complexity arising
              from several sources: multiple spatial scales characterize the basin response
              (the shortest wavelengths are measured in tens of meters, the longest in
              kilometers, and basin dimensions are on the order of tens of kilometers);
              temporal scales vary from the hundredths of a second necessary to resolve the
              highest frequencies of the earthquake source up to a couple of minutes of
              shaking within the basin; many basins have highly irregular geometry; the
              soils; material properties are highly heterogeneous; and geology and source
              parameters are only indirectly observable, and thus introduce uncertainty into
              the modeling process.  

Current earthquake simulations provide much useful
              information, but are not always capable of adequately reproducing observed
              seismograms.  The likely reason is that these models use a number of
              restrictive assumptions to reduce the computational requirements.  Motivated by
              the need for greater fidelity in earthquake ground motion modeling the research
              team is developing enhance models by incorporating the following: (1) The
              ability to represent physical domains an order of magnitude larger than current
              models; (2) The ability to model frequencies higher than currently possible;
              (3) Improved earthquake source models derived from available observation by
              solving 3D inverse problems; (4) improved basin material models based on the
              inversion of observations of ground motion within the basin; and (5) The
              ability to resolve boundary surfaces and sharp interfaces.

The drive toward
              greater fidelity in earthquake modeling introduces computational challenges in
              all states of the simulation process: from preprocessing, to solving, to
              postprocessing.  This is addressed through a concerted, unified effort in
              parallel 3D mesh generation, parallel 3D seismic inversion, and large-scale
              distributed visualization.  It is expected that this will result in important
              advances in physical modeling and algorithm and software tool development for
              multi-teraflops computers, while gaining physical insight into earthquake
              ground motion.  Because of the critical role that ground motion plays in
              infrastructure design, the accelerated availability of suitable simulation
              methodologies will have a direct impact on public safety and welfare.



