Title       : KDI: Coordinated Motion of Natural and Man-Made Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9980058

Award Number: 9980058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Stephen Morse morse@sysc.eng.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia K. Parrish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger W. Brockett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Grunbaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter N. Belhumeur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1347,8877,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Be it a school of fish swimming gracefully through the water, a herd of deer
              running through a meadow, a flock of birds flying across the horizon, or a
              swarm of bees circling about a hive one cannot help but wonder how these and
              other similar natural groupings, coordinate themselves and move so flawlessly,
              often without an apparent leader or any form of centralized control. What kinds
              of signaling must they use? What role if any, do currents, vortices, or other
              local environmental disturbances play in this process? Are there universal
              principles of coordinated group motion and if so what might they be? How might
              they be used to design a school of autonomous submerged vehicles, or a group of
              ground-based or airborne mobile robots to collectively accomplish a useful task
              in a coordinated manner? In broad terms, these are the questions to which this
              research will be addressed.

More specifically, we propose to mount a
              cross-disciplinary assault on the joint problems of understanding how fish
              schools coordinate their collective motion and how schools of autonomous
              submerged vehicles might be designed to move in a coordinated manner. We
              propose to address these problems experimentally, theoretically and by means of
              computer simulation. At the theoretical level, our aims will be to develop
              models, which are biologically plausible, and, in addition, operating
              strategies will enable coordinated group motion of engineered systems. Our
              ultimate goal is not to derive analytical models nor to develop computer
              simulations, which are visually satisfactory, but rather to discover the
              underlying concepts upon which the coordination of group motion might depend.
              Thus, for example we would hope to develop concepts which, on the one hand
              might help to explain how fish maintain their spacing and, on the other might
              serve as guidelines for the design of groupings of man-made autonomous vehicles
              of all types.

The experimental thrust of this research will proceed in two
              distinct but parallel directions. With the objective of gathering the world's
              first data-base documenting the long-term, three-dimensional motions of
              individual fish within a large school, we will take timed sequences of stereo
              video images of actual fish schools living in a large {1000 gallon or more}
              tank. We will image the responses of schools to various stimuli and under
              various conditions. Using advanced image/vision processing techniques, we will
              transform this data into a form suitable for verifying the validity of proposed
              behavioral and analytical schooling models. This database together with full
              documentation will be made available to the science and engineering communities
              via the World Wide Web.

With the objective of trying out candidate group
              coordination strategies in a reasonably realistic setting, we will develop an
              experimental test facility consisting of a school of approximately a dozen,
              identical miniature underwater vehicles. These experiments are expected to be
              useful for both the biological and the engineering perspectives; we will be
              able to test robotic versions of hypothesized biology models not possible in a
              fish tank. Experiments with this man-made school will be carried out in an
              Olympic-sized swimming pool, which is available at Princeton University. Our
              first goal will be to instrument these vehicles so that they can function
              autonomously, without remote control. We will then experiment with a variety of
              maneuvers including group formation, cruising, bifurcating, avoiding obstacles,
              and changing group shapes. We will implement various biologically inspired
              goal-seeking strategies such as foraging as well as gradient climbing tasks
              relevant both to biology and to numerous engineering applications.

The
              research we are proposing will be carried out by a cross-disciplinary team
              consisting of experimental and theoretical biologists together with experts in
              computer vision, control systems and robotics. It is our view that by means of
              this multi-pronged assault consisting of theoretical analysis, computer
              simulation, and experimentation with both natural and man-made groups, we can
              attain an understanding of the underlying mechanisms governing the coordinated
              motion of natural and man-made groups.

