Title       : Making Thinking Visible: Promoting Model-Building and Collaborative Discourse in
               W.I.S.E.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2002   
File        : a9980600

Award Number: 9980600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice D. Gobert jgobert@concord.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Concord Consortium
	      10 Concord Crossing, Suite 300
	      Concord, MA  01742    978/369-4367

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Order to design, test, and refine rich tasks for middle and high school students
              in the domain of plate tectonics.

The notion of making thinking visible is
              used in two ways.  First, students will engage in drawing tasks, making their
              models of plate tectonic phenomena explicit and then use their models as
              artifacts for reiterative cycles of collaborative discourse and model-revision.
               Second, students will be provided with a set of prototypes of dynamic,
              runnable models of plate tectonic phenomena so that they can visualize dynamic,
              causal, and temporal processes and use this "experiential" knowledge to test,
              critique, and revise their models.  The goal here is to promote knowledge
              integration and promote meta-knowledge of model-revision.   Next, we will
              foster students' knowledge integration by helping students learn from one
              another in two ways.  First they will engage students in collaborative
              discourse about the evolution of the theory of plate tectonics. Second, they
              will engage east and West Coast students in discourse about plate
              tectonic-related phenomena using intriguing questions about the geological
              phenomena in each geographical area.  The goal is to promote students' inquiry
              and knowledge integration using discourse to address intriguing questions that
              are personally relevant.

With respect to model-based learning, outcomes of
              this project will include: findings about students' model-based learning and
              reasoning, the affordances made by "visualizing" the runnable prototypes, and
              insight into how these processes may be different from conventional pencil and
              paper model-based tasks.  Regarding    collaborative discourse tasks, outcomes
              will include: the types of explanations students construct for each other and
              how meaning is co-constructed in collaborative discourse.  Outcomes will also
              include findings regarding the nature of students' epistemologies of science
              and of scientific models, and differences between 6th and 9th grade students in
              terms of their epistemologies. Further outcomes will be flexible WISE units for
              6th and 9th grade students who utilize model-based tasks, visualization, and
              collaborative discourse to promote students' understanding of the causal
              mechanisms underlying plate tectonics and the development of the theory of
              plate tectonics.

