Title       : Adaptive Bayesian Receivers in Fading Channels: A Sequential Monte Carlo
               Filtering Design Paradigm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9980599

Award Number: 9980599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaodong Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rong Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
The coming generation of tetherless communication technology promises
              a giant leap forward in information
accessibility. Advanced features of the
              so-called  fourth-generation wireless systems and beyond, such as data rates
              compatible with multimedia applications, will enable many emerging applications
              not possible with current wireless systems. However, it is not at all clear how
              wireless receivers should be optimally designed to meet the technical
              challenges introduced by the wider bandwidths and higher data rates inherent in
              the future wireless systems. It is generally believed that the real niche for
              future wireless receivers lies in the development of adaptive systems to
              perform sophisticated signal processing functions. But, at this time there is a
              lack of concrete principles that can be used to design these futuristic
              receivers. It is important at this stage to acquire the insights and
              theoretical tools that may help spark revolutionary breakthroughs in this
              field.

Investigation of design methodologies of adaptive Bayesian receivers
              in single-user and multiuser fading channels is proposed. The approach is to
              formulate the problems of signal reception in unknown time-varying channels as
              multivariate Bayesian inference problems. Sequential Monte Carlo filtering
              methods, the relatively simple but extremely powerful numerical techniques
              recently developed in the field of statistics, will be employed to develop
              adaptive systems for computing the Bayesian estimates of the channels and data.
              An array of receiver design problems found in wireless communications, such as
              mitigation of various types of radio-frequency interference (including
              multiple-access interference, narrowband interference, impulsive noise),
              tracking of fading channels, resolving multipath channel dispersion, space-time
              processing by multiple antennas, exploiting coded signal structures, etc., will
              be treated under the unified framework of sequential Monte Carlo Bayesian
              estimation. The theoretical effort in this project is expected to culminate in
              the formulation of novel receiver design concepts applicable for future
              wireless systems.




