Title       : Virtual Courseware for Environmental Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9980719

Award Number: 9980719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Desharnais   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary A. Novak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    323/343-4970

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)  Population increase, industrialization, and
              urbanization are growing threats to environmental quality and human health. It
              is more important now than ever to provide opportunities for undergraduates to
              understand the processes that lead to environmental degradation and how these
              problems can be avoided or mitigated. The goal of this project is to increase
              inquiry-based learning of environmental science at the national level. This
              project is a plan for the development of a library of "virtual courseware"--
              interactive, web-based software that engages students in active learning of
              important environmental concepts. The virtual courseware is being designed and
              implemented by the principal investigators in collaboration with the Center for
              Distributed Learning.  Six virtual courseware applications are being developed.
               Each "virtual application" is Web-based and easily accessible. Each
              application is also appropriate for introductory environmental science courses
              and reinforces scientific methodology.  It is interactive, intuitive, and
              inquiry-based, and is vertically scalable so that it can be used by college
              biology majors, general education non-majors, and high school students,
              (modular and self-contained).  Project evaluation is being conducted by the
              Center for Usability in Design and Assessment.  Because of the web-based nature
              of the project, dissemination is widespread.  The products of this project are
              making environmental science education more accessible, promote learning and
              environmental awareness, and provide the possibility for reducing the costs of
              education.  


