Title       : Reconstructing the Introductory Biology Curriculum Using Inquiry-Based
               Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a9980913

Award Number: 9980913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109939             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Derting terry.derting@murraystate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Claire A. Fuller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Canning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sterling N. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Spencer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Murray State University
	      328 Wells Hall
	      Murray, KY  42071    270/762-3537

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)  Students entering our upper-level biology courses are
              weak in their understanding of basic biological concepts and scientific
              methodologies.  Furthermore, many students have difficulty succeeding in our
              introductory courses and, on average, fewer than 40% of entering students
              complete the major.  Our project is designed to enhance learning by our biology
              majors through reconstruction of our introductory biology curriculum. The
              project has five major objectives:  (1) to combine broad exposure of students
              to basic scientific concepts with significant opportunities for in-depth
              understanding through direct investigation; (2) to place a greater emphasis on
              concepts, processes, and active scientific inquiry; (3) to develop the
              intellectual tools needed by students to grasp and explore new scientific
              topics at the outset of their undergraduate curriculum; (4) to provide a
              supportive student-centered curriculum that facilitates the transition of
              students from a high school to an undergraduate level of study; and (5) to
              enhance the ability of faculty to adapt and introduce newly developed
              materials, pedagogical methods, and technologies into their courses.  We are
              implementing a new introductory curriculum that consists of two new concept
              courses and revised courses in Botany and Zoology.  The curriculum is based on
              adaptation and implementation of exemplary teaching practices (e.g., active
              learning in large lectures, collaboration among students, and case studies) and
              laboratory investigations (e.g., Dickey and Koniski's investigative approaches,
              Research Link 2000) that are inquiry-based.  Development of assessment methods
              and project evaluation is being conducted under the leadership of D. Ebert-May.
               Throughout the project, development of the teaching abilities of all faculty
              is being emphasized.  As a result of our new curriculum, it is expected that
              students are developing the intellectual tools and knowledge of content
              necessary for enhanced learning in advanced courses, while increasing their
              confidence and interest in biological study.


