Title       : Evolution of Sea Surface Temperatures in the Coastal Antarctic Paleoenvironment
               During the Late Cretaceous and Paleogene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a9980538

Award Number: 9980538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyger C. Lohmann kacey@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports research for construction of a long-term
              record of climate during the late Cretaceous and early Paleogene to assess the
              annual seasonality in temperature on the coastal margin of Antarctica. Stable
              isotope and element compositions of well-preserved bivalve shells collected on
              Seymour Island will be the primary source of data used to reconstruct
              paleoenvironmental conditions.  Seasonal temperature records collected through
              high-resolution sampling along growth structures in bivalve shells will allow
              seasonality to be assessed during different climate states and during periods
              of rapid climate change. In addition, high stratigraphic resolution will enable
              this project to detect the presence and frequency of short-lived thermal
              excursions that may have extended to such high latitudes.

To compile a
              reliable temporal record of paleoclimate, two major avenues of investigation
              will be undertaken: 1) precise stratigraphic (and therefore, temporal)
              placement of fossils over a large geographic area will be employed through the
              use of a graphical technique employing geometric projections; 2) stable isotope
              and elemental analyses will be performed to derive paleotemperatures and to
              evaluate diagenetic alteration of shell materials. To provide realistic
              comparisons of paleotemperatures across stratigraphic horizons, this study will
              focus on a single taxon, thus avoiding complications due to the mixing of
              faunal assemblages that have been encountered in previous studies of this
              region.

The near-shore marine fossil record on Seymour Island provides a
              unique opportunity to address many questions about the Antarctic
              paleoenvironment, including the relation between seasonality and different
              climate states, the influence of climate on biogeographic distribution of
              specific taxa, the effect of ice-volume changes on the stable isotope record
              from the late Cretaceous through the Eocene, and the plausibility of
              high-latitude bottom water formation during this time interval. In particular,
              information that will be collected concerning patterns of seasonality and the
              presence (or absence) of short-lived thermal excursions will be extremely
              valuable to an understanding of the response of high latitude sites during
              climate transitions from globally cool to globally warm conditions. 


