Title       : Collaborative Research: Supply Functions and Clean-Development Mechanism Rules
               for Tropical Forest Carbon Sinks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a9980252

Award Number: 9980252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander S. P. Pfaff apl96@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1317,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Because of concerns about global climate change, society is actively exploring
              the possibility of using forest ecosystems as a carbon sink.  Tropical forests
              may offer more than two-thirds of such opportunities.  The protection of
              tropical forests could offset global fossil fuel carbon emissions and reduce
              the cost of emissions limitations set in Kyoto.  In addition, certified
              emissions credits (CERs) under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)
              established in Kyoto likely will incorporate tropical forest sinks within
              efforts to meet emissions targets.  In principle, this could result in
              significant economic and sequestration benefits, although actual evidence on
              tropical carbon sinks is sparse.  To advance knowledge and practice associated
              with this important topic, this collaborative research project has two major
              goals.  First, the investigators will develop an integrated, spatially explicit
              model of that predicts how much additional carbon sequestration will occur in
              Costa Rica if financial rewards for sequestration are offered.  This modeling
              effort will include both economic modeling of land use and ecological modeling
              of carbon storage.  Both sets of models will be based on empirical observations
              of carbon and nitrogen stocks and flows, with systematic sampling of variations
              in soils, climate, and land uses.  The second major goal of the research will
              be to contribute to the effective design of rules that allow
              carbon-sequestration efforts in tropical locations to replace
              emission-reduction efforts in more developed nations.  This line of inquiry
              will involve the conduct of sensitivity analyses on the integrated model in
              order to derive simplified versions of state-of-the-art disciplinary and
              integrated models.  This effort will facilitate the search for estimate how
              much carbon sequestration will be generated in Costa Rica in response to
              different kinds of monetary rewards for carbon sequestration.  This project
              will increase understandings of the interplay of socioeconomic and ecological
              factors that influence land-use choices as well as the effects of land-use
              change on carbon sequestration in Costa Rica, a representative nation with
              significant tropical forests and readily available data sources.  In addition
              to addressing these fundamental issues, the project will explore the potential
              for simplified models to identify the potential implications of different
              carbon-sequestration incentives on land-use decisions, thereby providing
              valuable new insights into critical aspects of the Kyoto accord to reduce
              atmospheric carbon.

