Title       : An Interactive Web-Based Materials Characterization Project for Undergraduate
               Education in Analytical Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9980739

Award Number: 9980739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne E. Pemberton pembertn@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)  Recent attention in chemical education has focused on the need
              for "problem-based" learning (PBL) strategies, particularly in the laboratory. 
              One concern expressed by industry and government laboratory chemists about the
              training of chemistry undergraduates is that students emerge with only a
              technique-based perspective on chemical analysis instead of viewing it as an
              integrated process based on problem-solving.  Education of students in the
              integrated concept of the "analytical process" has been lost.  The remedy to
              this curricular deficiency requires the development of critical thinking and
              problem-solving skills in our students.  Although it is desirable to achieve
              this goal through laboratory PBL experiences, many institutions, particularly
              small colleges, lack the instrumentation necessary for effective solution of
              real-world problems in their analytical chemistry laboratories.  The recent
              explosion in new electronic technology affords, as a supplement to the central
              hands-on component of the laboratory curriculum, the opportunity to enhance the
              problem-solving skills of students through interactive computer-based
              experiences.  This project continues the development of MCPweb, an interactive
              Web-based Materials Characterization Project (MCP). This virtual activity is
              based on a laboratory version of the MCP currently offered in the analytical
              curriculum at the University of Arizona in which students undertake a
              comprehensive analysis of a commercial product, device, or formulation. The
              goal of this project is to complete the prototype MCPweb for the electronic
              calculator to demonstrate the feasibility of this concept. This activity is
              primarily targeted towards undergraduate chemistry majors nationwide. In
              addition, this activity is also well-matched to the need for enhanced use of
              technology in analytical chemistry education.

