Title       : Traffic Management in IP Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  2002   
File        : a9980637

Award Number: 9980637
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302635             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arjan Durresi durresi@cis.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raj Jain  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              There is an immense demand for quality of service (QoS) in the Internet.  One
              key element of quality of service is traffic management.  Since the network
              traffic is bursty, it is difficult to make any QoS guarantees without proper
              control of traffic.  Currently, Internet Protocol (IP) has only minimal traffic
              management capabilities.  The packets are dropped when the queue exceeds the
              buffer capacity.  The transmission control protocol (TCP) uses the packet drop
              as a signal of congestion and reduces its load.  While in the past, this
              strategy has worked satisfactorily, there is need for better strategies for two
              reasons.  First, a large part of the traffic, particularly, voice and video
              traffic does not use TCP.  Continuous media traffic uses User Datagram Protocol
              (UDP).  The proportion of UDP traffic is increasing at a faster pace than TCP
              traffic.  The UDP traffic is congestion insensitive in the sense that UDP
              sources do not reduce their load in response to congestion.  Second, the
              bandwidth of the networks as well as the distances are increasing.  For very
              high distance-bandwidth product networks, packet drop is not the optimal
              congestion indication.  Several megabytes of data may be lost in the time
              required to detect and respond to packet losses.  Therefore, a better strategy
              for traffic management in IP networks is required.

Recognizing the need for
              direct feedback of congestion information, the Internet Engineering Task Force
              (IETF) has come up with an Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) method for IP
              routers.  A bit in the IP header is set when the routers are congested.  ECN is
              much more powerful than the simple packet drop indication used by existing
              routers and is suitable for high distance-bandwidth networks.  Unfortunately,
              to realize the full potential of ECN, several questions need to be
              answered.

In this research proposal, the PIs propose a comprehensive program
              of research on traffic management in IP networks.  They propose to develop a
              new set of traffic management algorithms for IP networks based on Explicit
              Congestion Notification mechanism.  A total of 18 different issues will be
              analyzed.  The PIs have identified potential solutions and approaches for each
              of these issues.  Specifically, they propose to work on a new congestion
              detection and buffer management scheme for routers, a mechanism for TCP to
              react to ECN messages from the network.  One of the important goals of this
              research is to make TCP traffic management algorithm free of any bias based on
              round trip time and number of congested gateways traveled.

The proposed
              research will be based on theoretical analysis and simulations.  The PI's
              approach will be a formal analysis of simple scenarios, heuristic analysis of
              more complex scenarios and validation using simulations.  The emphasis will be
              to develop simple solutions.  However, the performance lost in exchange of
              simplicity will be theoretically analyzed.

Traffic management is the key in
              providing QoS.  Currently, a significant amount of NSF, DARPA, and other
              research funding as well as energy in networking is being spent on QoS issues. 
              When QoS based solutions (integrated services, differentiated services, or
              multiprotocol label switching) are deployed, the need for traffic management
              will become apparent and the PIs expect to see an immediate need for proper
              methods for traffic management.  This proposal is, therefore, timely and
              important.

