Title       : Circulation of Magma in Volcanic Conduits as a Degassing Mechanism at Active
               Volcanoes: A Geochemical and Fluid-Dynamic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2000    
File        : a9980566

Award Number: 9980566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129716             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor C. Kress kress@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher G. Newhall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kress
9980566
The goal of this project is to better understand the volcanic
              gas source and the mechanism for non-explosive, passive degassing at
              high-gas-flux volcanoes.  We hypothesize that "excess" gas emission at
              passively degassing volcanoes may be explained by circulation of magma in the
              volcanic conduit at both mafic and silicic subduction zone volcanoes. Two
              contrasting volcanoes, Popocatepetl (Mexico) and Villarrica (Chile), are the
              focus of the proposed research. Popocatepetl has been passively degassing
              enormous quantities of SO2 vapor for the last 5 years despite very limited
              magma production.  Villarrica has had an actively degassing lava lake perched
              in its summit crater for the last 15 years. High rates of heat and gas transfer
              associated with conduit circulation may be able to explain the observed
              phenomena at Popocatepetl and Villarrica.  We will adopt a two-step
              investigative process for this study. First, geochemical analysis of rock
              samples from Popocatepetl and Villarrica will enable us to define pre-eruptive
              conditions in the magma chamber (e.g., temperature and pressure) and quantify
              the composition and size of the volcanic gas source. Second, using multiphase,
              fluid dynamic modeling of magma circulation in the conduit, we will quantify
              the rates of passive degassing at the two volcanoes under scrutiny. In addition
              to the laboratory and modeling studies described above, a field campaign at
              Villarrica will make COSPEC measurements of SO2 flux, directly sample gas from
              summit fumaroles, and collect rock samples from representative explosive and
              effusive eruptions.   Results of this study will shed light on the differences
              between the dynamics of explosive and non-explosive volcanic activity as well
              as help quantify the contribution of volcanic gases to the atmosphere from
              passive volcanic degassing.

