Title       : Micropower for Remote, Autonomous Microsystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2000     
File        : a9980835

Award Number: 9980835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John N. Harb jharb@et.byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry L. Howell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1602,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this Engineering Microsystems: "XYZ" on a Chip project is to address
              issues that are essential to the development of a power system suitable for
              remote, autonomous microsystems.  A critical element of any micropower supply
              is the ability to store energy and deliver it at the appropriate time and in
              the require form. In recent years, microfabrication techniques have been
              extended to a broader range of devices that offer a whole new level of
              functionality. These new devices are capable of interacting with the physical
              world, and an important class of these includes the remote, autonomous devices
              intended to operate without physical (hardwire) connections for either
              communication or power.

The proposed work builds upon the previous
              experience of the investigators with microsystems to address fundamental issues
              to develop, demonstrate and evaluate a method for integration of a microbattery
              with electronic components on a single chip. This will be accomplished by the
              design and fabrication of a simple circuit, including the batteries and
              appropriate electrical connections, in a sequential integration. A new
              fabrication process will be developed for microbattery fabrication directly in
              the silicon substrate.  In addition, the objective is to develop MEMS switches
              as an enabling technology for microbattery arrays to provide a flexible power
              system suitable for remote, autonomous microsystems.  Switch actuation suitable
              for use with microbatteries will be developed and demonstrated, and these MEMS
              switches will be connected to a microbattery array to demonstrate the
              performance of the system.

