Title       : Advanced Database Concepts for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2000    
File        : a9980417

Award Number: 9980417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne W. Dietrich dietrich@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan D. Urban  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31)

With the maturity of object-oriented database products,
              the emergence of object-relational systems, and the growing relationship
              between databases and the World Wide Web, there is a strong need for an
              advanced undergraduate database course to better prepare computer science
              majors for the database processing needs of industry. The goal of this
              Educational Materials Development project is to design an advanced database
              course based upon the latest database technologies and to develop the
              supporting educational materials. The objective is to cover the fundamental
              theory and to provide integrated, cooperative group projects to emphasize the
              practical application of these concepts. Since database professionals interact
              with users and are likely to be exposed to sensitive information, the project
              is also exploring the effective integration of professionalism and ethics
              within the curriculum. 

The expected outcomes include a set of modules, one
              for each topic, where a module includes class notes, active in-class exercises,
              cooperative group projects and outcome-based assessment.  The evaluation
              includes 1) detailed student evaluations including student performance data, 2)
              industry participation through an advisory committee, and 3) alumni feedback
              during the three years after students graduate.  In the final year of the
              project, the course will be tested at additional sites to assess the use of the
              materials across diverse student populations.  The external sites will also
              complete an evaluation of the effectiveness of the course and materials for
              their student populations.  Dissemination is being accomplished through
              professional journals and conferences, a web site with a mailing list of users,
              a faculty de




