Title       : Proof of Concept Proposal for Physical Chemistry in Practice - An Interactive
               Multimedia DVD Companion for the Physical Chemistry Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1999  
File        : a9980862

Award Number: 9980862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert K. Boggess                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67493              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabriela C. Weaver   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Denver
	      Campus Box 129 PO Box 173364
	      Denver, CO  802173364    303/556-4060

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) The project is developing a prototype for a multimedia disc
              (DVD,CD) that is allowing students in physical chemistry to see the practical,
              experimental applications of the concepts they are learning in the lecture
              course. This upper-division course is traditionally very abstract and
              mathematically oriented. The multimedia supplement is helping students to make
              a connection between the symbolic and theoretical material and how those
              concepts are put into practice. In lower level chemistry courses it is often
              possible for an instructor to carry out classroom demonstrations but in
              physical chemistry this is much more difficult. The proposed multimedia
              companion for physical chemistry is allowing instructors to demonstrate
              phenomena using graphics, animations, video and interactive activities of real
              instruments and showcase research currently being conducted in the field of
              physical chemistry. The Physical Chemistry in Practice (PCIP) digital videodisc
              (DVD) is a multimedia resource for both instructors and students. The DVD
              contains several 'programs', which are tied to traditional physical chemistry
              topics. Each program consists of 1) Description: An interactive description of
              an apparatus or experiment that illustrates a particular Physical Chemistry
              topic. The interactive description has photos, drawings of internal parts,
              computer animations and text/narrated discussions of the device 2) Video Tour:
              A videotaped tour of the apparatus or experiment that includes a brief
              interview with an expert in the field describing the device and its
              application. Video footage of the instrument in use and the collection of
              typical data follow the interview 3) Interactive Data: Typical data from the
              apparatus or experiment is being used in a tutorial program in which students
              can interpret, manipulate and analyze the information. The prototype DVD
              contains two complete programs. One illustrates the application of atomic force
              microscopy (AFM) in determining certain thermodynamic properties of polymers;
              the other describes the use of surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS). The
              prototype project is also resulting in a complete list of programs for the
              full-development DVD and a description of the traditional physical chemistry
              course topics to which these programs correspond.

