Title       : The Distribution and Diets of Penguins in Winter: Implications for Demography.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9980641

Award Number: 9980641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne Z. Trivelpiece waynezt@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Long-term seabird research conducted at Admiralty Bay, which is located on King
              George Island in the Antarctic Peninsula region, has documented annual
              variability in the life history parameters of the breeding biology and ecology
              of the Adelie, gentoo and chinstrap penguins.  Twenty-year records acquired on
              these species, including survival and recruitment, population size and breeding
              success, and diets and foraging ecology have enable scientists to test key
              hypotheses regarding the linkage between these predator parameters and
              variability in the Antarctic marine ecosystem.  At present, there is no data in
              the winter distributions of known Adelie or chinstrap populations from the
              Antarctic Peninsula and only limited data on winter diets.  This gap in
              knowledge of what features of the winter environment, both physical and
              biological may be important to the distribution, survival and future breeding
              status of penguins is critical. This project will focus on understanding the
              linkages between the physical environment and the population biology of
              penguins, in particular, sea ice coverage and its impact on krill availability
              as a food source for penguins.  Krill is a key food web species in the
              Antarctic oceans and accounts for nearly one hundred percent of the prey eaten
              by dominant predators such as baleen whales, seals and penguins.  Analysis of
              long-term data sets has suggested that years of heavy winter sea ice favor
              krill recruitment, as larval krill find refuge and food in the sea ice habitat.
               It has also been observed that years of heavy sea ice favor Adelie penguin
              recruitment and not that of chinstrap penguins.  Aspects of the work include
              analysis of diet samples, shipboard krill sampling, survival and recruitment
              studies of penguins, satellite tracking of penguins during the breeding and
              non-breeding season, and analysis of satellite sea ice images.  Penguins are
              the key species used to monitor the impact of commercial fisheries activities
              in the region, so this study will provide useful information to the convention
              for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, which is the part of
              the Antarctic Treaty System which focuses on Ecosystem management. 
