Title       : Enhancement of Psychological Science Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2000     
File        : a9980936

Award Number: 9980936
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67251              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian J. Sanders brian.sanders@drake.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane L. Rankin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven F. Faux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith M. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Klipec  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drake University
	      2507 University Avenue
	      Des Moines, IA  503114505    515/271-2011

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Psychology - Biological (71)
Recent discussions in the science education
              literature suggest that many departments continue to use primarily
              lecture-based approaches to teaching despite emerging evidence that students
              learn best when they are actively engaged in a participatory enterprise. In
              many cases, including ours, lack of available resources is the main barrier we
              have faced in implementing curricular reform. The result until recently is that
              our laboratory-based experiences have been less interactive and more
              demonstrative. 

Implementation of this project has made it possible to
              change the pedagogical culture of our department. We are initiating significant
              changes in several courses in our curriculum to allow our students to be more
              active participants in their science education. Examples of activities
              supported by this project include: (1) web-based interaction among groups of
              students within and between certain courses in the curriculum, (2) hands-on
              experience in using scientific instrumentation to generate and solve problems
              in psychological science, and (3) application of computer technology to
              analyze, graph, and report original data collected by students engaged in
              course based and independent research activities. An important anticipated
              outcome of this project is a collaborative research-rich environment in which
              classroom instruction and research are integrated across the curriculum. The
              effectiveness of such an approach has been convincingly demonstrated at several
              institutions including Furman University, Ohio Wesleyan University, and Mary
              Washington College. Because Furman has been especially proactive in creating a
              dynamic learning environment and because we share many institutional and
              departmental characteristics, their department will serve as an important role
              model and source of advice and counsel for us as we implement this project and
              evaluate our progress. 




