Title       : KDI: Accessing Large Distributed Archives in Astronomy and Particle Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9980044

Award Number: 9980044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James J. Whitmore                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander S. Szalay szalay@pha.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aihud Pevsner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harvey B. Newman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ethan T. Vishniac  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael T. Goodrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1348,8877,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9980044
Szalay
This proposal requests funding to support research into various
              ways of organizing and accessing the exceedingly large data sets now or soon to
              be acquired in astronomy and particle physics.   The typical data acquisition
              rate for such experiments exceeds several Terabytes per year, and in the very
              near future will reach the Petabyte per year rate.  Such amounts of data pose
              non-trivial challenges, in particular since they must be accessed quickly and
              conveniently by a large and geographically dispersed collaboration.  The
              astronomy data includes (1) the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), a 40 TB
              digital map of the northern sky; (2) data from the GALEX satellite (approx. 20
              TB); and (3) data from the space shuttle based AMS experiment.  In particle
              physics, data from the CMS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the
              CERN laboratory in Geneva Switzerland will significantly exceed 1 PB per
              year.
This research will address the following issues: (1) Organization of the
              data for efficient access.  This will require exploration of several advanced
              data structures so that data may be stored in a fashion which anticipates
              future queries. (2) Storage of the data in widely distributed locations.  This
              requires a novel approach from the perspective of both networking and
              distributed computing systems.  Proposers will develop a middleware of Query
              Agents to perform the queries at the verious data locations.   (3) Efficient
              handling of entire major archives.   This requires development of parallel
              processing tools that can exploit arrays of commodity processors and disks to
              allow analysis of several Terabytes per hour. 


9980044
Szalay
This
              proposal requests funding to support research into various ways of organizing
              and accessing the exceedingly large data sets now or soon to be acquired in
              astronomy and particle physics.   The typical data acquisition rate for such
              experiments exceeds several Terabytes per year, and in the very near future
              will reach the Petabyte per year rate.  Such amounts of data pose non-trivial
              challenges, in particular since they must be accessed quickly and conveniently
              by a large and geographically dispersed collaboration.  The astronomy data
              includes (1) the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), a 40 TB digital map of the
              northern sky; (2) data from the GALEX satellite (approx. 20 TB); and (3) data
              from the space shuttle based AMS experiment.  In particle physics, data from
              the CMS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the CERN laboratory in
              Geneva Switzerland will significantly exceed 1 PB per year.
This research will
              address the following issues: (1) Organization of the data for efficient
              access.  This will require exploration of several advanced data structures so
              that data may be stored in a fashion which anticipates future queries. (2)
              Storage of the data in widely distributed locations.  This requires a novel
              approach from the perspective of both networking and distributed computing
              systems.  Proposers will develop a middleware of Query Agents to perform the
              queries at the verious data locations.   (3) Efficient handling of entire major
              archives.   This requires development of parallel processing tools that can
              exploit arrays of commodity processors and disks to allow analysis of several
              Terabytes per hour. 


9980044
Szalay
This proposal requests funding to
              support research into various ways of organizing and accessing the exceedingly
              large data sets now or soon to be acquired in astronomy and particle physics.  
              The typical data acquisition rate for such experiments exceeds several
              Terabytes per year, and in the very near future will reach the Petabyte per
              year rate.  Such amounts of data pose non-trivial challenges, in particular
              since they must be accessed quickly and conveniently by a large and
              geographically dispersed collaboration.  The astronomy data includes (1) the
              Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), a 40 TB digital map of the northern sky; (2)
              data from the GALEX satellite (approx. 20 TB); and (3) data from the space
              shuttle based AMS experiment.  In particle physics, data from the CMS
              experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the CERN laboratory in Geneva
              Switzerland will significantly exceed 1 PB per year.
This research will
              address the following issues: (1) Organization of the data for efficient
              access.  This will require exploration of several advanced data structures so
              that data may be stored in a fashion which anticipates future queries. (2)
              Storage of the data in widely distributed locations.  This requires a novel
              approach from the perspective of both networking and distributed computing
              systems.  Proposers will develop a middleware of Query Agents to perform the
              queries at the verious data locations.   (3) Efficient handling of entire major
              archives.   This requires development of parallel processing tools that can
              exploit arrays of commodity processors and disks to allow analysis of several
              Terabytes per hour. 



