Title       : Early Introduction of FTNMR Spectroscopy into the Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2000    
File        : a9980793

Award Number: 9980793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lyle W. Castle castlyle@isu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              E. J. Sutter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karl De Jesus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lenore H. McAlexander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Idaho State University
	      309 Fine Arts Bldg., Box 8046
	      Pocatello, ID  832098046    208/282-2592

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) This project expands and enhances undergraduate opportunities to
              utilize Fourier Transform Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (FT-NMR) spectroscopy in
              General Chemistry, Organic Chemistry and Undergraduate Research.  The project
              adapts an existing program at Boise State University (BSU).  The BSU model uses
              FT-NMR starting with organic chemistry and continues through advanced courses
              and undergraduate research.  Similar improvements are being implemented at
              Idaho State University with experiments and research being modified to take
              advantage of the expertise of the faculty at Idaho State.  Laboratories and
              curricula are enhancing students' critical thinking skills and exposure to the
              scientific process of inquiry through investigation.  Laboratories have become
              open-ended investigations, where students hypothesize, interpret data, reach
              conclusions, and move directly into independent research.  The project reflects
              a national and institutional effort to promote active learning in science. 
              

The emphasis on NMR spectroscopy complements DUE's theme of integrating
              technology into education.  Intensive use of NMR in academics has historically
              been limited to graduate students; the advanced systems now available make this
              research tool readily available for undergraduate use as well.  Also, NMR is
              increasingly important to both academic investigation and industry.  When
              students complete the undergraduate curriculum, their level of NMR exposure
              rivals that of many graduate students.  The project is enabling an increase in
              undergraduate research in chemistry at the university.  It will be replicable
              by other universities that wish to enhance inquiry-based learning, critical
              thinking and undergraduate chemistry students' research abilities. 
