Title       : Studies on the Impact of Sewage-Associated Microorganisms on Indigenous Seal and
               Bacterial Populations and Drinking Water Quality at McMurdo Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a9980425

Award Number: 9980425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167923             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Lisle   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon A. McFeters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston Clear Lake
	      2700 Bay Area Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  770581098    281/283-3015

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              McMurdo Station, Antarctica, has been releasing macerated, untreated human
              sewage into the pristine marine waters off the coast for years.  The marine
              waters impacted by the sewage plume sometimes extend to the drinking water
              intake at Intake Jetty.  Additionally, deposit feeding invertebrates located
              within the area impacted by the sewage effluents have been show to not only
              assimilate the nutrients associated with the sewage but also exhibit increased
              mean body and organ sizes.  A previous study found preliminary, but
              inconclusive, evidence that the sewage-associated bacterium, clostridium
              perfringens, was colonizing Weddell seals feeding in the impacted area.  It is
              hypothesized that (!) Weddell seals are being colonized by sewage -associated
              bacteria and viruses, (2) sewage-associated bacteria are exchanging their DNA
              with indigenous species, potentially altering the procaryotic gene pool of this
              ecosystem (3) sewage-associated bacteria and viruses are entering the drinking
              water system at McMurdo Station and (4) the current methods used to monitor the
              microbiological quality of marine and drinking waters at McMurdo Station are
              underestimating the risks associated with their respective contact and/or
              ingestion. These hypotheses will be addressed by using molecular techniques
              (e.g., pulse field gel electrophoresis, PCR), in situ microcosms for gene
              transfer experiments, more sensitive culture based techniques for determining
              the extent of sewage contamination in marine waters, sediments and seal feces
              and scat and performing the most extensive microbiological survey of the
              drinking water distribution system to date.  A major focus of this work will be
              determining if the same C. perfringens genotypes that are present in the sewage
              are related to those isolated from seal feces and scat, marine waters and
              sediments and drinking water samples.  This approach has been used in other
              systems to establish a direct epidemiological link between a bacterium's source
              and the colonized (infected) host. In general, the results from this study will
              provide information which can be used in the monitoring and design of
              remediation efforts of coastal waters off of McMurdo Station and other coastal
              waters around Antarctica that are being impacted by the discharge of untreated
              human sewage.  The data will also be as a baseline for studies of ecosystem
              recovery following the planned installation of a sewage treatment plant at
              McMurdo Station.
