Title       : The Development of Scientific Thinking and Conceptions of Science in College
               Science Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a9980519

Award Number: 9980519
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregg E. Solomon                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $997612             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil A. Stillings nstillings@hampshire.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol L. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Anne Ramirez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampshire College
	      West Street
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/549-4600

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Development of Scientific Thinking and Conceptions of Science in College
              Science Students

The project is a three-year comparative study of general
              (as opposed to field-specific) student outcomes of introductory college science
              instruction will be compared with those resulting from more traditional
              instruction.  Assessments will be conducted in a large state university,
              several private colleges, and several junior colleges.  A rich, mutimodal
              assessment methodology will be employed, including the following components:
              

1.  Interviews of students to assess their scientific epistemologies.  A
              modified version of the Nature of 
      Science Interview will be
              employed.
2.  On-line essay-style assessments of students' higher-order
              scientific inquiry and basic quantitative skills. 
     Two new instruments
              developed in previous research will be  combined and refined for this
              project.
3.  On-line student surveys covering student demographics, attitudes,
              and motivation.
4.  Classroom observation, including detailed coding of
              teaching method and content.  An observational      protocol developed in
              previous research will be employed.  
5.  Faculty interviews.

     The
              methodology will be deployed in three interrelated subprojects.  First, student
              outcomes will be assessed and correlated with instructional practices and
              demographic variables in 12 courses distributed factorially across the three
              types of institution, two levels of innovation, and two disciplinary areas
              (biology and earth/environmental science).  This project will produce a rich
              picture of higher-order cognition in today's college student and of the
              cognitive gains associated with various instructional practices. 

     
              Second, a sample of students from the 12 courses will be followed
              longitudinally for the duration of the project.  The persistence and further
              development of early gains in cognitive skills and epistemology will be
              assessed.  Students' choices of major field of study will be added to the
              demographic analyses of this data.  This project will produce rich data on the
              development of scientific epistemology and cognitive skills in contemporary
              college students, and it will allow the assessment of the hypothesis that early
              explosure to inquiry-oriented instruction triggers persistent cognitive and
              motivational change.
    
      Third, three intervention studies will be
              undertaken in which the researchers work with faculty members for courses that
              were assessed in the first year to redesign their courses to improve general
              student outcomes.  The course will then be reassessed.  The intervention
              projects concern the introductory chemistry curriculum at a large university,
              an interdisciplinary general science course at a small college, and geoscience
              course at a small collge.  This project will attempt to use early findings of
              the assessment research and cognitive-informed principles of instructional
              design to improve student gains in general inquiry and quantitative skills and
              in epistemological sophistication.
    
      Overall the project will
              produce  research findings and new assessment techniques that will have an
              impact on changing college science education to meet national standards for
              improving students' understanding of the nature of science and skills in
              scientific reasoning. 
 


