Title       : XYZ on a Chip: Magnetic Nanosensors on a Chip
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9980734

Award Number: 9980734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew N. Cleland cleland@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David D. Awschalom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9980734
Cleland

The PI's have recently developed methods by which deep
              sub-micron-size mechanical structures, with integrated displacement-inducing
              and displacement-sensing elements, can be fabricated and used as practical
              sensors.  The PI's wish to apply this technology to the development of
              high-frequency chip-based magnetic sensors, which in the ultimate limit will be
              sensitive to the behavior of individual magnetic moments.  The sensors they
              will develop will be based on nanometer-scale, radiofrequency cantilevers,
              fabricated from single-crystal GaAs heterostructure substrates.  GaAs is a
              piezoelectric material, allowing the use of both piezoresistive and
              piezoelectric strain sensing.  The magnetic signals will emanate either from
              magnetic samples embedded in the sensor geometry, or from the interaction of an
              magnetic tip integrated in the cantilever design, which is scanned over a
              fixed, magnetically active sample.  In the former geometry, they plan
              experiments to probe the physics of very small ferromagnetic and paramagnetic
              samples, and the mechanical detection of optically-induced electronic and
              nuclear magnetization.  The latter geometry will allow a number of microscopy
              applications, probing both surface and subsurface interactions.  Signals
              emanating from subsurface sources, such as electric currents on a buried
              heterostructure interface, would allow imaging on an otherwise topologically
              featureless sample.

These sensors should be able to probe time scales
              approximately four orders of magnitude shorter, and magnetic volume scales
              approximately five orders of magnitude smaller, than the present
              state-of-the-art in scanned magnetic force probes and fixed torque
              magnetometry.  These sensors should allow sensitivities of order one Bohr
              magneton at frequencies approaching 1 GHz.  The high frequencies and small
              physical size scales they will thereby be able to probe will engender a number
              of interesting engineering and science applications.
***








