Title       : Experimental Studies of the Liquid-Glass Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a9980370

Award Number: 9980370
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herman Z. Cummins Cummins@sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9980370
Cummins

This project investigates the dynamics of liquids in the
              vicinity of the liquid-glass transition and of solid glasses by laser light
              scattering spectroscopy. Recent theoretical and experimental research has shown
              that relaxation (or memory) functions in supercooled liquids exhibit complex
              behavior extending over many decades in frequency. Current research is directed
              at measuring these functions and their evolution with decreasing temperature.
              The data analysis will utilize an extension of mode coupling theory (MCT) that
              now includes orientational degrees of freedom. A systemic investigation of both
              polarized and depolarized Brillouin scattering in the molecular glass-former
              salol will be carried out to explore the extent to which relaxation functions
              can be determined reliably with this technique. They will be used to assess the
              compatibility of such results with MCT, which provides detailed predictions for
              density correlation functions and their evolution with temperature. In
              addition, the dynamics of glasses at lower temperatures where aging phenomena
              and two-time scaling behavior has been predicted theoretically and observed in
              computer simulations will be pursued.  The techniques developed will also be
              applied to new materials including elastomers, materials in which the liquid
              and glass phases are separated by an intermediate elastomer (or rubber)
              phase.
%%%
The liquid-glass transition is one of the oldest unresolved
              fundamental problems in condensed matter physics. It is also of major practical
              concern in the manufacture of various glasses including plastics and glassy
              metallic alloys. Current mode coupling theories will be tested to assess the
              extent to which relaxation (or memory) functions can be determined reliably
              with this technique. In addition, the dynamics of glasses at lower temperatures
              where aging phenomena and two-time scaling behavior has been predicted
              theoretically and observed in computer simulations will be pursued.  The
              techniques developed will also be applied to new materials including
              elastomers, materials in which the liquid and glass phases are separated by an
              intermediate elastomer (or rubber) phase.
This research project utilizes laser
              light-scattering techniques and will be conducted by primarily by graduate
              students and postdoctoral researchers. The program will include collaborations
              with other research groups both in the US and in Europe.
*** 



