Title       : A Comparative Psychology of School Subjects: Promoting Epistemological
               Sophistication in Elementary Science Learning through the Study of History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a9980536

Award Number: 9980536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $963181             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie R. Herrenkohl leslieh@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel S. Wineburg  (Principal Investigator former)
              Philip Bell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Reed Stevens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research addresses the fragmentation of the school day and the
              disconnectedness of science education within the elementary curriculum. The
              purpose of the study is to explore whether pedagogical activities can be
              implemented in elementary classrooms that foster connections across science and
              history that enhance the epistemological sophistication of students learning
              science. The project will involve a series of design experiments that involve
              providing students and teachers with intellectual tools to make explicit the
              similarities and differences of thinking in science and history. Because these
              similarities and differences are rarely explicit topics of classroom debate,
              students are typically left on their own to make connections from one subject
              to the next. As a result those least able to bring conceptual coherence to the
              school day-students-end up shouldering the burden of having to do so. 

The
              intellectual tools that this project will seek to foster are ones that science
              and history share. These are tools of discourse and argumentation. If the
              project is successful in helping students appropriate and adapt the discursive
              tools of argument related to core ideas of evidence and cause in science and
              history, it should achieve two goals: (i) students will learn to appreciate the
              continuity of intellectual work and its essential specificities by discipline
              and (ii) students will begin to treat intellectual resources as useful beyond
              narrow circumstances. Because the fragmentation of the school day is no less a
              challenge for elementary school teachers, the project will also research and
              support teachers as they make connections across science and history.
              

Building upon an established tradition of discipline-specific research on
              cognition and learning, this project will pursue a comparative psychology of
              school subjects as an empirical project organized around a set of educational
              interventions. The proposed extension of the discipline-specific approach is
              motivated by the fact that this approach fails to provide an account of how
              forms of inquiry in one discipline might shape intellectual endeavors in
              another-an issue of considerable importance given the fragmentation of the
              school day. The broad intellectual goal of this project is to build a theory of
              the whole that is greater than the sum of its parts. 

The series of design
              experiments will be conducted in fifth-grade classrooms in collaboration with
              teachers. The project will collect and analyze naturalistic discourse data and
              use software designed specifically for supporting argumentation during science
              learning. The broad educational goal of these design experiments is to offer an
              "existence proof" that cross-disciplinary structures can be cultivated that
              simultaneously do justice to the specifics of distinct disciplines while at the
              same time establishing appropriate intellectual connectedness. In so doing,
              students and teachers are likely to gain greater confidence in the value of
              school knowledge. By explicitly highlighting the similarities and differences
              between science and other subjects (in this case, history), students can learn
              early in their educational careers that science is a generative, connected, and
              relevant intellectual activity.


