Title       : Kinetics and Mechanism of Stable Free Radical Miniemulsion Polymerization
               (SFRMP) and Application to the Preparation of Nanostructured Latex Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2002     
File        : a9980208

Award Number: 9980208
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohamed S. El-Aasser mse0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              E D. Sudol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victoria L. Dimonie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Most polymeric materials with special properties have narrow molecular weight
              distributions (MWDs).  In this project the PIs will use a novel free radical
              initiator system with nitroxide stable radicals that will promote the synthesis
              of polymers with narrow MWDs.  Initial attempts to use this initiator system in
              emulsion polymerizations were unsuccessful, and problems were traced to large
              monomer droplets.  To overcome these problems, a miniemulsion polymerization
              technique was developed.  Monomer is first dispersed in the form of submicron
              droplets where nucleation and polymerization occur.  Polystyrene latexes with
              relatively high solids content and with particle sizes of 100 nm were
              successfully prepared, and narrow MWDs were obtained.  An understanding of the
              kinetics and mechanism of this unique emulsion polymerization process is one of
              the primary goals of this project.  New avenues for the synthesis of latex
              particles with a variety of covalently bonded functional groups (e. g.,
              carboxyl, amino, epoxy) at the particle surface will be explored.  The PIs will
              also take advantage of the "living" character of polymer chains in an
              investigation of the preparation of multi-layered colloidal particles with
              desired surface structures/properties by sequential monomer addition steps. 
              The properties of these materials will be measured and are expected to differ
              substantially from those being made by conventional polymerization processes.
