Title       : Quantitative Environmental Learning Project (QELP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1999  
File        : a9980740

Award Number: 9980740
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126611             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. Hull jhull@sccd.ctc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Greg A. Langkamp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Seattle Central Cmty Col
	      1701 Broadway
	      Seattle, WA  981222413    206/587-3800

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
There has not been widespread development and
              implementation of interdisciplinary programs for non-science majors.  The
              central goal of this project is to promote collaboration between teachers of
              mathematics and earth and environmental science, and encourage partial or
              comprehensive curricular revision linking these disciplines.  One reason for
              the absence of such course materials in colleges and high schools is that few
              appropriate classroom-ready resources have been available, particularly in
              environmental mathematics.  This project is addressing this need by generating
              resources that are modular, flexible, and easy to implement in diverse
              educational settings.  

This project is creating a series of classroom
              exercises designed to investigate topics in environmental and earth science
              using introductory college mathematics.  These educational materials draw
              heavily on real world data, promote student investigation and collaboration,
              and make use of existing classroom technologies.  The project is designing a
              website with links to data sets for approximately 15 environmental science and
              15 mathematics topics.  Each data set is packaged with background information
              and a short description of its utility for classroom use.  Each data set will
              be made available in a variety of formats to promote maximum accessibility by
              the community of users through different technologies.  The website also offers
              a "forum" devoted to sharing ideas and teaching methods related to these
              resources.  

The materials are being assessed by site testers in community
              colleges, high schools, and four-year colleges.  The project will be evaluated
              based on student learning gains.  In particular, the project will assess the
              impact on female students.  The project will conclude with a workshop for the
              site testers.  The workshop will focus on developing strategies for broad scale
              dissemination and implementation of these learning resources.    
