Title       : Development of Visualization-Enhanced Laboratory and Courseware for the
               Integrated Dynamic Systems Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9980775

Award Number: 9980775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91915              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chiang Shih shih@eng.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Hollis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Emmanuel G. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering-Mechanical (56)
The goal of this project is the establishment of a
              visualization-based multimedia studio for the enhancement of teaching of the
              Dynamic Systems course sequence in a mechanical engineering program.  The 
              project adapts the "seeing is believing" concept from the Air Force Academy and
              the University of Colorado and the use of virtual laboratories and pre-lab
              demonstrations from the Pennsylvania State University, the University of
              Pennsylvania, and Vanderbilt University.   Also adapted are the use of hands-on
              demonstrations from the University of Alberta,  the "learning through
              developing concept" from the University of Pittsburgh,  and the "learning
              through teaching" concept from North Carolina A&T University.   Visual
              presentation has always been one of the most effective approaches to teach
              engineering fundamentals because 'seeing is believing'. This is especially true
              for the study of dynamic systems since many concepts are either difficult to
              observe due to fast motion or to comprehend because they are counterintuitive.
              Therefore, image-processing techniques to produce courseware to capture these
              dynamic processes in digital video format are being used. This allows the
              students to observe in slow motion these dynamic events and, consequently,
              develops a better understanding of the physical concepts. The project is
              developing three levels of courseware delivery: active examples, demonstrations
              and a full-scaled dynamics laboratory to provide students with a hands-on
              learning experience. In addition the 'learning through teaching' concept is
              implemented by requiring students to produce, with faculty guidance, 
              visualization projects and presenting to their fellow students. Not only is
              this motivating their active participation but also teaching them advanced
              image processing technology and Web-authoring skills. A set of multimedia
              courseware is being produced under this project, which is being made available
              to the entire teaching community through the Internet. The final assessment of
              the project is being presented at an ASEE education conference and published in
              an ASEE journal.

