Title       : Adapting Proven Active Learning Techniques and Internet Technology to
               Undergraduate General Physics (1200 students)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a9980952

Award Number: 9980952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199918             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohan Kalelkar   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joe H. Pifer  (Principal Investigator former)
              Aram Z. Mekjian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugenia Etkina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) Large numbers of science students enroll in general physics that is
              taught in a conventional lecture/recitation format with high attrition,
              lukewarm evaluations, and faculty dissatisfaction with student learning. In
              contrast Rutgers' nationally recognized 120-student Extended General Physics,
              using cooperative learning workshops and other techniques, has shown remarkable
              success in reducing attrition, promoting enthusiasm, and raising the
              performance of at-risk students to levels comparable to that of the regular
              course. This project is adapting a number of cooperative learning techniques to
              general physics in a cost effective, sustainable fashion.

The project is
              making multiple changes. Topics covered are reduced; lectures are more
              interactive, emphasizing important concepts. Internet-based homework assignment
              and grading are used for a "Just in Time" quiz due prior to lecture (to
              encourage textbook reading) and pre-workshop homework. Recitations are replaced
              with workshops that utilize cooperative solution of more complex problems
              requiring synthesis of concepts and advanced problem solving skills. Labs are
              closely integrated with the course and shifted from a "recipe" format to a
              blend of explicit instructions and more generalized questions requiring
              students to make reasonable assumptions and design their own procedure. Section
              size is smaller. The project is adapting existing workshop and lab courseware
              to this new mode of instruction. Results will be disseminated in a regional
              conference on introductory physics.

Expected outcomes are enhanced,
              long-term learning and improved morale. Rutgers students are highly diverse,
              racially and ethnically. In the current project, material are treated in a
              coordinated fashion from several different points of view in order to reach
              students with different learning styles. This approach is expected particularly
              to enhance the performance of minority students and women and to encourage
              their entry into and persistence in science-based careers.



