Title       : Solvation in Supercritical Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2001    
File        : a9980383

Award Number: 9980383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348308             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Maroncelli mpm@chem.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9197,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Mark Maroncelli of Pennsylvania State University is supported by a
              grant from Experimental Physical Chemistry to perform experimental and
              theoretical studies on the nature of solvation of molecules in supercritical 
              fluids.  Currently in this subarea of ultrafast solution dynamics, there are
              anomalies in the results that may be interpreted as density inhomogeneities
              local to the solute (although this is still controversial) and, therefore,
              supercritical fluids are more complex than previously thought.  A simple
              nonreactive solute/supercritical solvent system will be quantitatively modeled
              and then simulations will be performed to view the molecular interactions from
              spatial and dynamic points of view.  Analytical models will be constructed that
              one could use to predict the solvation effects using well-known solute and
              solvent properties.  This model will be used to predict experimental
              observations on solute diffusion, relaxation and chemical reaction rates in
              supercritical fluids at various temperatures and pressures.  Professor
              Maroncelli will conduct experiments simultaneously with theoretical work.
              Anthracene in supercritical carbon dioxide is one chemical system being probed.
               

This work is especially timely because of the interest in supercritical
              solvents for a wide variety of applications such as environmentally benign
              processing and remediation as well as separations and extraction. 
              Supercritical solvation has extremely important industrial applications, and a
              more complete theoretical understanding of this phenomenon will have an
              important impact.



