Title       : KDI: A Knowledge Network for Biocomplexity: Building and Evaluating a
               Metadata-based Framework for Integrating Heterogeneous Scientific Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a9980154

Award Number: 9980154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2979000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Omer J. Reichman reichman@nceas.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Zak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Helly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Brunt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew B. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandy J. Andelman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Willig  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Robert B. Waide  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 8877      KDI-COMPETITION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1338,1346,8877,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9980154
Reichman

Complexity is an inherent property of biological systems
              that arises from direct and indirect interactions among the earth's physical,
              chemical, and biological components.  Biodiversity, the ecological
              manifestation of biocomplexity, includes the structural and functional
              attributes of dynamic systems that arise at all levels of biological
              organization, including individuals, populations, communities and ecosystems. 
              Catalyzed by societal concerns over the environment and facilitated by
              technology advances, scientists focused on complex ecological systems have
              generated an explosion of ecological data.  However, broad-scale and synthetic
              research is stymied because these data are largely inaccessible due to their
              spatial dispersion, extreme structural and semantic heterogeneity, and
              complexity.
Using investigations of the relationship between ecosystem
              function and biodiversity as a test bed, this project will integrate
              distributed and heterogeneous ecological information sources into a
              standards-based, open architecture, knowledge network.  The network will extend
              recent advances in metadata representation and provide conceptually
              sophisticated access to products from distributed, autonomous data
              repositories.  As part of the knowledge network, the PIs will create new tools
              for discovering retrieving, interpreting, integrating, and analyzing data that
              will allow testing of multiple formulations of hypotheses that pertain to
              biocomplexity. This project also will employ creative approaches to education,
              outreach, and training in informatics and biocomplexity for professionals and
              students.  

