Title       : Introducing Chemical Transport Phenomena in Soils into the Undergraduate Civil
               Engineering Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a9980866

Award Number: 9980866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62609              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ning Lu ninglu@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan P. Gosink  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Civil (54) The objective of this project is to establish a
              curriculum change in undergraduate civil engineering education at the Colorado
              School of Mines. The changes reflect a major shift in civil engineering
              practice by filling the gap between current textbooks and engineering practice.
              Over the last two decades, geotechnical engineering, a sub-discipline of civil
              engineering, has experienced radical changes. Traditional focus on the
              stability of structural foundations is now supplemented with environmental
              considerations such as soil contamination and subsurface waste isolation. As a
              result, today's geotechnical engineers must deal with soil chemistry in
              engineering practice, a subject typically excluded from formal undergraduate
              education. Furthermore, all of the soil mechanics textbooks currently in use at
              the undergraduate level in the United States cover little if any material on
              chemical transport phenomena in soils. It is, therefore, imperative to
              establish this major change in undergraduate curriculum.

In this project,
              fundamental concepts of chemical transport phenomena in soils are being
              introduced into the companion courses "Soil Mechanics" and "Soil Mechanics
              Laboratory" by adapting and implementing two experiments illustrating chemical
              transport phenomena in soils: Chemical Diffusion Test for demonstrating
              chemical diffusion phenomena (after Shackelford at Colorado State University),
              and Chemical Osmosis Test for demonstrating chemical potential as a viable
              driving force for fluid flow (after an apparatus used at the US Geological
              Survey, Louisiana State University, and others). The physical phenomena of
              chemical diffusion underlying the first experiment is one of the dominating
              transport mechanisms in soils. The chemical potential governing fluid flow
              depicted by the second experiment becomes very significant when fine-grained
              soils such as clays are encountered. Comprehension of both mechanisms is
              critical for the full understanding of today's environmental design issues such
              as contaminated soil remediation and underground waste containment. Currently,
              both Soil Mechanics and Soil Mechanics Laboratory are compulsory courses in all
              civil engineering curricula in the United States. Because at Colorado School of
              Mines over one hundred students (reflecting 20% of seniors at CSM) are required
              to take both courses annually, the course curriculum change and laboratory
              implementation will have broad impacts campus wide as well as lasting impacts
              on students' careers. This project provides a testing ground for the
              feasibility and necessity of the proposed curriculum reform nationwide. 


