Title       : Enhancing the Education Research Infrastructure to Conduct Large-Scale Studies
               of Policy and Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a9980573

Award Number: 9980573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2943923            (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Russell wrussell@aera.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald E. Sroufe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Educational Res Assn
	      
	      Washington, DC  20036    /   -

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a proposal for a system of activities intended to develop a strong
              research infrastructure in education.  It contains a program of research and
              training for conducting quantitative education policy and practice-related
              research using large-scale national and international data sets.  It would
              support a fellows program to federal agencies, doctoral fellows, a small grants
              competition, training in statistical data base analysis, and a series of
              special targeted meetings "think tanks" for special focused issues not
              addressed otherwise.  Researchers, mostly at beginning levels, would compete
              for these programs from fields of mathematics, sciences, education, sociology,
              economics, and psychology and often work across disciplines.  The Grants Board
              would meet 3 times a year to recommend grant awards and to monitor the grant
              activities.  The grant is managed by an office at University of California,
              Santa Barbara.

