Title       : Fostering Undergraduate Scientists through Inquiry and Research in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9980685

Award Number: 9980685
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124745             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Roese jroese@gw.lssu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Back  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara I. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Kirkpatrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lake Superior State Univ
	      650 West Easterday Ave.
	      Sault Ste. Marie, MI  49783    906/632-6841

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              iological Sciences (61)  The Department of Biology is instituting process-driven
              education, producing graduates who understand scientific fundamentals and can
              also function as scientists.  Specifically, the project is optimizing
              integration throughout the curriculum via environmentally oriented, pedagogical
              themes and cross-disciplinary biological concepts.  The project is also
              developing new investigative laboratory experiences and expanding opportunities
              for independent scholarly activities for undergraduates.  In particular,
              through a curricular-wide revision of the biology programs, research activities
              are being incorporated at each stage of the students' development.  A
              pedagogical philosophy conceived and developed by the BSCS and the Howard
              Hughes Medical Institute has been adapted by focusing on two educational
              themes.  First, Science as a Process, and second, Environmental Resources as
              Tools for Teaching Principles and Concepts.  Guided by these themes, we are
              using four cross-disciplinary concepts:  Biophysics (form and function), Self
              (homeostasis and energetics), Lineage (evolution and genetic continuity), and
              Interactions (inter-organismal and environmental associations) to integrate the
              curriculum.  The model for implementing inquiry-based laboratory activities is
              the Science Cornerstones Project initiated by Portland State University. 
              Students are developing general cognitive skills (query development, data
              analysis, problem solving) at the same time they master curricular-wide
              concepts and course-specific techniques.  Additionally, student-faculty
              research groups are being created that correspond to both centers of
              investigation and areas of concentration within the revised curriculum.  Each
              group consists of faculty mentors and students, from freshmen through seniors. 
              These groups meet weekly to discuss independent projects conducted by juniors
              and seniors in the group.  Under-class students are taking part in these
              discussions and serve as field/lab technicians.  Upper-class students are
              presenting the results of their independent research projects to the University
              community.  Assessment of project success and national dissemination of student
              projects via presentations and publications are being funded by the
              University.










