Title       : CreATE : Creative Audio Technology Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  2000   
File        : a9980674

Award Number: 9980674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24693              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Marchese marchese@rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erick J. Guerra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jess W. Everett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Schmalzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Rawlins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
Multidisciplinary, project-based education is a major
              hallmark of the engineering curriculum under development at the newly created
              College of Engineering at Rowan University. The common 8-semester clinic
              sequence is inherently multidisciplinary since it is taken simultaneously by
              all engineering students. However, multidisciplinary teams in industry are
              usually comprised of non-technical as well as technical personnel. To encourage
              the creation of multidisciplinary teams that contain both engineering and
              liberal arts majors, project topics must be created that appeal to a wide
              audience. Music is a topic that inherently unites college age students
              regardless of their major, ethnicity, religion or sex. The Creative Audio
              Technology Environment (CREATE) capitalizes on the unifying theme of music to
              encourage creation of diverse product development teams made up of engineers
              and music and other liberal arts students.

The Creative Audio Technology
              Environment (CREATE) at Rowan University is a multidisciplinary audio
              development studio and laboratory wherein students from three different
              colleges within the university collaborate on innovative audio design projects.
              Housed in a dedicated facility within the Department of Music but shared
              equally among students and faculty from engineering, music and physics, CREATE
              contains a dedicated 24-channel mixing console and audio recording equipment
              consisting of an 8-track ADAT, DAT, analog cassette and CD recorders. The
              development studio also contains microphones, audio effects processors,
              amplifiers, monitors and an HP spectrum analyzer.

The objectives of the
              Creative Audio Technology Environment at Rowan University are to: 1. Provide
              students with a state-of-the-art audio development studio to encourage rapid
              product development of audio related products, 2. Introduce engineering
              students to the importance of considering the customer (e.g., music students)
              to develop a quality product that meets desired customer attributes, 3. Promote
              the profession of engineering, not only to engineering students, but to liberal
              and fine arts students as well, by allowing a diverse student body to take part
              in a product development endeavor with music as the underlying theme, a theme
              which inherently unites students and faculty alike, 4. Provide a laboratory to
              teach the scientific principles of music and sound to a multidisciplinary
              audience.

The proposed CreATE laboratory is an adaptation and implementation
              of several existing courses and laboratory programs throughout the country
              (Miami, WPI, Georgia Tech and KSU) which have used audio related projects as a
              means of presenting principles of electronics, sound and vibration, and product
              development.  The major program example from which ideas and materials are
              adapted is that of Kansas State University.  The CreATE laboratory combines the
              best aspects of this program (and others) and enhances the multidisciplinary
              component by ensuring that there is an active, regular interaction with
              students and faculty in the music department.



