Title       : Hardware and Software Co-Design for High Performance Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2001      
File        : a9554561

Award Number: 9554561
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerzy W. Rozenblit jr@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9554561  Rozenblit  Hardware/Software Codesign is  receiving increasingly
              widespread  attention. Codesign provides  methods and techniques which can 
              effectively and efficiently manage  the diversity and complexity of 
              applications employing embedded  systems. They result in a decreased 
              development cost of complex systems  and their time to market  deployment.  Our
              proposed research targets are:  a)implementation independent  specification and
              modeling of  embedded systems, b) associated  partitioning, based on iterative 
              refinement, c) construction of  modules for mixed software/hardware 
              components, and d) component  mapping to target implementations.  These key
              target areas will form  the foundation for the development  of a graduate
              research training  program.  The baseline for the proposed  effort is our
              internationally  recognized research in the areas of  codesign, computer
              systems  engineering, design and synthesis  of VLSI systems, and advanced work 
              in multi-chip module (MCM)  partitioning and behavioral  synthesis.  Technical
              Innovation:  In the  proposes research, concepts,  techniques and tools for the
              design  of high-performance, low-cost  systems that consists of hardware  and
              software components will be  developed that transform an  implementation
              independent, model-  based description into a working  prototype.  Structural
              Innovation:  Joint work  and continuous interaction with  local (State of
              Arizona) industrial  partners, international  collaborators, student exchanges,
               and industrial mentorship.  The  development of a state-of-the-art  graduate
              program in codesign  providing a broad based, academic  and industrial
              experience and thus  training future science and  engineering leaders.
