Title       : Determinants of Biodiversity, Social and Economic Patterns in Montane Eco–ystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1995      
File        : a9554501

Award Number: 9554501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce Reiss                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack A. Stanford stanford@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony D. Barnosky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9554501  Stanford  A pilot project to initiate multidisciplinary research needed
              to  determine links and conflicts between long-term economic growth and 
              sustainability of ecosystem integrity is proposed. The vehicle to  accomplish
              this end is an experimental collaboration of some 80  scientists called the
              Consortium for Study of North Temperate  Montane Ecosystems. The group is
              composed of scholars at The  University of Montana, Montana State University
              and participating  institutions. The Consortium will be advised by members of
              relevant  land management agencies and informed citizens. Existing and  new
              basic research efforts will coalesce under the Consortium  umbrella around a
              common, integrativeresearch theme.  Examination  of biodiversity patterns and
              processes, including natural, social  and economic attributes in a regional
              ecosystem context, is the  unifying principle.    Work will be focused on the
              Crown of the Continent (CCE) and  Greater Yellowstone Ecosystems (GYE). The GYE
              and CCE represent the  largest, relatively intact ecosystems in temperate
              latitudes of  the world. They are among the last vestiges of "natural" Montana 
              ecosystems and encompass mountains and river valleys where  altitudinal,
              climatic and associated gradients lead to a diverse  assemblage of animals,
              plants and human communities. Both  ecosystems are rapidly becoming affected by
              human influences at  local to regional scales as a consequence of shifting
              demographic  and economic patterns. The biodiversity unifier will be used to 
              guide assembly, analysis and modeling of massive regional data  bases required
              to accomplish an integrated synthesis that, in the  long run, will offer
              predictions about future conditions as a  consequence of current practices and
              policies. The primary goal of  the Consortium is to sufficiently understand
              linkages and conflicts  between natural and social components to begin to
              predict the long-  and short-term consequences of environmental and social
              change  within and between these two  enormously valuable ecosystems.
