Title       : Graduate Trainees Program in Optical Science and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9554521

Award Number: 9554521
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abraham Ulman aulman@duke.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9554521  Ulman  We are proposing a Graduate  Research Traineeship Program in
              Optical Science and  Engineering, in two strategic areas: materials for 
              photonics, and for information  storage applications. The Office of Science and
              Technology  Policy has emphasized that materials synthesis and  processing are
              critical technologies. Also, the U.S. Army  and Air Force are supporting 
              research in optical science and technology, especially in  the two strategic
              areas proposed here. The trainees in this  program will  develop new materials
              for photonics applications and for  digital image storage. Their research will
              be carried out at  four levels: *  Design and investigations of molecules;*
              Design and  investigations of polymers;* Processing of polymers;* Device 
              fabrication; Students will be  involved in all research facets,  and will
              interact with a number of faculty, and enjoy a  stimulating interdisciplinary
              research environment.  Theoretical work will  be carried out in collaboration 
              with Professor Shaul Mukamel at the University of Rochester.  Investigations of
              Langmuir-Blodgett films will be carried  out at the  NSF Center for
              Photoinduced  Electron Transfer, at the  University of Rochester, in
              collaboration with Professor  David Whitten. The trainees in this  program
              could enter a PhD track in the Chemistry or Chemical  Engineering Department at
              the Polytechnic University, and  would  be drawn from Chemistry and/or Chemical
              Engineering. The  goals of  the nonlinear optics part of  program have been
              defined together with Dr. David Williams  of Eastman Kodak Company, and
              training opportunities for the  trainees at Kodak Research Laboratories, 
              through summer employment, are now being discussed. Also  included in  this
              program are high school and undergraduate mentoring.  Plans for recruiting
              trainees will emphasize  underrepresented groups. Five  students would be
              recruited for  these traineeships and would  complete their PhD programs in 5 
              years or less.
