Title       : Mount Holyoke's Laboratory in Mathematical Experimentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1995   
File        : a9554646

Award Number: 9554646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donal O'Shea doshea@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harriet S. Pollatsek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Starting in each of June of 1996 and 1997, this Undergraduate  Faculty
              Enhancement project will bring 32 faculty members from  other schools to Mount
              Holyoke College for a one week workshop and  to a two day follow-up meeting
              preceding the joint mathematical  meetings 18 months later. The project will
              disseminate materials  and methods from the course, Laboratory in Mathematical 
              Experimentation, which was developed at Mount Holyoke with NSF  support. 
              Exploration of the course materials will introduce  participants to the
              interactive, conversational mode of mathematics  teaching that the course
              requires.  Participants will also explore  the opportunities the laboratory
              course affords for dramatically  restructuring the undergraduate mathematics
              major in ways that  enhance student understandine.  The June workshops will
              have five  elements.  First, participants will model the learning experience 
              of students in the Lab by actually carrying out computer  experimentation. 
              Second, the workshop instructors will model the  role of the teacher as coach. 
              Third, by looking at student papers,  participants will both address issues of
              teaching and evaluating  writing and also have a means of examining some of the
              ways  students' thinking develops.  Fourth, participants will have an 
              opportunity to talk with students who have taken the Lab.  Finally, 
              participants will discuss their observations and experiences and  compare them
              among themselves.  These elements will allow  participants not only to deepen
              their understanding of the  mathematical and pedagogical issues but also to
              begin to imagine  themselves teaching in new ways.  The January follow-up
              workshop  will be devoted to implementation issues, evaluation, and a study  of
              strategies for opening the mathematics curriculum.
