Title       : Concurrent Engineering and Design for Manufacture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1996  
File        : a9554740

Award Number: 9554740
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sammy G. Shina shinas@woods.uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This program is intended to discuss the latest developments and  progress in the
              fields of product realization.  These include the  latest methodologies, tools,
              techniques, analysis software and case  studies from American industry as well
              as the most current research  topics, teaching methods, laboratory exercises,
              student projects,  problems sets and teaching aides for engineering
              undergraduate  courses.  The material presented can be taught directly in
              product  realization courses or be incorporated as modules in manufacturing 
              engineering centered curricula.  Product realization is becoming an  important
              element of global competitiveness in terms of achieving  high quality and low
              cost products at the shortest time to market.   Several tools and methods have
              become widely used for product  realization and will be presented and discussed
              with classroom  notes and lectures, software demonstrations and laboratory 
              exercises such as:  quality function deployment (QFD) or customer  driven
              engineering for focusing the product users' input into the  design
              specifications of new products;  reducing cost through  analyzing product
              design for production and assembly (both manual  and robotic) by comparing and
              rating alternative designs and using  the manufacturing process capability for
              setting the tolerance  limits and quality level for new products.  Several case
              studies  developed by world class companies to illustrate product  realization
              will be presented.  Leading product realization  advocates from these companies
              will share their expertise with the  participants through open forum and plant
              tours.  This program will  increase undergraduate faculty experience with these
              concepts and  encourage them to develop courses, capstone projects and 
              incorporate modules of product realization into their curriculum.
