Title       : Developmental Biology CD-ROM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1996  
File        : a9554897

Award Number: 9554897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott F. Gilbert sgilber1@swarthmore.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Swarthmore College
	      500 College Avenue
	      Swarthmore, PA  19081    610/328-8000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We will be constructing a CD-ROM entitled A Multimedia  Companion to
              Developmental Biology.  This CD-ROM is  planned  to include those things that
              cannot be contained in a  textbook: moving images of animal development (along 
              with  animations, voice-overs, and labeled photographs to assist  the learner),
              research papers that enable each learner  access to primary literature,
              interactive animations that  enable one to understand complex experimental
              protocols,  interactive programs that enable one to model development by 
              changing the parameters of cell adhesion, migration,  etc.,  interviews with
              researchers whose work helped frame the  discipline, papers in the history of
              embryology, and  position papers debating issues of ethical concern to 
              contemporary developmental biologists (sex selection, gene  therapy, etc.)
              These presentations will be connected to one  another through three
              hierarchical indices and through  hypertext.  We plan to create different
              levels of  complexity, from entry level (middle-school) through  graduate
              levels,  in several areas.  While less advanced  students can gain much from
              watching the videos and  animations, more  advanced students can now plan their
              own  paths through the various presentations.  We hope to develop  Version 1.0 
              of this project over the sabbatical leave of  the Principal Investigator and to
              sell the resulting disc  "at cost." It will be  multiplatform and could be used
              with  any textbook in developmental biology or embryology (not  necessarily the
              one  authored by the P.I.) Version 1.0 would  contain sections on
              fertilization, embryonic cleavage,  gastrulation, cell  specification,
              induction, developmental  neurobiology, sex determination, metamorphosis, 
              gametogenesis, and  differential gene expression.
