Title       : A Digital Library for Middle Schools: Supporting Authentic Science
               Investigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a9554205

Award Number: 9554205
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1511725            (Estimated)
Investigator: Elliot M. Soloway soloway@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Marx  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wendy P. Lougee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph S. Krajcik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roberta M. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen Drabenstott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phyllis Blumenfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Birmingham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Soloway  95-54205    The Middle Years Digital Library (MYDL) will be an
              extension of the University of Michigan's Digital Library (UMDL), an
              NSF/NASA/ARPA funded project.  MYDL, via the Internet, will provide ready
              access to a broad range of information resources, from traditional books,
              magazines, and journals, to data sets, scientific instruments, computer-based
              research tools, and collaboration with peers and mentors.  In addition, MYDL
              will feature tools to support students publishing their findings and tools to
              support teachers collaborating with fellow teachers.  To insure accessibility,
              MYDL interfaces will be developed using Learner-Centered Design methodology. 
              MYDL brings together, for the first time, a critical mass of diverse resource
              "in one place" with an accessible interface.    MYDL is also a complementary,
              comprehensive plan of action to sustain innovation.  Technology per se is not
              enough.  To sustain innovation requires considerable resources and
              resourcefulness.  We propose working with participating schools to:  (1)
              develop, deploy, and redesign model curriculum through investigatory projects
              that make integral use of the MYDL,  (2) integrate into the classroom
              instructional practices that support investigation-based science learning (3)
              work with teachers to change their attitudes, beliefs, and practices from a
              more traditional didactic pedagogy to a more investigatory-based pedagogy, and
              (4) evaluate, on an ongoing basis MYDL and its impact on teaching and learning.
                 The UM Collaboratory for Science Education has significant experience in
              creating thriving, technology-based education innovations.  We will leverage
              these experiences to build the Middle Years Digital Library.  We will extend
              UMDL, thus, only incremental support is needed to tailor MYDL to middle-school
              students and increase the kinds of "collections" that are included.  MYDL will
              provide a clear demonstration of the viability of electronic libraries and the
              extent to which such libraries will play a pivota l role in affording schools
              the opportunity to change and offer students and teachers the opportunity to
              develop a working science literacy.
