Title       : Improving Introductory Economics Education by Intergrating the Latest
               Scholarship on Women and People of Color
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1996  
File        : a9554732

Award Number: 9554732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan F. Feiner sffein@usm.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Maine
	      96 Falmouth St
	      Portland, ME  041049300    207/780-4411

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Over the two years of this proposed faculty development project  more than 400
              undergraduate economics professors will:  participate  in hands-on activities
              focussing on methods for integrating the new  scholarship on the economics of
              women and minorities into  introductory economics courses; revise all aspects
              of their courses  to reflect the teaching and assessment of student learning of
              this  scholarship; and disseminate the results of these activities. These 
              faculty development activities are informed by, grow out of, and  adapt the
              very successful NSF funded programs we've held in the  summers of 1993, 1994,
              and 1995 (June 15 - 20, Wellesley College).   This proposed project will extend
              the results of prior NSF support  to ensure the long term impact of these
              innovations in  undergraduate economics education.  During the three years of 
              proposed activities Project Director Feiner will work with Project  co-PIs to
              plan, advertise and conduct one, 1.5 day and four, 2.5  day faculty development
              conferences focussing on integrating race  and gender into introductory
              economics (Two 2.5 day conferences are  scheduled in the first year, two 2.5
              day conferences and one 1.5  day conference are scheduled in the second year.) 
              The 1.5 day  program will run immediately prior to regional Eastern Economics 
              Association meetings in March of 1997, the 2.5 day programs will  target
              various sub-sets of the profession including economics  faculty teaching at;
              women's colleges, historically black colleges,  colleges with substantial
              Hispanic/Native American enrollments,  community colleges serving
              underrepresented populations, and new  minted Ph.D.'s.  Each program (excluding
              the last) will accommodate  40 participants who will work in small groups to
              develop:  ways to  use the work of prior NSF conferences in their classrooms; 
              strategies for teaching economic controversies in a manner which  facilitates
              students' critical thinking capacities; the pedagogies  associated with
              diversity and the classroom clima te; and  instructional materials for the
              range of course activities which  incorporate race, gender and active learning.
               Participants will  critique and refine these modifications and develop
              techniques to  assess the impact of these changes on student outcomes.  The
              last  program is the Capstone Conference and is planned for 250  participants. 
              It will be held at the University of Southern Maine  in October 1997.  Upon
              return to his/her home institution faculty  will teach their redesigned
              courses, and assess the project's  impact on student outcomes and faculty
              intellectual growth.   Dissemination occurs as participants:  share project
              results with  department colleagues; meet at the Allied Social Science 
              Association Meetings (the annual meeting of the AEA); present  papers at
              regularly scheduled professional meetings; and  participate in panels or
              workshops during the Capstone conference  scheduled for October, 1997 open to
              all interested members of the  economics profession.  Conference proceedings
              will be published in  an edited volume.  This project has the potential to
              significantly  affect the teaching of economics while greatly increasing the 
              numbers of minority and female undergraduates pursuing economics.
