Title       : Development of Course Materials to Promote Collaborative Learning through
               Interactive Animation for Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9554949

Award Number: 9554949
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81346              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Sher sherd@sunynassau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas S. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Glass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip Cheifetz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne M. Trabucco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nassau Community College
	      Stewart Avenue
	      Garden City, NY  115304533    306/222-7500

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing materials that enhance the  Harvard approach
              curriculum and that of other reform  projects for precalculus and calculus with
              techniques  borrowed from Sher and Wilkinson's adaptation of Treisman's 
              approach. The approach takes advantage of, but does not  require, computer
              workstations designed for group  interaction with interactive animated
              demonstrations of  ideas in mathematics and computer science. These group 
              stations, funded under the Instrumentation and Laboratory  Improvement Program,
              are specifically designated for use by  groups of three students.  Groups work
              as a team to solve  problems posed by the instructor. The group stations are 
              also available after class for project preparation. The  materials being
              developed illustrates precalculus and  calculus concepts. The project is
              evaluating this approach  by measuring retention rates, periodically surveying
              the  students to measure changes in attitudes, and measuring the  effect of
              laboratory courses on student grades. A variety of  conference presentations
              and journal publications describe  the results from our project. A laboratory
              manual and other  materials are being produced for commercial publication as 
              well as via the World Wide Web. The project principals are  conducting a
              week-long course for community college and high  school teachers to disseminate
              these ideas. Queensborough  and Borough of Manhattan Community Colleges are
              serving as  beta test sites.
