Title       : Interdisciplinary Research and Education in Hydrology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a9554527

Award Number: 9554527
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shafiqul Islam shafiqul.islam@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9554527  Islam  An interdisciplinary research traineeship program is
              proposed to educate a new generation of hydrologists.  The proposed traineeship
              program includes substantial institutional matching and develops a balanced
              instructional and research environment to emphasize the interdisciplinary
              nature of contemporary hydrologic education.  Principal goals of this program
              are:  * To design an interdisciplinary PhD program that creates a
              self-sustaining infrastructure in hydrology education, and continues beyond the
              duration of the GRT award.  * To create an individualized student curriculum
              that provides a formal training in interdisciplinary areas of relevance to the
              hydrologic sciences;  * To guide students through a significant exploratory
              research experience in the hydrologic sciences, emphasizing independent and
              group study on emerging hydrologic issues;  * To provide opportunities for
              supervised teaching experiences that encompass skill development, student
              contact, classroom evaluations and interdisciplinary hydrology curriculum
              development.  Our proposed traineeship program is distinguished by several
              structural and academic innovations.  Notable among these are:  the use of GRT
              funds to support an initial 20 month residency period to allow broad academic
              training and exploratory research; participation in an integrated teaching
              experience; the formation of an interdisciplinary hydrologic sciences program
              committee structure that encourages and fosters interactions among diverse
              groups of students and faculty; development of an interdisciplinary hydrology
              curriculum with a common set of degree requirements; proactive strategies to
              attract and retain underrepresented students including formal linkages with two
              undergraduate feeder institutions; and use of cost-of-education allowances and
              University matching to support mini-sabbatical leaves to national labs, a
              hydrologic distinguished lecture series, and participation at national
              professional conferences.  The impact of this trainee ship will extend far
              beyond preparing a new generation of hydrologists over the next five years. 
              Existing academic linkages will be strengthened and new ones will be formed by
              the creation of a self-sustaining graduate program that mirrors the
              interdisciplinary nature of contemporary hydrologic issues.
