Title       : Development of Software to Assist Teaching Petrography to Undergraduate Earth
               Science Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1999  
File        : a9554903

Award Number: 9554903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104808             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric H. Christiansen eric christiansen@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An important difficulty faced by undergraduate Earth Science  students is
              learning how to identify minerals in thin sections of  rocks under a
              microscope. We will develop computer software  (PetroDisc) to help students
              understand minerals and textures in  thin sections of igneous, metamorphic, and
              sedimentary rocks. The  application will be an interactive tutorial that draws 
              photomicrographs from a CD-ROM or laser disk. Multiple images  (plane and cross
              polarized light, stage rotation, reflected light,  interference figures,
              cathodoluminescence, etc.) of the same thin  section will simulate a
              petrographic microscope and illustrate the  fundamental properties of minerals
              in thin sections. Each mineral  grain on the image will be keyed to a database
              of mineral names,  optical, compositional, and x-ray properties. Students will
              be  able to interactively explore a series of thin sections,  amplifying a
              laboratory instructor's effectiveness. Extended work  with this program should
              increase their ability to identify  minerals and manipulate various kinds of
              petrographic data  (including x-ray maps, back scattered electron images, modal
               abundances, and crystal size distributions). PetroDisc will be  constructed by
              a small team of geologists and an instructional  programmer. Early versions of
              the program will be evaluated in  laboratory classes, by other petrologists,
              and by making a  prototype available for use and comment on the Internet before
              it  is released. PetroDisc will be supplied by BYU to Earth Science 
              departments at colleges and universities for minimal cost.
