Title       : Interdisciplinary Minor in Global Sustainability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2000      
File        : a9554965

Award Number: 9554965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Bryant pjbryant@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Bowler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Burton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Reeburgh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this three-year project is the development of a curriculum
              including six new courses, leading to an  Interdisciplinary Minor in Global
              Sustainability at the University of California, Irvine.  The new courses will 
              integrate and address global sustainability themes across disciplines and will
              be developed and taught by faculty from  five of UCI's schools: Biological
              Sciences, Engineering, Physical Sciences, Social Sciences, and Social Ecology. 
               The Minor will be open to undergraduates in all disciplines and will begin in
              the sophomore year with a sequence  of three core courses.  The first course,
              The Physical Environment, will deal with the origin of the earth, the  dynamics
              of its oceans, lands and atmosphere, and the impact of human uses on the
              physical world.  The second  course, The Biological Environment, will examine
              the evolution of biological diversity and ecosystems, and the  impacts on
              biological diversity of human encroachment, exploitation, and pollution.  The
              third course, People,  Cultures, and Environmental Sustainability, will cover
              the causes and consequences of human population growth,  natural resource
              management, environmental law, and environmental ethics.  In the junior year,
              students will select  from a series of elective courses in relevant
              disciplines.  In the senior year students will attend a seminar series, 
              complete a research project, and present the results of their projects at an
              undergraduate research symposium.  AU  courses will include relevant field
              experiences making use of UC's Natural Reserve System as well as other sites.  
              The overall curricular structure and proposed courses have already been
              approved by appropriate UCI Academic  Senate committees.  Ongoing evaluation
              will consist of formative and ?tive components using data from student  surveys
              and interviews.  Electronic communication will be used for data acquisition by
              faculty and students, for  communication between students, faculty and the
              outside, and for dissemination of the pro gram to other institutions.  
              Additional dissemination activities will include presentations at national
              conferences for environmental educators,  a journal article, and videotapes of
              seminars given by guest lecturers.
