Title       : Long-Term Field Studies for Undergraduate Education: A Snapshot in Time
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1997  
File        : a9554807

Award Number: 9554807
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Gibson dgibson@plant.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Farrel A. Olsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beth A. Middleton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald W. Saunders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A  common  feature of ecological field and laboratory courses  at  the  
              undergraduate   level  is  a  lack  of  appropriate   field  experiences.  In
              particular, field experiences for the most  part  consists  of mensurative
              habitat studies, e.g., making  lists  of  species   abundances  from 
              contrasting  areas.   However,   much  ecological  research  and some of the
              most  important  conceptual  advances  have arisen from manipulative
              experiments  designed  to  meet rigorous statistical standards of replication,
              dispersion of  treatments,  and avoiding the pitfalls of pseudoreplication.  
              To  address  this  dichotomy  between  teaching  and  research,   the 
              establishment  of  a  long-term  field  experiment   to   improve 
              undergraduate  teaching in ecology and environmental  science  is  proposed. 
              The long-term experiment is designed to address topics  of  ecological
              succession contrasting the effects of  mowing  and  fertilizer  treatments  in 
              upland  and  lowland  abandoned  farm  fields.    Elementary,  Middle  and High
              school pre-service  and  in-service  teachers,  and  students  taking  courses 
              in  Southern  Illinois  University's Environmental Studies Program (as a minor
              for a wide  range   of  major  degree  programs)  will  participate  in   the 
              establishment, running, data collection and analysis of the field  experiment. 
               The student's participating in the experience  will  assess  the  advantages,
              disadvantages and limitations  of  field  experiments,  and  be  prepared to
              integrate  research  data  and  results  in  an  understanding  of  ecology.  
              Because  of   this  intervention,  students'  will  better  appreciate  the 
              role  of  scientific  research  in understanding  the  natural  world.   An 
              important corollary is that the students will be better  able  to  describe 
              and  articulate  one of the most  important  ecological  processes,  i.e., 
              succession.   The  improvements  to  the  SIUC  undergraduate   curriculum  
              that  will   occur   following   the  incorpora tion  of  the field experiment
              into appropriate  courses  will   be   a   model   for   other   programs  
              nationally   and  internationally.
