Title       : Reforming Education Through Science and Design: A PhD Training Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a9554564

Award Number: 9554564
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $675000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea A. diSessa disessa@soe.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Ranney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9554564  DiSessa  Building on two well-developed and respected PhD training 
              programs in mathematics and science education research, we  propose a new
              program combining the best features of  cumulative , scientific research  and
              educational innovation. This program will create  researchers who expand our
              understanding of science and  mathematics education while contributing
              practical solutions  to problems. The Graduate Traineeship area for this
              proposal  is: Research and Technology for the Teaching and Learning of  Science
              and Mathematics targeted subdiscipline of Education  and Human Resources.
              Current  training in education is polarized between abstract, basic  principles
               and ad hoc innovation. We seek  instead to train students capable  of (a)
              developing scientific principles grounded in practice  and (b) developing
              principled  educational innovations by  conducting design experiments in
              diverse, authentic  settings. We  call our approach the "Reforming Education
              through Science  and  Design" (RE:SD) paradigm. RE:SD requires training in new 
              inquiry methods that promote equity and capitalize on  authentic research
              contexts. Effective use of modern  technology, including computers and
              telecommunications,  requires new, creative scientific principles, but  it also
              enables new methodologies  of investigation and avenues of practical impact.
              Innovative  components of the proposed training include (a)  multidisciplinary
              collaboration between faculty in physical,  mathematical, cognitive,  and
              instructional sciences; (b) an intense, apprenticeship-  style  learning
              environment; (c) a proven, comprehensive commitment  to equity; and (d) success
              in preparing  students for the full range of relevant careers including 
              university faculty, policy makers, curriculum reformers, and  software
              designers.
