Title       : Powerful Ideas in Physical Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1998  
File        : a9554625

Award Number: 9554625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $821804             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald F. Kirwan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Poel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren W. Hein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jack G. Hehn  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc of Phys Tchrs
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403845    301/209-3300

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With the ultimate goal of improving elementary teachers' concept  understanding
              of physical science and their physical science  teaching skills, the objective
              of this proposed project is:  To  encourage and enable colleges and
              universities to provide physical  science courses which are more appropriate to
              the entry-level  background of students, which better honor the learning
              process,  and which are more attuned to the exit-level needs of future 
              elementary school science teachers.  To accomplish this stated  objective, the
              AAPT proposes to provide a carefully orchestrated  program of awareness and
              training sessions and follow-up support  activities for physics and physical
              science faculty using Powerful  Ideas in Physical Science:  A Model Course
              (NSF#TPE-9154024) which  is based on well-documented research findings about
              science  learning.  It features a hands-on constructivist approach,  represents
              a "less is more" philosophy, includes content selected  specifically for the
              needs of future primary teachers, and uses  both traditional and alternative
              assessments.  The model represents  the cumulative efforts of a group of
              physics, chemistry and science  education faculty representing twelve different
              colleges and  universities.  It has been intentionally designed to be 
              transportable to a variety of institutions.  This proposal requests  funding
              for a three-year program to train and support physical  science faculty from
              colleges and universities across the nation to  use the model to reform their
              physical science courses for  prospective elementary teachers. Three levels of
              disseminatimn are  proposed:  1) Awareness Workshops, 2) Professional
              Development  Seminars, and 3) Summer Faculty Enhancement Programs.  Technical 
              assistance visits to participants' institutions will help assure  the quality
              of reform efforts.  Continuing follow-up support for  program participants will
              be provided through an electronic  bulletin board, articles and information in
              AAPT publications, and  special session s at meetings of the AAPT.
