Title       : Collaborative Graduate Research Traineeships in Hydrology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9554573

Award Number: 9554573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry J. Simpson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9554573  Simpson  This proposal requests support for  five (5) Graduate
              Traineeships in  Hydrology, to be supervised in a  collaborative effort by the 
              Departments of Earth and  Environmental Science at Rensselaer  Polytechnic
              Institute and  Geological Sciences at Columbia  University.  Faculty from the 
              Schools of Engineering at both RPI  and CU would also participate as  potential
              dissertation advisors.  The strengths of the two  institutions related to
              hydrology  are generally quite distinct, with  RPI emphasizing local and
              regional  surface and groundwater field  areas, including a considerable  water
              management component imparted  by Engineering School faculty  participation,
              with CU, though  Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory  and the Goddard Institute of
              Space  Studies (NASA), emphasizes  interdisciplinary elements of  number of
              fields, including  paleoclimatology, atmospheric  science, oceanography, 
              dendrochronology and tracer  geochemistry applications to the  past several
              years that offer  important new tools for  investigations of surface and 
              groundwaters through measurements  of natural tracer substances  including
              radionuclides, stable  isotopes and chemicals such as  freons.  Students would
              matriculate  at one of the tow institutions, and  meet PhD requirements
              applicable  there.  Integration would be  accomplished by having each student 
              spend at least one semester in  residence at the collaborating  department,
              attending courses or  doing field and laboratory work  during their first three
              years.  One member of the academic advisor  team for each student would also be
               derived from the collaborating  institution.  Several ongoing joint  research
              efforts between the two  institutions on surface and  groundwaters in the NYC
              and Hudson  River valley areas would be  expanded.
