Title       : St. Louis School District Urban Systemic Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a9554490

Award Number: 9554490
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Thomasena H. Woods                      
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14325173           (Estimated)
Investigator: Cleveland Hammonds chammond@dtd1.slps.k12.mo.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Mahan  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Brd of Ed Cty of St. Louis
	      801 North 11th
	      St. Louis, MO  631011401    314/345-2500

NSF Program : 7358      URBAN SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The St. Louis Urban Systemic Initiative (SLUSI) promotes a large scale
              comprehensive strategy to transform current thought and educational practice to
              bring all of the District's students to educational excellence in mathematics,
              science and technology. The Initiative will accomplish this task by focusing on
              Professional Development, Curriculum/Instruction and Assessment, Student
              Support Systems and Structural, Organizational Process Reform. It is
              anticipated that reform in these four areas will result in improved student
              achievement. Key stakeholders from the St. Louis Collaborative, the Mayor's
              office and the St. Louis community will forge relationships in support of
              mathematics, science and technology reform within St. Louis Schools and the
              School District of University City.    Consistent with the National Science
              Foundation's directives and recommendations for urban systemic reform, the
              SLUSI has at its core a vision that seeks to: (1) improve the scientific and
              mathematical literacy of all St. Louis students; (2) provide the mathematics
              and science fundamentals which will permit all students to participate fully in
              a technological society; and (3) enable a significantly greater number of these
              students to pursue careers in mathematics, science engineering and technology.
              The Initiative builds upon existing community involvement, exemplary
              Comprehensive Regional Centers for Minorities (CRCM) activities, and a
              leadership structure that has secured the endorsements of key political leaders
              of the City of St. Louis and University City. The vision of the SLUSI is to
              improve the achievement of all students by providing high quality mathematics
              and science instruction through state-of-the-art pedagogical and instructional
              strategies supported by organizational reforms.
