Title       : Development and Implementation of a Course in "Information Engineering Across
               the Professions" Accessible to All Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9554855

Award Number: 9554855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136270             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Cyganski cyganski@ece.wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Orr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard F. Vaz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the proposed effort is to develop and implement  a course in
              "Information Engineering Across the Professions"  which will be accessible to
              and relevant for students from  virtually any discipline.  This proposal
              addresses a need  that has arisen from the impact that information technology 
              is making on all professions, technical and non-technical.  This course will
              provide students with knowledge regarding  such concepts as the nature of
              information, bandwidth, types  of transmission and storage media, and the
              fundamental  principles governing information technology.  Through the  use of
              laboratory project-based "personality modules"  customized to address different
              student disciplinary  interests and backgrounds (e.g., mechanical engineering,
              the  sciences, the arts, management), the course will expose  students to
              professional applications of these technologies.    Given the range of topics,
              and the innovative means of  course delivery, it is reasonable to expect that
              the  proposed course will prove attractive to a significant  number of students
              (including women and under-represented  groups) who are not typically drawn to
              engineering.    The specific result of this project will be one course, 
              offered twice per academic year.  A substantial evaluation  plan has been
              developed.  Regarding dissemination, beyond  the traditional methods, a broad
              range of course resources  will be available for downloading and customization
              via the  World Wide Web.
