Title       : Planning for a Ubiquitous Educational Network with Enhanced Cognitive
               Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1995 
File        : a9554283

Award Number: 9554283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94680              (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Gorman jgorman@ket.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome Kagan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene Leonard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kentucky Educ Television
	      600 Cooper Drive
	      Lexington, KY  405022248    606/258-7102

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Gorman  95-54283    Full time access to appropriate computing power for every
              student, in class as well as at home, has not been economically possible
              despite its generally recognized benefits. Nor has it been possible to seek the
              potential for parental involvement in their child's studies if provided with
              outreach from the school to the home.' This proposal for a planning grant
              describes organizational and research activities pre-requisite to developing a
              computing/communication structure that would provide those benefits.   
              Interdisciplinary discussions including professionals from the fields of
              cognitive psychology, educational technology and digital engineering have
              envisaged an approach that serves the unique requirements of a
              computer-enriched educational environment. Those requirements are:     
              realistic cost    significantly lower tolerance to complexity of use, and    an
              absolute demand for ubiquity and equality in access.    The projected approach
              calls for a hierarchical local network infrastructure which includes the
              classroom and the home, and which expedites access to remote information
              resources. The envisaged infrastructure meets education's unique requirements
              by simplifying and relocating the requisite technical facilities and, at the
              same time making innovative use of new communication and multisensory
              input/output technologies.    This planning grant proposal would survey
              existing and developmental high quality educational software and operating
              protocols, in K-12 mathematics and science. This would include evaluation
              criteria from current and experimental school programs, curriculum developers
              and test-bed operations. The software and the operating protocols will be
              conceptually superimposed on the envisaged infrastructure. As a result, a
              scenario of design, testing and evaluation will be derived to serve in guiding
              the development of a follow-on project to implement the envisaged
              infrastructure in a succession of test environments.
