Title       : The Weather Underground: Application of Computer Technology to Science in
               Michigan Secondary Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1999   
File        : a9554211

Award Number: 9554211
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2086446            (Estimated)
Investigator: Perry J. Samson samson@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Samson  95-54211    Operating from within the Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Space
              Sciences Department at the University of Michigan, The Weather Underground has
              been supplying the Internet community near real-time meteorological conditions
              and National Weather Service forecasts for 3 years. The Weather Underground has
              developed a technology which brings user interactivity to imagery. Growing from
              the desire to provide an intuitive interface for exploring complex data (all
              current weather conditions, and forecasts for every airport in the United
              States), a client-server technology has been developed which provides a
              framework where information can be 'attached' to imagery. Information can be as
              simple as text (caption), or as complex as motion video(CUSee-Me session).   
              The Weather Underground's inspired vision is carried to completion by a team of
              dedicated individuals in multiple disciplines. The cross pollination between
              the humanities and the science communities has created a collaborative working
              environment extending between universities. Through NSF support, this funding
              cycle will bring the complexity of the Weather Underground systems into the
              hands of teachers and students throughout the Internet community. It is
              proposed to build software systems where participants can easily create
              interactive imagery, and create server based survey systems. The creation of
              such systems will allow participants to create domain specific interviews,
              carried out over the Internet.    The content domain in which this proposal
              sits is the hydrology cycle, including water quality. This is the second of a
              series of content components, which will link the weather, air quality, the
              hydrology cycle, water quality, land use, and agriculture. This iteration of
              research and development will refine current intuitive interfaces for entering
              and browsing complex data sets. Additionally, the data collection methods will
              be used, when appropriate, to gather large samples of educational research data
              and process this data  automatically.    The Interactive Image Format (.iif) is
              a language which defines regions and actions, allowing authors to create
              networked imagery. Regions include: points/pixels, polygons, rectangles,
              colors, pop-menus, help bubbles. Actions include: warm (mouseOver), hot
              (mouseClick). Actions effect properties, including: show, hide, URL(ftp,
              gopher, http). Paralleling .html, the .iif language is platform and server
              independent, insuring browsing and authoring to occur from multiple hardware
              platforms, and allowing .iif files to be incorporated into existing Internet
              browsers. This round of funding will produce intuitive IlFConstructors for both
              the Macintosh and X-Windows platforms. These editors will be graphically
              oriented and very easy to use. Their products will be interactive images which
              utilize networked resources. It is the goal of The Weather Underground to put
              the power of this editor into the hands of K12 students.    The Weather
              Underground's experience with real-time data streams has produced a very
              intricate series of interconnected software programs capable of ingesting,
              processing, and displaying large volumes of data. This system has come from the
              current NSF-MT funding. This proposal is an attempt to link our multi-bandwidth
              user interfaces with our sophisticated data processing engines. The Weather
              Underground has teamed with educational, and scientific partners capable of
              creating a testbed involving large numbers of participants. This proposal is an
              attempt to put our 'raw-computation' into the hands of worldwide participants
              through intuitive ,"cool" interfaces.
