Title       : Native American Mathematics and Science Technology Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2000    
File        : a9554472

Award Number: 9554472
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1295054            (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Buller schlkarenII@technet.nm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : National Indian Telecom In
	      1205 Colle Luna
	      Santa Fe, NM  87501    /   -

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Buller  95-54472    This project will provide interested Native American
              communities and schools with relevant technology infrastructure, training for
              use of the technology in the community and in mathematics and science
              education, training to maintain the hardware during and beyond the project,
              on-going technical assistance, technology needs-assessment assistance through
              community-school alliances formulated through the project, and a variety of
              data bases containing relevant information to Native Americans. Specifically,
              this project has three interrelated objectives: 1 ) Provide infrastructure
              technology in rural and reservation communities and schools in 15 Native
              American communities (5 per year). This objective includes needsassessments,
              installation, training, and technical assistance to develop their own wide area
              network; 2) Improve K- 12 mathematics and science education through the access
              and use of the Internet. This objective includes preparing teams of educators
              and community members in the use of the Internet to improve teaching and
              learning as well as daily living. This project will prepare 150 K- 12 teachers
              (50 per year) and 75 community members (25 per year) in 15-20 Native American
              communities nationwide. Action Plans for use of the Internet in the classroom
              will be developed and follow-up site visits will occur; and, 3) Establish and
              maintain a variety of data bases and specialized bulletin boards.   
              Participants who lack local access to the Internet will access it via 1-800
              numbers through the Electronic Pathways server funded by NSF in 1995 and housed
              and maintained at the University of Colorado, Boulder Computer Center. The
              project also includes a three-pronged approach to its evaluation: 1 )
              Implementation Evaluation; 2) Progress Evaluation; and 3) Summative Evaluation.
              Experts in technology and program evaluation will evaluate the project.
              Sustainability has been addressed from the beginning of the development of this
              project with input into its development by numerous  Native and non-Native
              American individuals with expertise in technology, Indian Education, teacher
              enhancement, mathematics and science, and community development. A critical
              component in this project is the exploration with the end-users of the
              potential cultural implications of the technology they will be employing. These
              discussions will occur prior to installation of any hardware. Also, Electronic
              Pathways is committed to training Native Americans in the technology and
              related aspects of this project and will include 12 interns (four annually) in
              the program.
