Title       : Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement in Molecular and Cellular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9554731

Award Number: 9554731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas H. Howell                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neville R. Kallenbach neville.kallenbach@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jann P. Primus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Boutte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Faculty Resource Network--a 28 member award-winning consortium  which links
              fourteen liberal arts colleges in the Northeast, twelve  historically black
              colleges and universities in the South, and one  predominantly minority
              institution in the Midwest with New York  University-proposes to build on its
              decade of experience in  improving undergraduate teaching by initiating an
              intensive  three-year faculty enrichment program focusing on the teaching of 
              introductory and advanced undergraduate courses in molecular and  cellular
              biology and the development of innovative laboratory  techniques.  Two summer
              residential workshops form the centerpiece  of the program.  The first, in
              1996, will focus on introductory  molecular biology courses and the second, in
              1997, on advanced  molecular biology courses.  The workshops will introduce
              faculty to  the latest methods and techniques of molecular biology and explore 
              new means of teaching biology that incorporate innovative hands-on  and
              inquiry-based methods.  At the conclusion of each of the  workshop sessions,
              participants will have produced a curricular  packet, which includes summaries
              of major lecture themes,  laboratory experiments, relevant bibliographical
              materials, and  teaching strategies, for direct classroom application.  During
              the  academic years following each summer workshop, a series of local 
              campus-based colloquia at the home institutions will be held.   Workshop
              participants, who will have tested and refined the  material developed during
              their summer study, will lead these  colloquia, and will have an opportunity to
              share their new  knowledge and teaching techniques with colleagues. 
              Publications  summarizing these conclusions on curricular and pedagogical
              methods  will be published and distributed to the 600 Network faculty  members
              teaching in the sciences, together with faculty members of  other colleges and
              universities linked to the Network through the  Leadership Alliance and CCTOP,
              a tri-state community college  consortium.   In Summer 1998, the program will
              conclude with a  three-day conference held at Spelman College in Atlanta,
              Georgia.   At the this concluding event, program participants will make 
              presentations on the refined curricular and pedagogical innovations  they have
              tested in their classrooms to an audience of scientists  from Network
              institutions and beyond.  Undergraduate Faculty  Enhancement in Teaching
              Molecular and Cellular Biology will be of  particular interest to biologists,
              but it will also benefit other  science faculty whose work involves an aspect
              of molecular biology,  as well as those who are interested in effective and
              innovative  teaching strategies in the sciences.  By introducing faculty to new
               and important areas of the life sciences and by emphasizing  different
              pedagogical applications, the program will improve the  quality of learning for
              the 80,000 students on Network college  campuses.
