Title       : Alaska Native/Rural Education Consortium for Systemic Integration of Indigenous
               and Western Scientific Knowledge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2000  
File        : a9554466

Award Number: 9554466
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2100000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank W. Hill fnfwh@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank M. Hill fnfwh@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Oscar A. Kawagley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond J. Barnhardt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alas Federatn of Natives
	      
	      Anchorage, AK  99501    907/274-3611

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9554466  Larson    The Alaska Federation of Natives and the University of Alaska
               Fairbanks have established the Alaska Native/Rural Education  Consortium
              (ANREC) to implement recommendations from a seminar  series that focused on
              instruction to Alaska Native students.   Working through institutions of higher
              education, the Alaska  Department of Education, and tribal councils, the
              consortium  will  undertake a five year initiative to systemically document the
               indigenous knowledge systems of Alaska Native people and develop  pedagogical
              practices that will integrate indigenous knowledge into  the curriculum, and
              restructure instructional practices to  capitalize on Native learning styles,
              to improve the science and  mathematics achievement of students in Alaska
              Native village  schools.    The focus of the proposed initiative is on
              providing an opportunity  for the Native people of Alaska to formulate a
              renewed educational  agenda regarding the structure, content and processes that
              are  needed to increase the application of Native and non-Native  science,
              mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET) knowledge  to the solution of
              educational problems in the Arctic environment.    The overall project is
              organized into the following three  initiatives: (1) Native Ways of Knowing and
              Teaching (the  preservice component); (2) Culturally aligned Curriculum 
              Adaptations (the curricular component); and (3) Elders and Cultural  Camps (the
              inservice component).  These activities will be  implemented in the five (5)
              cultural regions of the State.  It is  anticipated by the Year 2000, the Alaska
              Rural Systemic Initiative  will involve 48 of the 54 public school districts in
              the state,  impacting 302 schools, with a total of 2925 certified staff serving
               31,515 students.    In addition to the pedagogical impacts, ANREC plans to
              establish a  Native Sciences Advisory Board, with national membership and 
              reflecting the culturally relevant science and mathematics  knowledge held by
              Native scientists and enginee rs.  Although the  Board will provide guidance to
              the content of ANREC's activities,  it is hoped that other systemic initiatives
              or organizations  involved with teaching native students will benefit from its 
              existence.  ***
