Title       : Methods For Setting Standards on Performance Assessment In State-Wide Assessment
               Contexts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9554480

Award Number: 9554480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279796             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald K. Hambleton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7262      RESEARCH ACTIVITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F                 f                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                        f    
                f        4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                           ,   -   .   /   0   1   2   3   4   5   6         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
              button CC CC  static !        %d %d %d %d             @"t#                     
                            e    D          P                          ! %s (%s) %s: %s %s   
                          Print Manager is out of memory. Quit any applications thAbstract  
              This proposal seeks support for research on the development and validate of
              methods for establishing standards of student preference eon statewide
              assessments that require students to produce, rather than select, responses to
              examination exercises.  Statewide assessments of student performance are
              critical to the improvement of American education.  Through such assessments,
              state governments can assess the comparative strengths and weaknesses of
              students' achievement and can guide school systems and schools in the
              remediation of deficiencies in curriculum and instruction.  Existing
              standard-setting methods were developed for use with multiple-choice,
              pencil-and-paper tests in which students select an answer from among those
              presented in each test item.  These methods are not directly applicable to
              modern performance assessments that attempt to measure what students can do,
              not which answer they can select.  As more and more states modernize their
              assessments in lie with newly-developed curriculum standards, such as those of
              the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, they must e defe nsible and
              reliable methods for determining whether their students have achieved levels of
              performance that are competitive with those of the  world's major
              industrialized nations. The research proposed here will provide such methods. 
              The proposed research will be conducted by a consortium of directors of
              statewide assessments in five states and leading university-based psychometric
              researchers who have contributed substantially to the development of
              standard-setting methodology over the past two decades.  The research will be
              coordinated by the Council of chief State School Officers, ensuring its rapid
              dissemination to al of the nation's state departments of education and its
              ready adoption by those agencies.                                              
                    Oh     +'  0                                       $       H       l     
                                                       D       h                             
                                   R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                             
                       Abstract                            Microsof  S u m m a r y I n f o r
              m a t i o n                           (                                        
                        +                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    t Corporation               Sadie R. Jones              @       yf       
                                @     SJ f                          @        f               
                                                                                             
                @                                           Microsoft Word 6.0               
                                                    2                                        
                                                            ;                                
                                                       e =       e               -           
                         -                                       j       j   j       j      
              j       j       j                                                              
                          1                                                                  
              !       #       #       #       @                           T   C   ?          
                              j                                                              
                                        j       j                                            
                                        j               j               !                    
                ~               j       j       j       j               !           y        
                                                                                             
                      Abstract   This proposal seeks support for research on the development
              and validate of methods for establishing standards of student preference eon
              statewide assessments that require students to produce, rather than select,
              responses to examination exercises.  Statewide assessments of student
              performance are critical to the improvement of American education.  Through
              such assessments, state governments can assess the comparative strengths and
              weaknesses of students' achievement and can guide school systems and schools in
              the remediation of deficiencies in curriculum and instruction.  Existing
              standard-setting methods were developed for use with multiple-choice,
              pencil-and-paper tests in which students select an answer from among those
              presented in each test item.  These methods are not directly applicable to
              modern performance assessments that attempt to measure what students can do,
              not which answer they can select.  As more and more states modernize their
              assessments in lie with newly-developed curriculum standards, such as those of
              the National Council of Teachers o
