Title       : Low-Cost Rural Internet Access Using a New Digital Radio Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1999  
File        : a9554215

Award Number: 9554215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1295136            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steen A. Parl sig@world.std.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Signatron Tech Corp
	      29 Domino Drive
	      Concord, MA  017422845    508/371-0550

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Parl  95-54215    This program will demonstrate high speed Internet access for
              rural areas using a new low-cost and flexible Over-the-Horizon (OTH) microwave
              radio technology. The most remote area of Vermont, known as the North East
              Kingdom (NEK), has been chosen for this demonstration.  NEK schools are highly
              motivated to cooperate on a joint effort to implement Vermont's state education
              programs. However, with a few exceptions, they have ineffective means of
              computer communications and share a common isolation due to prohibitive long
              distance dialing costs. The goals of this program are: (1) to demonstrate that
              the technology is cost effective for interconnecting LANs and for providing
              remote access to the Internet and (2) to show that such cost effective
              connectivity in a rural area can promote a sustainable increase in
              collaboration between the schools and can stimulate student learning through
              access to the National Information Infrastructure (NII) via high quality
              network and Internet connections. The program consists of a one year planning
              and training phase, a one year operational evaluation phase, and a six month
              continued operational and evaluation/assessment phase.    The technology
              proposed builds on recent advances in low-cost OTH radio links made by
              Signatron and is based on the military and commercial radio modems developed in
              the past. Some of the new advances were made in SBIR contracts from the NSF and
              the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). The proposed radio network will
              complement local infrastructure grants from major computer corporations and
              will provide some of the infrastructure called for by current VISMT research
              and planning programs. Connections from school LANs to an Internet service
              provider are planned using fractional Tl (256 kb/s per school) with Internet
              access at Tl (1,544 kb/s). These rates are high enough for hundreds of users,
              can even provide images and video conferencing, and can be expanded with
              increased demand.    A cost comparison with leased line s for the 8 schools
              shows that the radio network investment is paid in only 20 months and that it
              will be 775~o less expensive to sustain than a similar network based on leased
              lines. Volume manufacturing can further reduce radio network costs.    The math
              and science education program will be planned and executed by VISMT. The
              results will be evaluated by WM/CRS and the Vermont Department of Education
              against SSI goals. UVM/CRS, aided by Americorps volunteers, will also explore
              extending the network to libraries, municipal offices, and local business. Upon
              completion, local sustainability will be assessed by WM/CRS and the nation wide
              applications of this technology will be independently assessed by a recognized
              expert in education networking.
