Title       : MPWG: Science Connections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1995  
File        : a9554497

Award Number: 9554497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99761              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann Sigford asigford@stfl.css.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cindy Johnson-Groh  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : College of St Scholastica
	      1200 Kenwood Avenue
	      Duluth, MN  55811    218/723-6000

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Johnson-Groth  9554497    The enthusiasm that girls develop during short-term
              enrichment programs is rarely sustained in  their home and school environments,
              particularly in rural communities where girls have little  exposure to role
              model scientists, and teachers often are unfamiliar with cooperative activity- 
              based curricula.  The College of St. Scholastica is developing, implementing,
              and evaluating  Science Connections, an intervention program designed to
              provide sustained encouragement and  support during the critical middle school
              years.  Science Connections is to involve teachers,  families, and scientists
              in a network of continuing support for young women's involvement in  science
              courses and careers.  Specific objectives include:  1) increasing the
              likelihood that 6th  and 7th grade girls who have participated in science and
              mathematics enrichment activities will  retain their interest in these subject
              areas; 2) increasing the likelihood these girls who have  participated in
              science and mathematics enrichment activities will enroll in advanced science
              and  math courses; 3) increasing the linkage between informal programs designed
              to develop girls'  interests, skills, and understandings in science and
              mathematics; 4) increasing the involvement  of parents, teachers, and scientist
              role models in supporting the girls' interests, skills and  understandings in
              science and mathematics; and 5) evaluating the impact of the intervention 
              design, and disseminating information on the program model throughout the
              science education  community.     Science Connections consists of two major
              components:  a monthly series of Saturday Science  Workshops during the
              academic year and a Summer Science Weekend.  Twenty-five sixth and  seventh
              grade girls are to participate each year, selected from a pool of seventy girls
              (from  predominantly low-and middle-income rural or minority families) who have
              already attended an  existing week-long science enrichment program.  Science
              Connections provides participant s with  ongoing opportunities for hands-on
              science, cooperative group activities, interactions with role  model
              scientists, and visits to scientific institutions, as well as supplemental
              activities to do at  home.  Family and teacher involvement provides further
              support for sustaining girls' interest in  science and mathematics.  All
              students receive annual surveys to determine whether participation  in Science
              Connections has influenced their attitudes, course selections and performance,
              extra-  curricular activities and career goals.  Survey results will be
              compared with those of summer  camp graduates who are not participating in
              Science Connections, thereby providing a modified  control group to help
              isolate the impact of this program.  Information on the project design, 
              methodology, and impact will be disseminated widely.  ***
