Title       : Mathematics Education and the World Wide Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1995 
File        : a9554233

Award Number: 9554233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $649916             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene A. Klotz klotz@forum.swarthmore.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Swarthmore College
	      500 College Avenue
	      Swarthmore, PA  19081    610/328-8000

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Klotz  95-54233    The Math Forum will be a virtual mathematics education and
              technology-transfer center that brings together four critical elements that
              must be integrated in order to realize the promise of the WWW for math
              education: teacher support and networking, math resource development, a
              well-designed WWW focal point for math education, and development of necessary
              WWW tools. Built on knowledge gained in the successful Geometry Forum project,
              the Math Forum will use the power of the WWW to weave public discussion forums,
              teacher education, interesting mathematics, and sophisticated archives into a
              productive community.    New tools modeled on our existing software will be
              employed to create collaborative environments that enable public discussion
              with the full set of resources available on the Internet. Through interactive
              projects and facilitation of special topic discussions, students,
              mathematicians, and math educators will contribute to each other's work and
              provide the rich input, networking, and support sought by teachers for their
              ongoing professional development.    Through the process of archiving and
              summarizing the activity of online communities and teacher groups, the Math
              Forum will build a collaborative math educational materials library. The Math
              Forum will collaborate with existing publishers and curriculum groups, such as
              those working on NCTM Standards materials, so that educators and students can
              participate effectively in the curriculum development process and the products
              can meet the needs of real classrooms. In the course of this effort many more
              well-developed curricular resources will become available online.    In order
              for the archives to be useful and for math educators to make effective use of
              the WWW the Math Forum must adapt and create software tools and web site
              designs to meet their specific needs. Forum programmers will produce
              subscription software, evaluation tools, and structured resources that enable
              users to make sense of the overwhelming informatio n on the Internet. These
              tools will make it possible for participants to filter and evaluate resources
              and to move more directly to the task of constructing the environments they
              wish their students to explore.  Furthermore, the Math Forum will develop
              interactive math projects that take advantage of the WWW for presenting
              engaging mathematics.    Many of the experiments conducted here will have
              immediate and wide applicability in other areas of education and use of the
              Internet. A careful program of evaluation and outreach will bring regular
              reports to the broader educational community. Hired netsurfers and online
              support staff will keep the Forum on top of new developments and gather
              relevant resources while publicizing the Forum and establishing the
              resourcefulness of this pivotal venture.
