Title       : Principals of Pollution Prevention
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9554972

Award Number: 9554972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144660             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Berthouex berthoue@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale F. Rudd  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Pollution prevention is practiced in industry, but there  appears to be no
              coherent and generally applicable  principles of pollution prevention about
              which to organize  instructional materials. The literature abounds mainly with 
              anecdotal and disconnected accounts of successful pollution  prevention
              campaigns. There is a need for educational  material on pollution prevention.
              Our goal is to design a  course and prepare teaching materials suitable for
              students  from all engineering disciplines.  Environmental engineering texts on
              pollution control  summarize state-of-the art knowledge in a way that does not 
              foster innovation because (1) they compartmentalize the  treatment of
              wastewater, solid wastes, gases, hazardous  substances, etc. and (2) they
              typically do not deal with  pollution prevention and waste minimization.
              Chemical and  mechanical engineering texts on manufacturing process design 
              typically ignore the production of pollutants and pollution  prevention. The
              systematic coordinated view that is so  valuable in solving real problems is
              not fostered by  division along these boundaries. This approach fails to 
              convey to the young engineer the notion that certain  fundamentals apply to all
              processing systems. We seek to  amalgamate the subdivisions of process design,
              pollution  prevention, and pollution control, and integrate the  management of
              various physical forms of pollutants.  The principles of pollution prevention
              common to all fields  of engineering involve the intelligent management of 
              materials, energy, and chemical reactivity. These principles  guide the
              engineer in the search for superior manufacturing  processes. These rules of
              thumb are constrained by the  physical laws of conservation of mass,
              conservation of  energy, and the principles of managing chemical reactivity. 
              These principles serve to identify pollution prevention  concepts that might be
              successful from those concepts that  cannot be successful. The most important
              part of the  instructional material will be ch apters on applications  focusing
              on perhaps twenty areas of the economy. The  applications will serve to
              identify and limit the specific  techniques of mass ands energy balancing and
              the specific  rules-of-thumb to be presented in the introductory  materials. 
              This method of instruction emphasizes the role of the  engineer as a developer
              of technology that is economically  competitive and environmentally
              responsible. The principles  can be a generally applicable basis foe
              instruction in  engineering.  The final product will be a course syllabus with
              an  instruction manual, including practice problems and  exercises, that can be
              used to teach an integrated approach  to pollution prevention and control. The
              ultimate product  will be a textbook because this is the only way to have the 
              course taught nationwide.
