Title       : Graduate Research Traineeships in Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9554570

Award Number: 9554570
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vasilios I. Manousiouthakis vasilios@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9554570  Manousiouthakis    Irrevocable change is occurring in  the way we
              conceive, develop and  design chemical technologies,  whether for
              petrochemicals  production, bioprocessing, or  electronic materials synthesis.
              The  scientific and economic arguments  for development of clean  technologies
              with minimal  environmental impact have become  truly compelling if we are to
              enjoy  further improvement in our quality  of life for the foreseeable future. 
              Those engaged in clean chemical  process development confront  revolutionary
              challenges in  chemical synthesis, separations,  and process design for
              pollution  prevention and the minimization of  waste. A new breed of chemical 
              engineer must be educated and  trained in the area of  Environmentally
              Conscious  Manufacturing to meet these  challenges. Funds are requested for 
              the support of five Graduate  Research Trainees pursuing PhD  studies in
              Chemical Engineering in  the area of Environmentally  Conscious Manufacturing.
              Two  additional trainees will be  supported by UCLA matching funds.  The
              Traineeships will be for five  years and will be administered  through the
              Chemical Engineering  Department. An integrated program  of cross-disciplinary
              research,  classroom learning, industrial  internships, and teaching 
              experience has been designed to  train PhD students in  environmentally
              conscious  manufacturing and pollution  prevention research. Given that the 
              ultimate implementation of  pollution prevention concepts will  require the
              participation of  scientists and engineers trained in  fields other than
              chemical  engineering, each of the Trainees  will be jointly mentored by two 
              faculty members; one from chemical  engineering, and one from another 
              discipline. This interdisciplinary  approach in research and training  will
              provide the optimal means to  contribute effectively to the  engineering
              science and technology  base for environmentally conscious  manufacturing,
              which is currently  in its infancy. A rigorous  curriculum, a multimonth  visit
              to a  host research institution,  seminars, workshops and teaching 
              assignments, and their daily  interactions with their mentors and  each other,
              will prepare these  students to teach and do research  in this field.
              Furthermore, their  contributions to the development of  software, monographs,
              and case  studies will help educated a new  generation of engineers that are 
              environmentally aware and have the  knowledge base needed to prevent  the
              generation of pollution.
