Title       : Leveraging Networks for Collaborative Education in the Blacksburg Electronic
               Village
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9554206

Award Number: 9554206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1244698            (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Carroll carroll@cs.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John K. Burton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford A. Shaffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Beth Rosson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9217,HPCC,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Carroll  95-54206    We propose to create and evaluate an infrastructure for
              constructing and conducting experiments in a virtual laboratory. Our
              architecture will integrate existing and future Internet technology to support
              collaborative, highly interactive educational settings. Our prototype testbed
              will address physical science middle and high school students. The project
              represents a rational melding of existing technologies in new ways that we
              believe will do as much for active learning as the advent of World-Wide Web
              browsers such as Mosaic has done for passive browsing of information.  Key
              elements of our proposal are:      a participatory design approach involving
              teachers and students as design team members (in contrast to externally-imposed
              educational technology solutions).    support for reuse of a wide variety of
              educational software available on the Internet (in contrast to requiring and
              assuming custom-designed educational applications).    asynchronous extensions
              to interactive, collaborative environments (in contrast to the current
              dichotomy between non-interactive e-mail collaborations and strictly real-time
              interactions via MUDs and MOOs).    multimedia extensions to interactive,
              collaborative environments (in contrast to teletype-style interactions
              currently supported by MUDs and MOOs).    collaborative system support for
              heterogeneous platforms ranging from PCs to high-end workstations (in contrast
              to the assumption of homogenous computing environments).    continuous on-site
              teacher support to help in selection and composition of project-oriented
              curriculum elements, community involvement in experimental projects, and
              evaluation of technology change, attitudes, and outcomes.    This project seeks
              to leverage the technological and cultural opportunities of the Blacksburg
              Electronic Village (BEV), a densely interconnected community in rural
              Southwestern Virginia. It exploits the availability of Tl network connections
              to the four participating public schools. It builds upon an  ongoing NIE
              Planning Grant, our ongoing work on participatory design of educational network
              applications, our ongoing work with computer aided education systems and
              software, and working relationships with Apple Computer, a company with years
              of commercial experience in supporting K-12 education.    This project will
              develop the technical infrastructure necessary for solutions to educational
              issues and concepns of national significance:      mitigating logistic
              obstacles to peer-based learning in rural settings.    facilitating broad
              community involvement in public school activities.    empowering teachers
              through their use of instructional technology.    promoting more active roles
              for students in using World-Wide Web technology.    increasing access to peer
              collaboration and laboratory experiences for students.    enhancing
              participation in school activities for all students.
