Title       : Implementation Grant for the NIE MOST (Missouri Supporting Teachers) Electronic
               Support System to Promote Problem-BasedLearning Using a Computational Science
               Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1999       
File        : a9554313

Award Number: 9554313
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $863865             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Laffey laffeyj@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale R. Musser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Barnes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Laffey  95-54313    Project MOST (Missouri Supporting Teachers) represents a
              consortium that has embraced a vision and plan of work to improve science and
              math teaching and learning. We propose to build, implement, and sustain an
              Internet-based support system for teachers and students as they undertake
              project-based learning and computational science. Along with reform efforts
              already underway in Missouri, the following objectives of Project MOST enable
              new ways of working and learning in schools:    (1) a network infrastructure
              that creates a community of educators and leverages knowledge and experience
              across the community,  (2) an electronic teacher support system designed around
              the practices and challenges of teaching and learning with project-based and
              computational science approaches,  (3) a consortium of change agents with a
              cohesive vision and a common set of tools for supporting teacher
              professionalization and school restructuring, and  (4) new knowledge both to
              understand the nature of the learning, teaching and community enabled by new
              tools and approaches, and to improve, as well as judge the worth, of the tools
              and approaches.    A support system using available technologies and based on
              the innovative work of two teachers in Lee's Summit will assist teachers as
              they facilitate and monitor student projects, use new tools and methods, solve
              problems, assess student outcomes, and develop professionally. The support
              system will assist students as they undertake meaningful projects by helping:
              locate resources and mentors, collaborate with others, use new tools and
              methods, solve problems, and build and share a portfolio of their project. The
              support system also facilitates the roles of preservice teachers gaining field
              experience, mentors from in and out of school who support student work, those
              who assess student processes and achievements, and researchers.    Over time
              the support system will grow in richness of resources and have improved
              functioning for teaching and learning throu gh better designed processes and
              more tightly integrated and powerful technologies. In the second year of the
              grant four new schools will join Project MOST and a model of regional consortia
              will be implemented and tested.    Project MOST and the research that comes out
              of this undertaking has the potential to lead to fundamental advances in the
              area of educational reform, professional development of teachers, and school
              change. As the project develops, contributions will be made to understanding
              how to utilize existing technology to break down teacher and school isolation
              and provide immediate ongoing professional support for the practitioner in the
              classroom. This provides a foundation for growing this model from a focus on
              computational science and project-based learning at the secondary level to
              other appropriate educational reform programs at all levels. The potential is
              there to impact students and teachers who are currently isolated in classrooms,
              and transform them into active members of a growing intellectual community.
