Title       : Laboratory Courses in Nonlinear Dynamics and Computational Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1996      
File        : a9554955

Award Number: 9554955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37899              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roderick V. Jensen rjensen@wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Laboratory Courses in Nonlinear-Dynamics and Computational Neuroscience. 
              Mathematical and numerical models play a very important role in our
              understanding of complex processes in a wide variety of scientific disciplines.
               With  the advent of highspeed graphics workstations and new mathematical and
              numerical methods for describing complex  dynamical systems, many difficult
              problems can now be addressed.  Coupled with the explosion in experimental data
               in the form of large-scale data bases, digital timesefies, graphical images,
              and video, these new developments have opened up exciting new interdisciplinary
              frontiers in scientific computing and numerical modelling.  The purpose of this
              proposal is to request support for the development of two new undergraduate
              courses in Nonlinear Dynamics and in Computational Neuroscience that will
              utilize the state of the art facilities of the newly funded Laboratory for
              Computational Neuroscience (DUE-9551414) at Wesleyan University.  Hands on
              laboratory experience in computer  modelling and graphical data analysis has
              usually been restricted to graduate and post-doctoral students.  However, 
              because of the new computer technologies (high-speed graphics workstations) and
              new theoretical ideas (nonlinear dynamics and chaos theory) and numerical
              methods (high level programs for graphical and numerical analysis, like
              MATHEMATICA and IDL) for describing complex systems, these exciting
              interdisciplinary fields should be both accessible and appealing to
              undergraduate students.  In particular, the proposed laboratory courses should
              inspire and provide a testing ground  for additional undergraduate courses in
              Earth and Environmental Studies, Molecular Biology, Chemistry, Astronomy,  and
              even Art and Architecture.
