Title       : A Model for Preparing Teachers to Integrate Technology into Teaching
               Mathematics, Science,and Social Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1997  
File        : a9554311

Award Number: 9554311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98647              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carole Ames cames@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pui-Kei Wong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9217,HPCC,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9554311  Ames    This proposal is a planning grant to develop a comprehensive
              model for integrating  technology into teaching mathematics, science and social
              studies for both undergrad  courses in the deciplines and in the preparation of
              K-12 teachers.  The fundermental  premise of this model is that significant
              integration of technology into teaching will only  occur with the simultaneous
              engagement of university science and mathematics  faculty, university teach
              education faculty, students in K-12 school districts.    In the fall of 1994
              the Deans of the College of Education and the College of Natural  Science
              agreed to place a high priority on developing collaboration between the two 
              colleges around the integration of technology in teaching, both for university
              courses  and for preservice and inservice work with K-12 teachers.  Pursuant to
              that priority  they appointed a planning committee with representatives from
              the two colleges, the  Office of Computing and Technology, and the Ingham
              Intermediate School District.    Concurrently, the College of Education, with
              support from the University and private  industry, designed a new Technology
              Exploration Center that embodies innovative  design principles that offer a
              unique approach to integrating technology into education.   This center, which
              opened in January 1995, is located in a highly visible, central  location in
              the College of Education, is organized around subject matter applications  and
              is designed to create a socially inviting environment to stimulate discourse
              about  educational among faculty, students, teachers and school children.    In
              April 1995 the planning committee hosted the first "Technology in Education 
              Showcase" in the Center in which nine university faculty presented their uses
              of  technology in teaching to an invited group of faculty from the two
              colleges, K-12  teachers, Intermediate School Representatives, and graduate
              students.  The showcase  stimulated a high level of engagement and discourse
              about the possibiliti es and  challenges of integrating technology in teaching.
                 The planning grant will support a yearlong series of four such technology
              showcase  meetings, including outside speakers, that would be open to a wide
              audience with the  specific intent of developing a full proposal for a systemic
              approach to extending this  model to a larger educational community.  Study
              groups including faculty, students  and teachers will be organized around new
              hardware and software applications.  In  addition, the grant will support
              making these deliberations visible on the internet, both  to invite input from
              other universities around the country and to share the emergent  model.  The
              model will address a priority identified in NSF's Division of Undergraduate 
              Education: "A major emphasis is teacher preparation programs that feature both
              small-  and large-scale efforts to engage the nation's college and university
              faculties in the  undergraduate education of the next generation of K-12
              science and mathematics  teachers."    ***
