Title       : An Internet-Based Interactive Learning System for Computing Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1995  
File        : a9554854

Award Number: 9554854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mathew J. Palakal   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carla L. Boyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds for establishing an Internet-  bsed interactive
              learning system at Indiana University-  Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI).
               The Department of  Computer and Information Science (CIS) seeks to improve its
               breadth-first computer science curriculum by adequately  supporting student
              learning of abstract theoretical  materials through interactive learning,
              simulation and  modeling opportunities.  The goals are 1.  to develop an 
              interactive learning system called PACER (Personally Active  Computing
              Exploration Resource) as an instructional  supplement for the breadth-first
              introductory computing  courses, and 2.  to cultivate and support early
              interest in  science through delivering PACER to K-12, college, and  returning
              adult students.  The PACER system meets learners"  needs of repetition and
              visual simulation of complex ideas  and offers them the ability to pursue
              education from remote  locations and have access to resources never before 
              available.  The interactive design of PACER encourages self-  directed
              learning.  It also challenges and supports women,  minorities, commuting adults
              and students with disabilities  to purse the field of quantitative reasoning.  
               The proposed interactive learning system will be developed  as World Wide Web
              pages using Hypertext Markup Language.  Unlike traditional Web pages, the PACER
              pages will support  interactive learning sessions as well as simulations with 
              animation capabilities.  The hierarchical organizations of  Web pages allows
              the PACER system to have learning modules  that are inter linked, which in turn
              supports "demand-based"  learning.  This feature allows PACER to be an active 
              learning tool for learners at all levels.    The proposed PACER system will be
              available to students in  our breadth-first introductory compute science
              courses,  Computing 1 and 2, and students at New Augusta Middle School  in the
              Metropolitan district of Pike Township, Indianapolis,  Indiana
