Title       : Undergraduate Faculty Workshop: Environmental Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  1996  
File        : a9554710

Award Number: 9554710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Ryan Dupont rdupo@pub.uwrl.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry E. Baxter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louis Theodore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this workshop is to present both a course and  develop a
              problem workbook supporting undergraduate instruction in  these critical and
              wide ranging areas.  Offering such a course to  20 undergraduate teaching
              faculty and involving them in development  of supporting teaching materials
              will significantly enhance their  understanding of current environmental
              management subjects and help  them update and develop new courses in this area.
               Problems and  solutions generated by an interdisciplinary team of engineering
              and  applied science faculty invited to attend the workshop will form  the
              basis of the workbook generated from this effort.  Topics to be  included in
              the workbook are:  fundamentals, regulations, risk  assessment/risk
              communication, pollution prevention, sustainable  development, air/water/solid
              waste management, hazardous waste  management, indoor air pollution,
              environmental ethics,  environmental justice, ISO14000 and global environmental
               management.  The first draft of the problem workbook will be  prepared during
              a two-week summer workshop at Utah State University  in June, 1996.  The
              1996-1997 academic year will provide an  opportunity for participants to
              classroom test the effectiveness of  the teaching materials provided to them in
              the workshop, and the  problems contained in the workbook.  A three-day follow
              up summer  session in late June, 1997 is scheduled at Manhattan College to 
              provide an opportunity to revise, update, and edit the workbook,  and finalize
              production and distribution plans for implementation  in undergraduate
              engineering and applied science curricula.  This  project is proposed as a
              collaborative effort between universities  (Utah State University, Logan, Utah;
              Northern Arizona University,  Flagstaff, Arizona) and a four-year undergraduate
              college  (Manhattan College, Riverdale, New York).  The Program Director and 
              co-Directors have over 50 combined years of experience in  environmental
              management, have been successfully involved in NSF  U ndergraduate Faculty
              Enhancement projects in the past, and are  involved in minority and Native
              American retention and training  efforts at their institutions.
