Title       : Union City On-Line: An Architecture for Networking and Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1997      
File        : a9554327

Award Number: 9554327
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1555434            (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Honey mhoney@edc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Ramella  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Spielvogel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Silvia T. Correa-Abbato  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel St
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/969-7100

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Honey  95-54327    Union City On-Line is a unique partnership among the
              Education Development Center's Center for Children and Technology, the Union
              City New Jersey Board of Education, New Jersey State Systemic Initiative and
              the associated Networking Infrastructure for Education Testbed, Bell Atlantic,
              Lotus Development Corporation, ISDN Systems Corporation, and ARC Consulting.
              The objective of this project is to develop highly sophisticated networking
              resources dedicated specifically to furthering the goals of the District's
              systemic educational reforms. Anticipated outcomes include:      producing
              extensive knowledge about effective architectures for high-speed networking in
              schools.    creating disseminable training applications to support teachers in
              integrating Internet resources into the curriculum, and to introduce them to
              authoring techniques and design principles for building original World Wide Web
              resources.    developing disseminable on-line applications to support three key
              themes of educational reform: student-driven inquiry, portfolio assessment and
              parental involvement.    creating a model for community authoring initiatives
              that bring together teachers, students and parents to create World Wide Web
              resources.    demonstrating the transfer of technical and design expertise from
              corporate and non-profit collaborators to the local community.    providing
              opportunities for the extensive dissemination of project outcomes by the school
              community and by project collaborators, at state and national levels.   
              Achieving these objectives involves two central tasks: first, developing a
              technical infrastructure that demonstrates a novel approach to creating an
              affordable, scaleable, and potentially ubiquitous district-wide networking
              architecture; and second, developing the necessary human infrastructure by
              creating:      Novel and scaleable approaches to teacher training and ongoing
              staff development.    A core set of applications that support district-wide
              reform efforts.    Opportunitie s to involve the community, including teachers,
              parents and students in a wide range of authoring projects.    A model for
              state and national network-based K-12 reform efforts. New Jersey's SSI and
              associated NIE project are a primary audience for this model.    At the
              conclusion of this three year effort, the project will have ensured the
              development of technical, training, and design expertise at the local level, so
              that the project's technical and human infrastructure can be maintained and
              further developed, and continue to serve as a model to other school districts .
