Title       : MPWG: Mentoring Through Cross-Age Research Teams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2001   
File        : a9554494

Award Number: 9554494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97397              (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia B. Douglass Claudia.B.Douglass@cmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carole Beere  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9554494  Douglass    This CMU project endeavors to institute a mechanism to
              encourage  and support the participation of girls and women in science, 
              engineering, and mathematics (SEM) through:  raising the  awareness of teachers
              and parents with regard to the factors  affecting the success of girls in SEM;
              forming cross-age research  teams of women and girls; and developing a
              mentoring system  from elementary school through professional employment. 
              Mentoring  Through Cross-Age Research Teams impacts the eight extremely rural, 
              economically disadvantaged counties in central Michigan.  Five  regional
              education service districts totaling 33 school districts,  with participation
              from about 240 girls and teachers will be  directly involved in the project. 
              Research teams are to be formed  of elementary, middle, and high school girls,
              college undergraduate  and graduate women, parents, teachers, and professional
              scientists.   The teams provide mentoring, encouragement, and academic support 
              while working together on a common research project.  This research  endeavor
              is augmented by academic year and summer enrichment  programs to highlight the
              issues surrounding the success of girls  in SEM, introduce role models, and
              provide information on career  opportunities.    A spring "project fair" is to
              showcase the efforts of the research  teams, as will presentations at state
              conferences.  The development  and distribution of an administrator's guide
              will facilitate  replication of the project.  Presentations are to be made at 
              teacher in-service workshops and at the state Math/Science Center  Director's
              meeting to encourage sponsorship by other centers and  districts.  This project
              expects to continue as a regular event  coordinated by the Central Michigan
              Science/ Mathematics/Technology  Center and the regional education service
              districts.  ***
