Title       : Forensic Science: An Interactive Multimedia Laboratory Program to Enhance
               Introductory Chemistry (Science) Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9554875

Award Number: 9554875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234539             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Kaplan lkaplan@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 7410,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              While major changes have taken place in all areas of the natural sciences,
              introductory instruction in both the lecture  hall and the laboratory has not
              changed significantly in many years.  The PI instituted innovative teaching
              techniques  in an elementary chemistry course called "Chemistry and Crime: 
              From Sherlock Holmes to Modern Forensic  Science" for the non-science major. 
              The techniques used in the laboratory have received national attention and 
              many colleagues have instituted similar innovations.  However, many
              institutions do not have the resources to  develop laboratory programs along
              these lines and, as times have changed, are increasingly concerned with
              exposing  the students to situations now recognized as potentially dangerous.  
               Since the PI has proven that forensics can be used to spark interest in
              science and since it is given that young people  are intrigued by computer
              graphics, it was decided to use computer animated simulations to allow
              extensive,  intensive investigation of scientific evidence collected at
              simulated crime scenes and studied using simulated  scientific instruments. 
              These animated modules will enhance not only the laboratory program in the
              forensic science  course but also the programs in introductory science courses
              for majors.    The PI will guide the development of the computer animated
              modules, develop the story board and oversee the  computer interfacing and the
              integration of the components into the curriculum.  The actual modules will be
              created  by Engineering Animation, Inc.  EAI, using their Vislab software, is
              one of the premier computer animation  companies in the world.    It is
              anticipated that implementing this innovative and creative approach, as part of
              an overall multimedia program  including actual laboratory experience, will
              enhance science education by stimulating interest and engendering  enthusiasm
              instead of promoting the stereotype that science is boring and hard.
