Title       : Graduate Research Traineeships in Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9554556

Award Number: 9554556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $566600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter H. Peters peters@engr.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9554556  Peters  The Departments of Chemical and  Mechanical Engineering at
              the  University of South Carolina will  establish an interdisciplinary 
              traineeship program focusing on the  reduction, recycle, or elimination  of
              hazardous solvents in  manufacturing processes. This  program in
              Environmentally  Conscious Manufacturing addresses  an issue which is of great 
              importance across the manufacturing  spectrum, and which affects both  large
              and small industries. The  program includes significant  interaction with small
              businesses  in the State of South Carolina, as  well as support from the State 
              Department of Environmental  Control. In addition, close  collaboration with
              large companies  such as AlliedSignal, AT&T, and  Westvaco ensures that
              trainees will  receive a broad exposure to  fundamental and applied problems 
              facing industry.  Trainees will perform research in  one of three broad areas:
              pressure  swing adsorption for solvent  recovery and recycle; supercritical 
              fluid technology for solvent  substitution and process  modification; or
              modeling of  solvent-intensive manufacturing  processes (including adsorption
              and  supercritical fluid technologies)  for life cycle analysis and 
              environmental design. The modeling  effort in particular is designed to  hasten
              the transfer of results of  academic research to industry,  including small
              businesses.  Trainees will receive mentoring  form outstanding academic
              scholars,  as well as from industrial mentors.  Some will have internships in 
              domestic industries, while others  may apprentice with AT&T Global  Information
              Systems in Germany  under an arrangement developed for  this traineeship
              program. These  trainees will also be given  instruction in classroom teaching.
