Title       : The Edison Link
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1995  
File        : a9554330

Award Number: 9554330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven A. Sanchez                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102543             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn Spampinato   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ivan J. Duran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Carson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kipp E. Bentley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Denver Public Schs
	      900 Grant Street
	      Denver, CO  80203    303/764-3301

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Spampinato  95-54330    With the advent of new technologies in distance
              education and interactive networks, students no longer need to be in a
              traditional school setting in order to access quality educational resources.
              How will this impact the future of education and learning? How can these new
              resources be used by schools to transform the way they do business rather than
              to simply incorporate the technological changes into their current models? How
              can these new resources be used to impact the lives of urban and minority
              children? In addition, how can these resources be used to assist teachers in
              their efforts to change their methods of instruction? Edison Elementary, a K-5
              school in Denver, Colorado, in conjunction with the Denver Public Schools (DPS)
              Department of Technology Services, and other community organizations seeks to
              develop a network model, named. the "Edison Link", that will begin to answer
              some of the questions mentioned above.    The curricular focus of the proposed
              network will be in the areas of elementary science, math and technology.
              Research shows that science receives the least amount of weekly instructional
              time of all the core curriculum in American schools. A recent survey also has
              shown that a vast majority of teachers want to institute reforms in the way
              they teach science and math. Knowing this, those involved in the proposed
              Edison Link see great possibilities in developing a network devoted to math and
              science that can offer educational opportunities for students and teachers
              alike.    The Edison Link will utilize a variety of technologies to achieve its
              goal of becoming a valuable and far reaching interactive math and science
              resource. The current (or soon to be) available technologies are as follows:   
               The DPS has installed a T-1 network, capable of audio, data and video
              transmissions, that connects all district schools and buildings.   An ITFS
              broadcast tower, capable of reaching throughout the Denver metro area, will be
              ready in early 1996. This tower w ill be owned and operated by the DPS and will
              allow television broadcasts receivable by any Denver metro home or institution
              with a satellite dish. One way video and two way audio connections can be made
              utilizing ITFS   World Wide Web connections, utilizing Netscape, are already
              available within the DPS. With CUSeeMe software and a computer top video
              camera, broadcast capabilities can be activated over the Internet and received
              throughout the world.      To date, a number of distance education projects
              focusing on science and math have been implemented throughout the United
              States. Their successes have been duly noted by those involved in the Edison
              Link project. The Edison Link will be developed and implemented building on
              these successes but with an additional focus on incorporating greater
              interactivity and Internet access. In addition, the project will be developed
              and implemented by classroom teachers. This is a departure from most distance
              education networks currently available. It will therefore be particularly
              focused on and sensitive to the needs of students and teachers.
