Title       : A "Networked" Social Science Laboratory: In-Person and Virtual Workshops
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2000  
File        : a9554748

Award Number: 9554748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255547             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Frey billf@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The problem this project addresses is the "quantitative reasoning  gap" that has
              been widely recognized among undergraduate social  science majors.  The
              objectives are to (1) introduce more "science"  into the social sciences at the
              early undergraduate level; (2) make  quantitative reasoning skills accessible
              to social science majors  by showing their relevance to social issues in an
              active learning  setting; (3) prepare students for applied upper level courses
              and  careers that utilize these skills.  The methods are implementation  of
              both traditional in-person workshops and a "virtual" -- Internet  -- accessible
              workshop that will enable social science faculty at  two and four year colleges
              to exchange data and ideas toward  introducing analysis of U.S. Census data in
              their classes.  This  project will have impact beyond that in the project
              period, since  the virtual workshop, along with an Internet-accessible library
              of  exercises, will be self-sustaining after the conclusion of the  project
              period.  In addition to faculty generally at two and four  year institutions,
              the special audiences addressed are minority and  disabled faculty, as well as
              faculty from two-year undergraduate  institutions and other institutions that
              provide little or no  financial support for involvement in such activities. 
              This  proposal builds on a Department of Education-funded (FIPSE) 
              collaboration between the University of Michigan Population Studies  Center
              (PSC) and a network of 12 colleges of the Great Lakes  Colleges Association
              (GLCA).  This existing FIPSE project  demonstrates the feasibility of
              incorporating interactive U.S.  Census data analysis via the Internet into
              existing undergraduate  curricula.  This proposal to NSF extends to a national
              community of  social science instructors an approach to sharing curricular 
              materials and interactive networking capabilities.
