Title       : Two-Year College Physics Workshop Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a9554683

Award Number: 9554683
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550843             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis J. Hieggelke curth@jjc.cc.il.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. O'Kuma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Joliet Junior College
	      1215 Houbolt Road
	      Joliet, IL  60431    815/729-9020

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This three-year national program is a continuation of several  successful
              projects administered by Joliet Junior College(IL) and  Lee College (TX). It
              will provide 15 intensive workshops (five  each year) for two-year college
              physics teachers at several  qeoqraphically-dispersed two-year college
              campuses.    One set of workshops will acquaint participants with the 
              development and implementation of (1) microcomputer-based  laboratories in
              mechanics and heat; (2) digital video, modeling,  and microcomputer-based
              laboratories in electricity, magnetism,  and opticsi (3) physics simulationsi
              and (4) active learning  problem-solving strategies using conceptual exercises
              and overview  case studies. The fifth workshop will be a working conference on 
              introductory physics that will provide previous workshop  participants an
              opportunity for sharing, gaining additional  experiences, and discussing new
              developments and technologies.  Each workshop will be led by two, two-year
              college physics  professors and two or three university/college physics
              professors  who play a major role in developing these areas.    These workshops
              will provide participants with applications of the  recent developments and
              findings of physics education research. As  a result, participants will be able
              to evaluate these developments  and will return to their campuses to begin
              implementing the  workshop activities. Thus, these workshops, as they have done
              in  the past, will facilitate the rapid incorporation of this  knowledge and
              technology at two-year colleqes.    The impact of the workshops will be
              reinforced by the continuation  of a networking system that employs a
              microcomputer bulletin board  system, an Internet access system, and a
              newsletter. The ultimate  goal of this project is to help two-year college
              students develop  a stronger understanding of classical and contemporary
              physics.  The task of updating physics programs at two-year colleges is 
              difficult, but essential, for  the nation and for science because of the lar ge
              number of  students, particularly women and minorities, attending two-year 
              colleqes.
