Title       : Computer-Animated Modules for Enhanced Instruction in the Geosciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1995  
File        : a9554918

Award Number: 9554918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22762              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald W. Tarman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly Pomona Fdn, Inc
	      
	      Pomona, CA  91768    /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Student  visualization  of  spatial  and  temporal  relationships  traditionally
               has  presented a challenge  unique  to  geoscience  faculty.  In California,
              however, the existing teaching  problems  are  being  exacerbated as a growing
              population of  students  for  whom  English  is the second language is being
              incorporated  into  university  communities.  This  inexorably  growing 
              concern   of  communication  of  scientific  concepts  and  principles  to   an
               audience  with  lower  levels  of  English  facility  requires  a  fundamental
               modification  of  our teaching  philosophy  and  the  methods   of  delivery 
              of  the  information  in  the  classroom.  Additionally,   because  of 
              societal  influences,   contemporary  students are oriented toward visual
              learning rather than auditory  learning.   Although no single solution to our 
              academic  dilemma  exists,    one    potentially   fruitful   direction,   
              offering  substantially  increased  efficacy in educational  communication, 
              lies  in  the  subordination  of the  spoken  word  to  alternate 
              communication   methods.   Short,  computer-animated   simulation  sequences
              carefully linked to oral lecture material, can be used.        In  this 
              scenario  animations will  be  presented  in  the  classroom  using  existing
              television  monitors  and  video  tape  players.  To implement instructional
              simulations and thus improve  student  comprehension of geologic relationships,
               this  proposal  seeks  support for the purchase of computer equipment  to 
              create  and     record     animated     sequences     appropriate     for 
              classroom/laboratory  instruction.   To  maximize  use   of   the  modules, 
              descriptions and single frame examples of  all  modules  will  be  placed  as 
              web pages on our existing  web  server  for  browsing. Copies of animations can
              then be obtained by contacting  the  writer.  If interest is sufficient, the
              files will  be  made  available on the web server for direct downloading.
