Title       : MPWG: The Oceanography Camp for Girls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1995      
File        : a9554493

Award Number: 9554493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dawn M. Pickard                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99878              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula G. Coble pcoble@marine.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan B. Rose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hepsi D. Zsoldos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Teresa M. Greely  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9554493  Coble    The Oceanography Camp for Girls (OCG) was developed jointly by
              the University of South  Florida's Department of Marine Science (USF DMS) and
              the Pinellas County School System to  encourage career interest in the sciences
              for young women posed to enter high school.   Oceanography was chosen because
              of its inherent interdisciplinary nature, requiring a familiarity  with the
              four "hard" sciences--biology, chemistry, geology and physics, as well as a
              foundation  in mathematics.  As such, the camp reflects the areas of study in
              which women are most often  underrepresented, and allows young women to use the
              knowledge gained from hands-on  activities and to apply it to a tangible marine
              environment in their own "backyard."  This  environmental "bridging" is
              accomplished via cruises aboard a research vessel for data  collection, field
              trips, and in-depth, practical laboratory explorations.  The uniqueness of this
               educational program derives its focus, not only from real-world environmental
              studies and  awareness, but also from one-on-one mentoring of middle school
              girls by women who are  already established in scientific fields.  This project
              would significantly expand and refine the  camp experience.  Annually, the OCG
              has reached only 30 young women residing in Pinellas  County.  The target
              population beyond Pinellas County allows a new population of young  women
              residing within a six county radius to benefit from this experience. 
              Additional  components of the expansion and refinement of this program include:
               1) modification of the  program format to accommodate a residential component,
              increase interactions between student  role models and camp participants; 2)
              addressing the numerous leaks along the education pipeline  to directly improve
              access and retention of women in the sciences; 3) providing teacher training 
              to enhance science education at secondary levels; 4) increasing collaborative
              efforts between  public and private research facilities statewide; and 5)
              serving as a m odel program for others,  offering training materials to pilot
              similar programs regionally.    The demonstration of the provision of services
              to female students includes:  a summer science  program, use of technology in
              instruction, technical assistance, development of a curriculum  addressing
              needs and interests of female students, improvement of individualized
              instruction in  the classroom, collaborations between secondary schools,
              university and governmental  organizations, and dissemination of information
              gathered over both short-term and long-term  review processes.  The target
              population for this program is young women who have  successfully completed
              seventh grade.  This is a critical time when girls experience a loss of 
              self-confidence and need positive encouragement in their pursuits of math and
              science.  The  rationale is that the camp experience will motivate participants
              to select more math and science  courses and seriously consider the sciences as
              a career option.  ***
