Title       : Introducing Parallel Programming Techniques into the Freshman Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9554975

Award Number: 9554975
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114975             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony B. Wilkinson abw@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. Michael Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this proposal is to restructure how parallel  programming is taught
              at universities.  Parallel programming  has been taught as a specialized topic
              at the senior and  graduate levels in research universities. However with the 
              growing importance of multiprocessor systems, it is now both  feasible and
              necessary to introduce parallel programming at  a much earlier stage and to a
              wider audience. This proposal  will investigate introducing parallel
              programming techniques  at the freshman year, integrating the material with
              existing  sequential programming classes. The introduction of parallel 
              programming techniques and their application will be  continued in a similar
              fashion throughout the undergraduate  curriculum wherever appropriate, in a
              gradual and  constructive way.  Introducing parallel programming at an earlier
              stage has two  major problems which will be addressed in his proposal.  First
              it requires special attention to dissemination and  integration of the
              material. Second it requires a suitable  computing platform. A major hindrance
              to teaching parallel  programming with large classes has been unavailability of
               suitable computing platforms. Recent advances will be used  in networked
              workstations and parallel programming tools  which enable the workstations to
              be used collectively. How  such networks can be used effectively in a parallel 
              programming educational setting will be explored. New  educational material
              will be created, which will be made  freely available to other institutions.
              This proposal is  intended to influence not only computer science and 
              engineering curricula but also many aspects of other  disciplines, as
              programming and its application are widely  dispersed among many disciplines,
              including the physical  sciences, natural sciences, business, and commerce.
