Title       : The Bigger Picture: A Project-Based Course on EnvironmentalGeophysics and
               Geochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1995   
File        : a9554973

Award Number: 9554973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75908              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah E. Kruse   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven C. Semken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A project-based course in environmental field methods will be  develmped for
              students in the second year of earth science  programs, creating a new context
              for students' first encounter  with more complex, and in particular, more
              quantitative science  topics. By teaching geophysical and geochemical field
              methods  through a sequence of in-depth studies of current environmental 
              problems, presented in their historical and social context, we  hope to keep
              students, especially women and minorities, in the  quantitative science
              pipeline and make clear their own potential  for such work. Students will work
              through in-depth environmental  "case-studies", or project modules, on topics
              such as salt water  intrusion in coastal Florida, uranium mining remediation in
              the  Navajo Nation, and eutrophication in a Georgia estuary. Students  will
              process a subset of the data, combine data sets, analyze  and interpret the
              data, define limits to their interpretations,  and make and justify policy
              decisions. The course will be built  around six or seven sequential modules,
              with each module  designed to follow a classroom introduction to the relevant 
              field methods. We plan to add supporting materials to these  modules so that
              they can also be used as individual case studies  in environmental geology,
              hydrology, geophysics, and  geochemistry courses, and will be in a form that
              can be  disseminated on the WWW, CD-rom, and hardcopy.    This work will be a
              collaborative effort by four faculty at  disparate institutions (College of
              William and Mary, Navajo  Community College, and Georgia Tech). Each of us will
              design one  or two modules, working with undergraduates at our home 
              institutions. We will collaboratively review and revise each  module as we
              develop the course as a whole. Thus students will  encounter a wider range of
              both geographic settings and cultural  contexts for environmental problems than
              is currently found in  quantitative geo-science courses.
