Title       : Graduate Research Traineeships in Photonics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9554533

Award Number: 9554533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Forrest forrest@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9554533  Forrest  We propose an innovative program  that provides unique
              research and educational experiences  for  graduate students pursuing a career 
              in photonics at Princeton  University. The requested five Graduate Research 
              Traineeships will accelerate the growth of a newly  established division
              concentrating  on optics and optoelectronic engineering within the  Department 
              of Electrical Engineering. This program forms the nucleus of  an
              inter-institutional  multidisciplinary effort to provide educational and
              research  opportunities in optical sciences  and engineering, including optical
              communications, advanced  photonic materials and devices, and  biomedical
              applications. To promote and facilitate this  ambitious  effort, the Advanced
              Technology  Center for Photonics and Optoelectronic Materials (ATC/POEM)  was
              established at Princeton  through a grant from the State of  New Jersey in
              1989. This center tightly couples POEM faculty  and students with the photonics
               industry, who have been engaged  over the last several years in an effective
              program of  technology transfer from academia to the industrial  sector. Hence,
              POEM  forms the focus of these future careers in both large and  small
              photonics-based companies. As part  of this proposal, we will encourage
              students to work  directly with  these companies under direct,  joint
              supervision between the  faculty of the Department of Electrical Engineering 
              and their industrial supervisor. In the  Appendix we include four letters of
              commitment from  industrial participants to these Graduate Research 
              Traineeships.    Furthermore, we will work closely  with undergraduate
              institutions  which will act as "feeders" of  highly qualified and interested
              undergraduates, to  provide both the student and their undergraduate advisor 
              with relevant experiences  in optical sciences and technology. The northeast
              has a  wealth of undergraduate institutions which  are world-renown for their
              quality  of education. Hence, Princeton is well-positioned to   engage jointly 
              with these colleges in  undergraduate summer internships in this rapidly 
              advancing and  important technological area. As a starting point, we  have
              already established an agreement with Swathmore  College to participate in our
              undergraduate intern  program to act as a supplier of future  graduate students
              to the optics program at Princeton.
