Title       : NSF Graduate Traineeships "Democracy and Democratization: Social Conditions,
               Institutional Forms, Transitions"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2001       
File        : a9554569

Award Number: 9554569
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $675000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Bollen bollen@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig Calhoun  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9554569  Calhoun  The present proposal seeks to  enhance the
              interdisciplinary  training of graduate students in  sociology, history,
              anthropology,  and political science to be better  able to contribute to
              understanding  of (a) the social conditions of  democracy (b) the nature of 
              transitions to democracy and their  consolidation, (c) democracy in  historical
              perspective, and (d)  cultural and ethnic issues in  democratic development.
              The UNC  Traineeship program aims  specifically to overcome the  unfortunately
              sharp divisions  between three major styles of work:  studies of large scale
              quantitative  data sets; comparative quantitative  and qualitative historical
              studies  and ethnographic studies of smaller  numbers of cases (including
              single  cases set in comparative context);  and social and political theory. 
              All trainees will gain competence  in all three of these major  approaches to
              the field. The  Traineeship program will be  centered in a two-semester 
              interdisciplinary course sequence  required of all trainees and  offered
              annually, and a proseminar  for trainees, other interested  graduate students,
              and faculty. All  trainees will be eligible for up to  four years of further
              financial  support from UNC, contingent on  satisfactory progress. Trainees 
              will be selected by a committee  composed of the Principal  Investigator and
              faculty from the  four departments. Trainees will  have the option of an
              international  field practicum in the summer after  their Traineeship year.
              Programs  are in place with the  Constitutional Commission of  Eritrea, the
              Ford Foundation and a  cluster of NGOs in India, and  university-based research
              centers  in Russia and Eastern Europe, Asia,  Africa and Latin America.
