Title       : Partners in Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1995 
File        : a9554240

Award Number: 9554240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253230             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claude C. McMillan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie S. Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul B. Reichardt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fairbanks N Star Borough
	      PO Box 71250
	      Fairbanks, AK  997071250    907/452-2000

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              McMillan  95-54240    A project to link K-12 students and teachers to practicing
              University, industry and agency scientists using  networked technology, with
              the aim of increasing the practice of authentic, project based math and
              science.    A significant portion of science and math teaching, inquiry, and
              application at the primary and secondary grade levels can be furthered by the
              virtually unlimited possibilities for information gathering and sharing via
              computer networking. Yet teachers and their students often do not take
              advantage of the facilities available, or do not have access to the technology
              that would make this possible. Alaska, with its far flung population and
              limited road system can especially benefit from networked technology. We should
              morph into the virtual classroom where students, teachers, and practicing
              scientists from throughout Alaska and the world engage in animated
              conversations, conduct experiments, and exchange information using the
              information networking.    The main goal of the proposed Partners in Science
              project is to further math and science learning in grades K-12 in the Fairbanks
              North Star Borough School District (FNSBSD), two rural Alaskan school districts
              (Iditarod and Gateway), and among isolated home-schoolers. In addition, the
              project will share the educational experiences and new concepts developed on a
              statewide, national, and global level. To accomplish this, the proposed project
              has been broken down into objectives that focus on its three main components:
              the students, the teachers, and the technology.    In order to achieve these
              objectives, the proposed project will link practicing scientists from higher
              education, government, and industry with teachers and students, using the
              latest information networking technology. It will be instrumental in igniting a
              redefinition of technology's place in the education process in the targeted
              school districts. We are very hopeful that Partners in Science is very
              effective in pulling in the most isolated student s in our state -students in
              rural districts and students being taught at home by their parents
              (homeschoolers).    A central feature of this project is the creation of
              Virtual Science and Math classrooms at the elementary, junior high and high
              school level. Teachers will be intensively trained in these classrooms in the
              best practices used to achieve the math and science standards expressed in
              Goals 2000 and Alaska 2000, using electronic and person-to-person
              networkworking to practicing scientists. Several levels of training are
              proposed to allow the opportunity to participate by our eager, yet
              inexperienced teachers to the most able and ready staff.
