Title       : Collaborative Interactive Remote Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2000   
File        : a9554261

Award Number: 9554261
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1032040            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt J. Maly maly@cs.odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. M. Overstreet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hussein Abdel-Wahab  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Maly  95-54261    Building on its expertise in networking, computer supported
              collaborative work, and remote learning, Old Dominion University will prepare
              to build a statewide highly Interactive Remote Instruction (IRI) pilot system
              based on networked workstations. Technology and pedagogical methods developed
              in the system will be integrated into TELETECHNET, a state funded program in
              which Old Dominion University and community colleges provides four-year degree
              programs. The first two years are being taught at the community colleges with
              the last two being provided by Old Dominion University to remote community
              college campuses via networked and televised course instructions. The project
              will consist of a three-year phase of research, development, implementation and
              evaluation.    Significant contributions include: 1) refining an existing IRI
              system to provide an open-ended teaching/learning environment with a set of
              basic features easy to use by students and faculty of all disciplines; 2)
              developing the basic concepts of new instructional methods to exploit the
              interactivity of the system in support of higher domains of learning; and 3)
              bringing together a consortium of government, industry and academic individuals
              who are dedicated to innovative approaches to education for the 21st century,
              and 4) providing Virginia with a cost-effective method of delivering high
              quality education remotely; and 5) serve as a model for other states faced with
              similar problems.    The proposed open hardware/software architecture uses
              existing technologies but anticipates the wider availability of a high-speed
              Information Superhighway and multimedia workstations in the near future. The
              system provides two-way video to remote sites; shared operation of X-window
              tools and applications; interactive note-taking; a VCR-like replay of past
              classes and ancillary material and a full motion video window which can display
              the instructor, a classroom demonstration, or any PC, Macintosh or X-window
              application.    These in structional capabilities enables instructors and
              students to access multimedia generated from a variety of sources and to use
              group collaboration tools for interaction between two participants, among small
              groups, or entire classes. The system will provide audio-visual interaction and
              allow faculty and remote-site students to share the manipulation of software
              tools, such as spreadsheets or chemistry models. While the elements of IRI are
              currently technically feasible, a major portion of the project's efforts are
              directed to the developing of new student-centered teaching methods and
              paradigms which take advantage of the environment and to refining the hardware
              and software through experience of actual instructional needs.  This system
              will provide easier access to higher education for both traditional and
              non-traditional students, who for personal or financial reasons choose not to
              reside at a four-year institution. IRI will promote effective use of network
              and computer technology for all participating students and faculty.
