Title       : Online Internet Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1995 
File        : a9554232

Award Number: 9554232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven A. Sanchez                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177157             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ferdi Serim ferdi@tigger.junc.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bonnie Bracey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton Regional Schools
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08540    /   -

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Serim  95-54232    The Online Internet Institute (OII) will create a virtual
              infrastructure on the Internet to provide leading Internet using educators,
              proponents of systemic reform, and teachers desiring professional growth with
              hands-on experiences which will enable them to integrate the Internet within
              their classrooms, and support their peers in doing the same. The OTA report
              Technology and Teachers: Making the Connection states "helping schools to make
              the connection between teachers and technology may be one of the most important
              steps to making the most of past, present, and future investments in
              educational technology and in our children's future." OII will add to the
              knowledge base required to make these connections.    During an eight week
              period this summer, 665 selected participants from school districts around the
              country will take part in a series of online activities and workshops designed
              to teach them how to identify and build successful models for using the
              Internet for systemic reform and curriculum development at the local level.
              Educators must experience what it is to learn through project-based,
              technology-enhanced approaches in their own learning, in order to effectively
              support this kind of learning for their students. Accordingly, each OII
              participant will in turn mentor at least five online participants in order to
              extend the process to the wider Internet education community, adding to the
              National Professional Development Library that will be created by the project. 
                At the same time, researchers working with the project will create an
              assessment piece that will support replicating this model. Software and
              technology developers and publishers will work with the project to develop
              virtual online components of value to educators with Internet access who are
              not workshop attendees.    Through these efforts, more than 3,000 teachers will
              return to their classrooms in the fall fully prepared to bring their students
              along into a rich environment of Internet resources. Man y tens of thousands of
              additional teachers will have access to electronic databases and models that
              provide a virtual instructional resource for networking in the service of
              curriculum development and systemic reform.
