Title       : Interactions and Matter: An Atomic-Level Approach to Mechanics and Thermal
               Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1998  
File        : a9554843

Award Number: 9554843
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337098             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth W. Chabay rchabay@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Sherwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              There are four serious problems with the first calculus-based physics course
              most science and engineering students take in college.  1) Research has shown
              that even students who do well in a traditional mechanics course emerge from
              the course unable to apply basic principles in reasoning qualitatively about
              physical problems.  2) Most students have studied mechanics in high school, and
              resent having to study the same material again (although their understanding of
              mechanics may be weak).  3) Both students and physics teachers are dismayed by
              the lack of modern physics in the introductory course.  4) The intellectual
              coherence of the subject matter is obscured when mechanics and thermodynamics
              are treated as two separate sciences.  We propose to develop a fundamentally
              new course that emphasizes atomic-level description and analysis and unifies
              mechanics and thermal physics by examining both macroscopic and microscopic
              viewpoints.  As we have done in our work on electricity and magnetism, we will
              place heavy emphasis on teaching students how toconstruct rigorous, qualitative
              explanations of physical phenomena in terms of a small set of powerful
              fundamental principles.  The fundamental physical understanding that results
              from this qualitative work will form the foundation for the more quantitative
              components of the course.  As in E&M, we will stress the nature of the
              assumptions and approximations made in analyzing physical problems, and the
              limitations of a classical viewpoint.  Theory and experiment will be integrated
              by creating "just-in-time" desktop experiments that can  be done in the lecture
              hall, recitation room, or at home.  We will draw on existing research on
              effective teaching of mechanics, and will adapt successful strategies where we
              can to the context of this course.  The textbook we produce will have the same
              workbook format as our electricity and magnetism textbook, Electric and
              Magnetic Interactions (1995, John Wiley and Sons), and we expect to write
              computer programs to aid in v isualization.
