Title       : An Intergrated Mathematics-Engineering Course for Non- Science Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9554913

Award Number: 9554913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129991             (Estimated)
Investigator: George T. Rublein gtrubl@math.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith A. Griffioen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposal aims to design an integrated two semester  general education course
              in mathematics and science. The  work will involve two more-or-less separate
              activities:  1)  The revision of a first draft of the mathematical material, 
              relying on results of pilot testing with undergraduates at  William and Mary
              and Norfolk State University and with in-  service teachers at ten university
              sites across the state of  Virginia.  2) The construction and piloting of a 
              physics/engineering portion of the material which will  directly reference the
              mathematics encountered by students  in the first term.  The central theme of
              the mathematical  material is that real engineering data will be used by 
              students who will be asked to solve problems that directly  bear on an
              intuitive grasp of a particular physical setting:  Powered aircraft flight.
              This data is freely available from  multiple sources: daily wind data, wind
              histories,  navigation maps and runway plates, weights and dimensions of 
              commercial aircraft and current magnetic declination data.  Computations
              involve arithmetic, elementary algebra, some  geometry, some trigonometry, and
              some use of hand-  calculators for numerical integration. Problems are selected
               because they are elementary. Omitted because of mathematical  complexity are
              many problems that would be part of a  standard introduction to aeronautical
              engineering.  The  engineering/science part of this work will ask students to 
              obtain some of these data themselves, with a view to getting  information that
              is crucial to the proper function of  aircraft. We will also design appropriate
              experiments to  test physical laws that are important to flight. Our entire 
              aim is to convince non-science students that they can  enhance their grasp of
              the outside world by means of  elementary calculations and data acquisition.
