Title       : Controls Education Using Matlab: Tutorials on the World-WideWeb
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1997      
File        : a9554819

Award Number: 9554819
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195548             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dawn Tilbury tilbury@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Messner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to improve undergraduate  controls engineering
              education. Students frequently have  difficulties in learning controls; it is
              often the first  subject in which they must use the properties of complex 
              variables and the fundamentals of linear algebra in a  sophisticated manner.
              The proposed education aids will  illustrate control system design and analysis
              and enable  students to quickly use the knowledge presented to them. We  will
              develop useful, widely available, and easily accessible  tutorials for
              undergraduate-level controls courses using  Matlab, a popular computation and
              visualization software  package, and the World Wide Web (WWW). These education
              aids  would be a valuable addition to the undergraduate  engineering curriculum
              at any university. Prototypes of  these tutorials can be viewed on the WWW at 
              http://www.engin.umich.edu/~tilbury/matlab_tutorial.html.  The main innovation
              of these education aids is their  implementation on the WWW. The tutorials will
              combine  explanatory text with sample Matlab commands and  illustrative plots
              and graphics. The outline of the  tutorials will closely follow the outline of
              the most  popular textbooks for undergraduate controls courses,  including
              modeling, Laplace transforms, time-domain and  frequency-domain relationships,
              root-locus methods,  frequency-domain methods, state-space methods, and digital
               control. Analysis techniques such as determining the  stability and
              steady-state error of a control system will be  incorporated throughout the
              tutorials. The tutorials will  contain example problems which are  worked out
              in detail,  showing all of the necessary steps, and sample problems for  the
              students to work on  independently. For these sample  problems, several levels
              of hints will be included. There  are three advantages to the approach taken in
              this project  for teaching students how to use Matlab for control  system 
              design. First, the tutorials will be immediately available  to students across
              the country  at no cost to them. Any  student with access to both the WWW
              through Mosaicing or  Netscape "3" and to Matlab on either a personal computer 
              or  a workstation will be able to follow a tutorial while  running Matlab and
              will be able to easily switch between the  two  programs. Second, students will
              be able to grasp key  concepts and design techniques in a "learn by seeing and 
              doing"  manner. Commands shown in the tutorials can be  copied from the
              Netscape or Mosaic window and pasted into  the  Matlab command window with a
              simple point and click of  the mouse; there is no need for time-consuming
              typing and  editing. Students can immediately see the result of an  actual
              computation, compare it to the result shown on the  tutorial,  and quickly
              experiment with modifications of the  code and changes of parameters. Third, by
              using the  hypertext  markup language on the WWW, the proposed on-line 
              education aids can be highly interconnected. There will be  several paths
              through a tutorial which have different levels  of complexity or which
              emphasize different methods. By  making the education aids available on the
              WWW, not only  will they be easily integrated into an existing  undergraduate
              controls curriculum in a traditional four-year  university, but they could also
              be used by community  colleges, industry, and individuals for continuing 
              education. With the education aids which we will develop, it  will be  easy for
              engineers in academia and industry with  access to the WWW and who currently
              know some classical  control  theory to learn how to use Matlab to apply their 
              knowledge and to improve their skills and understanding.
