Title       : Development of Research-Based Introductory Biology Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1996   
File        : a9554858

Award Number: 9554858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Hoerter hoerterj@ferris.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David V. Frank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fred J. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ferris State University
	      
	      Big Rapids, MI  49307    616/796-0461

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              As part of a strategic plan to restructure the biology  curriculum to emphasize
              ways that scientists gain knowledge,  the Dept. of Biological Sciences at
              Feffis State University  will revise the one-year introductory biology course
              to  permit students to experience the methods of science--  formulating and
              testing hypotheses, designing and conducting  experiments, analyzing and
              interpreting data, and  communicating results.  The course will forge
              connections to  other disciplines and emphasize investigation.  Professors 
              from a wide range of disciplines will discuss research-based  CASE STUDIES with
              student research teams and share  interpretations of lab experiments via an
              e-mail BIONETWORK  on the University's WWW home page.  The conceptual theme of 
              the course will the biological effects of LIGHT.  Prospective biology teachers,
              biotechnology and applied  biology majors will be involved in the development
              and pilot  testing of the labs, then as research mentors to each of the  lab
              sections.  Prospective biology teachers will be assigned  to a special lab
              section of area high school students  enrolled under an educational
              partnership.  A major goal is  to develop a series of RESEARCH CORES--systems
              that offer  multiple options for student research teams to design and  conduct
              an experiment, analyze the data and present their  results using a multimedia
              "poster" There will be four 4-  week research units per semester, one in each
              of the  following areas--in genetics/cell biology, plant/animal  physiology,
              ecology/behavior, and evolution.  A development  team representing the
              disciplines of biology, chemistry,  physics, mathematics, geography and
              education will develop  the case studies and research cores with the assistance
              of  biology education, biotechnology and applied biology majors.
