Title       : Quantum Science Across Disciplines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2000     
File        : a9554198

Award Number: 9554198
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1591774            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Garik garik@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan Dill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald L. Abegg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9554198  Garik    The Project on Quantum Science Across Disciplines proposes to 
              design and implement an introduction to quantum science for high  school
              students and undergraduates in biology, chemistry, and  physics through
              activities integrating computer modeling tools, a  data resource base, and
              hands-on experiments; do research on  student response to materials intended to
              introduce quantum science  at a level appropriate for interdisciplinary inquiry
              with hooks  paths between biology, chemistry, and physics; and, investigate the
               extent to which a technologically rich approach to teaching  interdisciplinary
              science can fundamentally change high school and  college instructional
              practices.    The target audiences are the high school students and 
              undergraduates for whom it is important to develop scientific  literacy as
              defined by the AAAS 2061 Project and the Draft National  Science Education
              Standards (NSES) prepared by the National  Research Council. An understanding
              of the methods and results of  scientific research and the tools of technology
              are important for  the broad spectrum of students studying science, whether for
               satisfaction of diploma requirements, technical professional  training, or
              preparation for advanced study. The new materials will  be aimed at high school
              classes, undergraduates, and adult  education courses with the potential for
              science teacher in-service  training.    The goal is to provide students with
              the tools to navigate between  the representations for quantum science adopted
              by each of the  sciences. As the theory for the microscopic processes which
              affect  all the sciences, quantum science can be a means for providing an 
              integrated approach to science education. The examples of quantum  science will
              be drawn from biology, chemistry, and physics, will  reflect research
              scientists' mental models for the process in  question, and will be coupled to
              laboratory experiments. Each of  the subject modules will be independently
              usable in an introductory  courses;  however, their linkage will encourage
              interdisciplinary  instruction.    Earlier projects have demonstrated the
              change in classroom  structure, communication, and the role of the teacher that
              results  from the combination of inquiry oriented projects and rich 
              technology. Students have the technological tools to pursue their  own
              independent projects, while the teacher takes on the role of  mentor and
              advisor. Electronic journals provide new opportunities  for student-student and
              teacher-student dislodges, combining the  best features of journal writing and
              portfolio assessment.  ***
