Title       : Ada: A Software Development Tool for the Entire Computer Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1995   
File        : a9554717

Award Number: 9554717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lillian N. Cassel                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118867             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean E. Sanders sanders@katya.acs.ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet D. Hartman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on two week summer workshops (Summers 1996 and  1997) and
              follow-through activities during the following academic  year and summer on the
              integration of Ada as a software development  tool into all levels of the
              computer science curriculum.  The  workshop covers material on software
              engineering, the design and  development of Ada programs, techniques for
              integrating software  engineering and Ada into computer science courses,
              resources and  educational materials for using Ada in undergraduate courses, 
              hands-on lab activities using Ada, and the development of a  curriculum project
              which utilizes Ada.  The workshop contains a  significant laboratory component
              that is designed to complement the  lecture material and include classroom
              tested lab activities and  typical assignments.  The first week of the workshop
              emphasizes the  early portion of a typical computer science curriculum.  The
              topics  for this week are based on the traditional paradigm of structured 
              analysis and design.  The second week emphasizes the upper levels  of the
              computer science curriculum.  Object-oriented design and the  corresponding
              features of Ada 95 will be introduced and contrasted  to traditional software
              design and development.  Ada tasks will be  introduced as the basis for
              studying concurrent programming.   Graphics packages and the realtime aspects
              of Ada programming will  also be introduced.  The curriculum activities for the
              workshop  include (1) the proposal of a curriculum project to be completed 
              during the academic year following the workshop, (2) discussion  groups in
              which issues, assignments, and resources for using Ada in  an educational
              setting are explored, and (3) interaction with an  expert on using Ada in the
              computer science curriculum.  An  electonic follow-up session is planned in
              Fall 1997 following the  workshop to present and discuss completed curriculum
              projects and  to develop products and plans for the dissemination of results
              from  the curriculum projects.  Results wil l be presented in SIGCSE  forums
