Title       : Information Technology in the Service of Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1999      
File        : a9554825

Award Number: 9554825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gianfranco Vidali gvidali@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey C. Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward D. Lipson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Simon M. Catterall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. Alan Middleton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We propose to develop, test, and produce a set of educational  modules that use
              computer and network-based resources to  teach science topics in an integrated
              way to non-science  majors.  These modules will consist of hypertext documents 
              combining text, still images, video, and sound using state-of-  the-art
              technology.  Two prototype units covering topics of a  successful new
              two-semester course taught at Syracuse  University called Science for the 21st
              Century have already  been tested in the classroom.  Advanced
              information-transfer  technologies such as video-on-demand and simulation-on- 
              demand will be implemented to increase active student  involvement.  New units
              will be developed to cover other  important science topics, such as evolution
              and imaging  science phenomena.  The five modules will constitute an 
              introduction to science for undergraduates who are not science  majors.  Each
              module will be self-contained and easily  expandable; it will be portable since
              it will be delivered  through the Internet or in other formats, such as CD-ROM.
                There will be three phases of this project:  a) design and  development of
              modules, b) implementation, testing, and  assessment of modules in our course,
              and c) dissemination of  products and training of teachers.  Through this
              pioneering  project, we hope to contribute to the process through which 
              revolutionary information technology connects with  improvements in our ability
              to educate our citizenry.
