Title       : IDA/WG: An Invitational Conference for Female Faculty and Graduate Students in
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1996      
File        : a9554196

Award Number: 9554196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99757              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan S. Metz smetz22@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne G. Brainard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9554196  Brainard    An Invitational Conference for Female Faculty and Graduate
              Students  in Engineering will begin to address the low representation of 
              female faculty in engineering in the US.  This initiative will  increase the
              awareness of all deans of engineering regarding the  need to improve the
              institutional climate to promote the  identification, hiring and promotion of
              female faculty and to  examine the admissions and funding criteria for female
              graduate  students.  The conference will focus on the professional  development
              of female faculty and gradate students by identifying  strategies to improve
              grant writing and skills, increase their  publications and collaboration with
              colleagues, and to enhance  their mentoring and advising skills which will
              benefit their  students.  A total of 30 will be female faculty and 30 female 
              graduate students will participate in the conference.  An  assessment will be
              conducted to determine the benefit of the  conference and to determine the need
              to offer this training on a  broader scope.    The anticipated outcome of this
              project is to effect a positive  change in the engineering infrastructure which
              will be equally  conductive to female and male faculty and graduate students. 
              To  this end, conference proceedings including a set of recommendations  to
              facilitate this process will be disseminated to all US deans of  engineering,
              participants and other female faculty who are members  of WEPAN, AWIS and ASEE.
               WEPAN, Women in Engineering Advocates  Network will continue to mark, print
              and disseminate the conference  proceedings and recommendations after the grant
              period ends.
