Title       : Technimagineering: A Program to Build a Science and Engineering Pipeline of
               Skilled and Motivated African American and Mexican American Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1997     
File        : a9554219

Award Number: 9554219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Brown mbrown@education.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jules M. Zimmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Rinker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven E. Butner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9554219  Brown      We seek a planning grant of $99,542 to devise and implement
              a research program for testing the potential of electronic networks for
              increasing the number of skilled and motivated African American and Mexican
              American students in the field of science, mathematics, engineering, and
              technology.  The work to be done in the planning phase will lead to a final
              project proposal.    The final project will study whether electronically linked
              communities of members engaged in these fields can counteract features of
              African American and Mexican  American communities that discourage children and
              adolescents from studding and pursuing careers in these fields.  Social
              cognitive theory suggests that students in 5th or 6th grade who establish
              strong connections with supportive, ethnically similar peers and mentors who
              are successful in science and math field- and maintain those connections
              through graduate school-are likely to become excited by as well as confident
              and competent in those disciplines.  Unfortunately, potential peers and mentors
              rarely live or work sufficiently close to economically disadvantaged Mexican
              Americans and African American communities to forge such relationship.  A
              special contribution of the final project will be the first comprehensive and
              systematic evaluation of the effectiveness of electronic technology in
              overcoming the sparse distribution of appropriate peers and mentors for these
              traditionally under-represented groups, and thus of promoting excellence
              through diversity in the science and engineering academic pipeline.    During
              the twelve-month planning phase, the principal investigators will select and
              convene an advisory board of 15-20 people who represent various stakeholders in
              the final project: students, parents, teachers, and a variety of  African
              American and Mexican American professionals in science, mathematics,
              engineering, and technology.  The Technimagineering Team, which includes the
              Principal Investigators, will determine: (1) strategies for  selecting and
              training participants; (2) curriculum materials and resources; (3) networking
              technology; (4) configurations linking students to peers and mentors; (5) final
              project evaluation strategy; (6) means of documenting and disseminating project
              results; and (7) self-sustaining strategies.    ??
