Title       : "Visualizing Earth"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1997      
File        : a9554504

Award Number: 9554504
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1874495            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Barstow Dan_Barstow@terc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric G. Frost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn S. Liben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sally K. Ride  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randall J. Souviney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9554504  Barstow    Over the past two decades, technology has dramatically
              advanced the  ability of scientists to use geographic visualizations to
              explore,  learn and communicate about the geosciences. These advances include 
              the vast amounts of data and images derived from remote-sensing  instruments on
              satellites, the direct observations and photographs  taken by astronauts, and
              the development of new computer-based  tools to display, manipulate and analyze
              the data and images. These  developments have truly revolutionized how
              scientists investigate  Earth.     We believe that these rich resources of
              data, images and software  tools have a similar potential to revolutionize
              Earth science  education, by enabling students to directly observe, explore, 
              investigate and visualize fundamental concepts in Earth science in  ways that
              have never before been possible in a school environment.  These dynamic
              visualizations will enable students to gain a deeper  understanding of key
              concepts in Earth science, and will enable  Earth science educators to reach a
              broader range of students,  including those who are not currently inclined
              towards science.    Capitalizing on this power depends upon developing a deeper
               understanding of the ways in which students make sense of  geographic images
              in technology-rich learning environments. In this  project, we will develop the
              knowledge base through research and  development in three areas:      
              *Technology -- reviewing the vast array of data sources to  identify those with
              the greatest potential for educational use, and  adapting software tools for
              accessing, displaying and manipulating  the data, to make them easy and
              inexpensive enough for school use.       *Cognitive Research -- better
              understanding how geographic  visualizations can help students learn, how
              technology impacts  these visualizations, and how students differ in their
              development  of the underlying skills of spatial, logical and symbolic thinking
                    *Curriculum Models -- developing sample curr icula, and  exploring
              instructional approaches and learning environments to  better understand how to
              help students tap into the learning power  of these resources.    Three
              research projects which will provide a context for the  integration of this
              technology development, cognitive research, and  exploration of curriculum
              models:       #1 -- "My State From Space" -- an introductory unit on 
              satellites, remote-sensing and geographic visualizations, which  will help us
              explore students' initial responses to these tools and  resources, with a
              special focus on the students' local environment.       #2 -- "Visualizing
              Weather" -- providing students will access  to current weather data and images
              for them to interpret and make  forecasts; with a cognitive research focus on
              how students  integrate multiple representations and how this can be used to 
              develop higher order thinking skills.         #3 -- "Engines of Change --
              Volcanoes, Earthquakes, and Plate  Tectonics" -- an investigation into how best
              to convey concepts of  plate tectonics, with a cognitive research focus on
              understanding  the development of increasingly complex visualization skills,
              and  a technology focus on advanced tools of data overlaying and 3- 
              dimensional rotations.    This work will be done as a collaboration among four
              organizations:  TERC (Daniel Barstow, Principal Investigator) with expertise in
               technology and curriculum development; UCSD (Dr. Sally Ride and Dr.  Randall
              Souviney, Co-Investigators) with expertise in remote-  sensing and Earth
              Science Education; SDSU (Dr. Eric Frost, Co-  Investigator) with expertise in
              geographic visualizations; and Penn  State (Dr. Lynn Liben, Co-Investigator)
              with expertise in cognitive  development and geographic information systems.   
               This result of this research will be a better understanding of how  these rich
              resources of geographic data, images and software tools  can be most
              effectively used in education, a deeper understanding  of the related cognitive
              issues, and a set of sof tware tools and  prototype curricula which demonstrate
              the educational power of  technology-enhanced geographic visualizations.  ****
