Title       : An Introductory Course in Modeling Dynamic Chemical and Ecological Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1998  
File        : a9554932

Award Number: 9554932
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Martire martired@gunet.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph E. Earley  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An  introductory  course  in modeling of  dynamic  systems,  with  special 
              emphasis  on chemical and ecological problems,  will  be  developed.  The 
              target student population  will  be  first-  and  second-year   social-science 
               and   humanities   students,   but  upper-division students and interested
              science majors will not be  excluded.  Rather  than placing emphasis on
              mathematical  methods  and  techniques used in modeling, attention will be 
              centered  on  salient  aspects  of complex-system behavior  as  illustrated  by
               models     constructed     using    the    commercially-available 
              software-package  STELLA  II. Relatively straight-forward  models  dealing 
              with  chemical  reactions  will  be  used  to  introduce  fundamental  features
               of complex-system  dynamics.  Problems  of  ecological  and  demographic 
              interest,  at  moderate  level   of  difficulty,  will  then be covered. The
              origin  and  behavior  of  "deterministic  chaos" will be treated using
              examples  from  both  chemistry and ecology. In the last third of the course, 
              students  will work in small groups (or individually) developing their  own 
              models,  each related to a specific problem of current  interest,  preferably 
              in  fields of the students' major academic  interest.  Opportunity will be
              provided for some outstanding students to use  less "user-friendly" software
              such as ODEPACK to deal with models  involving  "stiff" differential equations.
              The last  exercise  of  the  course  will  be a poster-session, at which
              individuals  and  groups will present their project-models to other members of 
              the  class,  and  to guests. The main aims of the course  will  be  to 
              facilitate  development of the students' insight with respect  to  types  of 
              functioning  to be expected  of  complex  networks  of  relationships,  and
              therefore in important natural  systems,  and  also to engender an appreciation
              of the power and limitations  of  modeling techniques.
