Title       : PPD/SP: Using ASTER to Improve Math and Science Accessibility by Students with
               Learning Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9554453

Award Number: 9554453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49557              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn Gardner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Linn Benton Comm College
	      6500 S W Pacific Blvd
	      Albany, OR  973213755    503/928-2361

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # HRD-9554453    Linn Benton Community College - Benton Center      
              Carolyn K. Gardner, Principal Investigator  Title:  "Using ASTER to Improve
              Math and Science Accessibility        by Students with Learning Disabilities"  
                                              ABSTRACT    Students with visual processing
              learning disabilities typically  have difficulty understanding printed 
              materials, and math and  technical subjects often present the greatest
              difficulties.  This  project proposes to initiate the first phase in research
              designed  to develop the most appropriate interface strategies needed to 
              optimize ASTER and related audio-formatting programs for students  with
              learning disabilities.  ASTER is an innovative computer  program developed
              initially to present math equations in an audio  format for students with
              visual disabilities.  It is important  that students with learning disabilities
              participate in tests on  ASTER navigation during the developmental phase of
              this software  program.  Commands which might be intuitive to a student who is 
              blind might not be as easy for a sighted student with a learning  disability. 
              Student  volunteers from the pre-algebra course and  Adult Basic Education
              program at Linn Benton Community College  Benton Center will be test subjects
              in specific experiments  conducted to answer the following questions:  (1) What
              are the  most intuitive keystrokes to select sections to be read on the 
              computer, to browse from section to section, paragraph to  paragraph, etc.? 
              (2) What kind of computer screen display do  students find most helpful?  (3)
              What additional educational  features are useful?  This research project is
              conducted  collaboratively with the Science Accessibility Program at Oregon 
              State University which is improving ASTER as an aid to better  accessibility to
              math and science written material for students  with various disabilities. 
              Results from this project will be  used  in future designs of ASTER.  ***
