Title       : Hands-On Activities for Developmental Math Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1998  
File        : a9554939

Award Number: 9554939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank Wattenberg                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145344             (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Sandefur sandefur@guvax.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rosalie Dance  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This  project  will  develop a collection of hands-on  activities  that  support
              introductory college mathematics at the  Elementary  Algebra,  Intermediate
              Algebra and Precalculus levels. The  units  will  particularly support older
              students who are coming back  to  school.  There  will be student and teacher
              materials  that  help  convey  mathematics  within the context of engaging 
              applications  and   interesting  problems.  The  materials   will   support   a
               cooperative  learning  style, with the  students  doing  hands-on  group  
              activities  during  much  of  class  time.  The  hands-on  activities   help  
              students  visualize  mathematics   and   make  connections   between  the  real
               world  and   the   mathematics.  Particular  attention  will be paid to
              developing  materials  for  students in teacher preparation programs, and for
              the faculty who  work  with  these  preservice teaching majors. Many 
              mathematical  topics  will  be integrated into each application. The  materials
               will  be  supported  by  the use of spreadsheets  and  the  TI-82  calculator.
               Hands-on activities using cooperative learning  will  appeal to the learning
              styles of holistic learners and we believe  that  the  methods encouraged by
              our materials will engender  the  support  networks  that  social learners
              often  appreciate.   The  applications   will   come  from  physics, 
              economics,   biology,  genetics,  and  other  areas  of  interest  to 
              students.   These  applications  provide  a context for the mathematics.  To 
              insure  accuracy, practitioners in a variety of fields will be consulted.  Over
              the two years of funding, units will be developed to support  most  topics  in 
              Elementary Algebra, Intermediate  Algebra,  and  Precalculus.
