Title       : The Network Montana Project: Development of a Rural Networking Infrastructure in
               Support of Systemic Change in Mathematics and Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1997      
File        : a9554251

Award Number: 9554251
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2520000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn D. Churchill church@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Churchill  95-54251    Network Montana Project (NMP) will focus on the
              development of flexible, sustainable approaches to a systemic educational
              network infrastructure. The partners in this enterprise will include teachers,
              administrators, and researchers from the state's educational system, leaders in
              state government, and  individuals from a variety of community, professional,
              and private sector organizations.  Commitments of talent and resources from all
              partners will be focused on the development of a lasting infrastructure capable
              of supporting the development of a variety of educational telecommunications
              services. This proposal seeks funding for a three year grant aimed at
              developing a systemic approach to K-16 networking in  Montana that:    1.
              Builds and maintains a state-wide coalition of partners from academia,
              government, and the private sector responsible for directing a wide variety of
              K16 educational networking activities during the period of NSF/NIE funding and
              in subsequent projects;    2. Supports and enhances a number of nationally
              significant systemic mathematics and science education reform projects;    3.
              Integrates multimedia network-based materials and delivery systems into
              mathematics and science instruction to enhance access and usability of many
              scientific resources.    4. Investigates adaptations of educational and
              informational telecommunications required to serve populations with special
              needs including those that may be visually or hearing impaired;    5. Develops
              a workable community networking model that is feasible in a low population
              density environment, promoting teleliteracy for rural citizens to enhance their
              involvement with lifelong learning, entrepreneurship and local/state
              governance.
