Title       : The Memphis Educational Computer Connectivity Alliance (MECCA) Enhanced
               Municipal Networking for Educational Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9554236

Award Number: 9554236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1346567            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack W. Buchanan jbuchanan@utmem.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry L. Tague  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      62 S. Dunlap
	      Memphis, TN  38163    901/448-5541

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Buchanan  95-54236    The project objective is to demonstrate that a well
              planned scaleable shared municipal network infrastructure can serve an
              extremely broad constituency and provide mathematics, science, engineering and
              technology education and thus empowerment to a broad range of Memphis citizens
              with educational backgrounds ranging from low literacy to postgraduate.    We
              will continue to encourage and facilitate the direct delivery of information to
              populations which are very diverse, choosing particularly those whose needs are
              carefully matched to resources available to us. In addition, a new emphasis
              will be placed on training teachers, subject matter experts and community
              leaders in the efficient use of network resources as tools for empowerment. We
              will train these various constituencies to be both providers and consumers of
              network information.    We will convert our virtual network consisting of
              bandwidth obtained from each MECCA member's Internet connection to a true
              Municipal Area Network based on a single mode fiber ring which is accessible to
              essentially all parts of the city. We will use switched Ethernet technology as
              a precursor to Asynchronous Transder Mode and Broadband ISDN technology.
              Educational activities highlighting mathematics, science and technology will
              take place to and from various points on the network. Specific projects include
              (1) Network infrastructure support of a two university graduate biomedical
              engineering joint instructional and research effort (2) Network assisted
              disease prevention/health and wellness education, (3) A training and resource
              center available to various entities in the city but emphasizing teachers and
              senior citizens, (4) Senior citizens connectivity and cross-generational
              activities involving seniors and K-12 students, (5) Seminars, workshops and
              conferences which highlight client-server and other network based activities
              and (6) Joint biological science efforts between the University of Tennessee,
              Memphis and LeMoyne-Owen College. Oth er partners have already been funded or
              will seek their own resources to utilized this shared municipal network
              infrastructure. These include the LeMoyne Gardens Housing Project and the One
              Room Drop-In School for educational activities, the Mid South Community
              Network, proposed by members of the United Way of the Mid South as a way to
              provide citizen access to social service agencies, the Memphis Public Library
              and Information Center and several potential projects involving the portion of
              the network serving the Medical Center community.
