Title       : Teaching Teachers to Teach Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1995   
File        : a9554724

Award Number: 9554724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53828              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry W. Samples samples@vms.cis.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Lenox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark F. Costello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher H. Conley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : US Military Academy
	      
	      West Point, NY  10996    914/938-4041

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              "Teaching Teachers to Teach Engineering" is a one-week workshop offered during
              the summer at the United States Military Academy.  The workshop is offered to
              faculty of all engineering disciplines who want to be good Teachers. The
              workshop strives to address the needs of faculty from two-year and four-year
              institutions, teaching and research   institutions, who are seeking high
              teaching standards, and efficiencies in preparation.  The workshop addresses
              topics in preparation, presentation, self-critique, learning models, goals and
              objectives, advanced technology, student-teacher relations, testing/grading,
              advising, legal aspects of teaching, research, scholarship, and time
              management.  Participants are expected to prepare and present classes, critique
              others, apply   workshop material in mini-class environments, and prepare an
              action plan for their next term.  Workshop participants will work in various
              size teams to develop confidence and poise in the classroom.  Participants will
              leave the workshop with the tools necessary to present logical and thought
              provoking presentations to their student.  They are expected to interact with
              faculty at their home institution to improve the teaching of others through
              seminars and presentations.  This workshop will guide faculty toward an
              efficient way to be both a good teacher and a successful researcher.
