Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis Applied to Evolution, Ecology, and Systemic Biology:
               An Extended Laboratory Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1996   
File        : a9554685

Award Number: 9554685
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207065             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank T. Bayliss fbayl@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric J. Routman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cristian R. Orrego  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/469-2141

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We propose an Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement project that will  provide for
              each of the next two years, an intense twelve-day  laboratory short course in
              Molecular Genetics & Evolutionary  Biology in the summer with a 4-day follow-up
              session each January,  and on-going technical and material support.  A highly
              successful  established format that evolved from ten prior national Chautauqua 
              courses was used in the design and development of our proposed  Undergraduate
              Faculty Enhancement project.  Twenty-two faculty will  be selected each year
              from a national applicant pool comprised of  faculty from community colleges,
              4-year liberal arts colleges and  universities, comprehensive universities, and
              research  universities.  Participants will learn the fundamentals of  molecular
              biology through the presentation of lectures and  demonstrations, and they will
              also conduct a series of experiments  to develop skill in PCR amplification,
              restriction enzyme analysis,  and various gel separation techniques.  In
              research groups of 4-5  composed of a mix faculty from community colleges and
              four-year  institutions, the participants will investigate "thematic" research 
              projects.  Seminar speakers will discuss their research on  procaryote,
              vertebrate, invertebrate, and plant systems, and their  application of
              molecular techniques.  Faculty will implement the  molecular techniques that
              they learn by adapting the exercises from  the course into undergraduate
              laboratory courses at their  respective institutions.  Trained faculty will
              have gained the  extraordinary capabilities afforded by these techniques to
              access  the genomes of natural populations from any taxa on earth and thus 
              create unique laboratory curricula at their own institutions.  The  SFSU
              faculty and Instructional Support Technician will support  participants after
              the summer course in the incorporation of  molecular techniques and analysis in
              undergraduate instruction.   Participants will also develop skill and
              confidence with molecular  techn iques to use in their research.  The workshop
              will be used to  develop laboratory modules and exercises for use in primary
              and  secondary education.
