Title       : The Applied Apprenticeship Approach (AAA): An Object-Oriented/Object-Based
               Framework for CS2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9554910

Award Number: 9554910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119382             (Estimated)
Investigator: Owen L. Astrachan ola@cs.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7410,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The second course in the standard Computer Science curriculum (CS 2) is often
              based on a theoretical study of data  structures without an integrating
              practical component. As this course migrates to an object-oriented approach, 
              students and instructors must be given materials to support a unified and
              application-oriented course. We propose  to develop learning modules that
              support an application oriented, apprenticeship learning approach to the CS 2 
              course. Each module supports a methodology that is inverted from the
              traditional "learn a data structure and use  it in a program" approach. Rather
              than studying data structures to use in applications, we propose to use
              applications  to study data structures. Each module supports an apprentice
              style of learning wherein students read and modify  implementations of data
              structures and application programs before writing them from scratch. Modules
              supply code  libraries and frameworks, explanatory material for students and
              instructors, and potential programming, lab, and  homework exercises. Each
              module supplies a situated learning experience that engages students from the
              outset by  providing practical and illuminating examples for how and why data
              structures are used. Applications are  interdisciplinary in nature, graphical
              where appropriate, and integrate several data structures into real-world 
              programs. Modules will be developed to support object-oriented (using C++)
              design and programs, but each  module will be developed as an Abstract Data
              Type (using C) to reach as wide an audience as possible. Three  institutions
              are collaborating in this proposal: a research and teaching oriented private
              university, a teaching oriented  public university, and a teaching oriented
              historically black university, ensuring that material will be accessible to  a
              wide audience. The modules developed will be made available electronically, as
              hyper-text documents, and as  published material to supplement traditional
              texts.
