Title       : Planning Grant to Investigate Integration of Technology into a Successful,
               Established Youth-Serving Not-For Profit Agency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1995 
File        : a9554337

Award Number: 9554337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Rubin jrubin@interacess.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jim Palos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Midtown Educational Founda
	      718 S Loomis Street
	      Chicago, IL  60607    708/332-5876

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Dinapolis  95-54337    The Midtown Educational Foundation (MEF) is dedicated to
              the professional success and personal happiness of inner city youth. Since its
              founding in 1965, MEF has helped thousands of disadvantaged, primarily minority
              youth by connecting them with successful programs and caring adults to provide
              motivation, guidance, and support. Its success, or rather the success of its
              students is built on a holistic philosophy that equips youngsters with the
              habits and attitudes necessary for life-long achievement. Central program
              features include character development, parent involvement, academic
              enrichment, mentoring, and collaborative partnerships. Its programs operate on
              a supplementary basis: students participate in the evenings, weekends, and in
              the summer. MEF programs have been replicated in four major U.S. cities and
              have received awards internationally. In 1995, MEF will serve over 800
              students.  This study will create a replicable model for successfully
              integrating technology into established not-for-profit agencies. It will also
              share lessons learned with educational systems. In this way, NSF will promote
              innovative use of computer and networking technology to support the work done
              by not-for-profits, as well as providing valuable information to systemic
              reform efforts that are active in Chicago.  With support received from NSF, MEF
              will hire an education specialist who will direct a team that will include
              current students, alumni, parents, business people, educators, and community
              leaders. The team will analyze MEF's mission and the needs of students. It will
              measure the strengths and shortcomings of current MEF programs. The team will
              then assess current best practices by viewing technology in other environments.
              Based upon these findings, it will purchase a base of equipment to allow
              students to work with available technology. Through the support of a
              collaborating organization, the team will attempt to provide computers in the
              homes of participating students. This unique  feature will create a valuable
              test environment.  Once students have experimented with purchased equipment,
              feedback will be obtained. Additional refinements will be made. In the end, a
              report will be produced that specifies how technology can be integrated into
              MEF's mission and its activities in a way that supports and enhances the
              effectiveness of this established not-for-profit. The report will describe a
              model that can be replicated throughout the not-for-profit sector. It will also
              give insights to those working on a broader, system-wide scale to integrate
              technology into education.
