Title       : Interdisciplinary Laboratory Course in Non-Linear Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1995   
File        : a9554909

Award Number: 9554909
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76412              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nilgun Sungar   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kent E. Morrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              During the past two decades the importance of geometrical methods  in   the  
              analysis  of  complex  dynamical  systems  have   been  recognized.  With  the 
              advent  of high  speed  computers,  these  methods  are now being applied in a
              variety of fields.   Houever,  existing  courses in the undergraduate
              curriculum do not  utilize  these  powerful tools and only emphasize
              traditional methods  for  solving  differential  equations. This project  will 
              develop  an  innovative,   interdisciplinary   laboratory-based   course    on 
              nonlinear  dynamical  systems at the  undergraduate  level.   The  course  is
              designed to teach the geometrical methods of dynamical  systems  analysis  to 
              undergraduates  in  physics,  mathematics,  biology,  chemistry and the
              engineering sciences and to build  an  intuitive  understanding of the behavior
              of  such  systems.   The  innovative  aspects  of  the  course will  be 
              interdisciplinary,  experimental  laboratory exercises and applications of 
              computers  and  visualization  techniques.  A  significant  portion  of  the 
              development  effort  is  to create laboratory  experiments  which  complement
              course lectures.  These experiments are drawn  from  a  number   of   areas  
              of  dynamical  systems  theory,   including  applications  in physics,
              chemistry, biology and  electrical  and  civil  engineering.  The experiments
              are used  to  reinforce  the  material  learned  in  class  and to  illustrate 
              the  underlying  similarities between seemingly unrelated physical systems.  
              This  course  will  serve  as a model for other universities  and  will 
              produce  tested material that can be used to build the laboratory  component
              for similar courses.
