Title       : Consolidating Democracy?: Democratic Political Culture in the Transitional
               Russian Polity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1997    
File        : a9423614

Award Number: 9423614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217248             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Gibson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Will democracy survive and flourish in Russia?  Perhaps no question in  
              contemporary politics is as important as the fate of Russian democracy.    To
              the extent that democracy is consolidated in Russia, world politics is   likely
              to be more peaceful, more humane, and less costly.     In addition to the
              strategic importance of this question, the transformation   of Russia raises
              important scientific questions.  What factors contribute to   the consolidation
              of democratic transformations, and how are these likely    to change in the
              near future?  What role do ordinary people (in contrast to   elites) play in
              the processes of change?  To what degree do Russian   citizens support
              democratic institutions and processes; to what degree are   they willing to
              trade freedom and liberty for security and economic   prosperity?  What factors
              contribute to the development of political   tolerance--a crucial ingredient of
              democracy--and how might tolerance be   fostered?  To what extent does the
              existence of distinctive subcultures   within a society make the development of
              democratic institutions and   processes more difficult?  Change in Russia
              produces a veritable   laboratory for the analysis of democratization 
              processes.    This project seeks answers to these questions.  In particular, 
              the project   extends existing research on the political culture of Russia
              through a new   survey on the opinions of ordinary citizens.  In conjunction
              with earlier   surveys, analysis of changes in Russian culture will be
              conducted.  On the   basis of both longitudinal and cross-sectional analysis,
              the project will   attempt to predict the likelihood of a democratic
              consolidation in Russia.    Ultimately, the project seeks to contribute to
              theories of democratization   by focusing on the all-important case of Russia.
