Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Analysis of the Drosophila Montium Subgroup:
               Horizontal and Vertical Transmission of Mobile Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1995     
File        : a9423508

Award Number: 9423508
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail Simmons simmons@scisun.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9423508  SIMMONS   This study will examine the evolution of a jumping gene,
              called hobo in a group of fruit flies.  Jumping genes are portions of the
              genetic sequence which function independently within an organism's (host's)
              genome.  Jumping genes move along chromosomes on their own.  Due to their
              mobility, hobo elements have been known to unfavorably alter the functioning of
              genes within their host.  Jumping genes are found to be present in substantial
              numbers across a wide variety of organisms, including humans.  Because jumping
              genes move and function independently of other genes they are not always
              inherited in the usual manner from parent to offspring across generations. 
              Instead jumping genes can be transmitted across species, even distantly related
              ones (e.g., from plants to animals) like a disease.  This infectious mode is
              termed horizontal transmission.  Jumping genes have been known to infect the
              chromosomes of distantly related species of fruit flies, which makes the flies
              a good model system for examing effects of jumping genes.  However, in order to
              determine the inheritance pattern for a jumping gene one must first know the
              relationships (taxonomy) of the host species.   This project's first goal will
              be to establish the relationships between species of fruit flies of the
              Drosophlia montium subgroup which are closely related to Drosophlila
              melanogaster.  Drosophila melanogaster has been an organism intensively studied
              in order to understand the function of genes in all eukaryotes, including
              humans.  Yet, in contrast, the taxonomy of this group of drosophilids is
              relatively unknown.  The investigators will determine the taxonomy of these
              fruit fly species by using some features of their morphology and the DNA
              sequences of their genes.  Once the fruit fly taxonomy is established, the
              presence or absence of the hobo element can be related to the taxonomy in order
              to infer the evolutionary history of the hobo elements.
