Title       : Bayesian Methods for Small Area Estimation and Latent Structure Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9423996

Award Number: 9423996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171896             (Estimated)
Investigator: Malay Ghosh ghoshm@stat.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,9187,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary focus on this research is on applications of Bayesian methods to
              small area estimation with discrete outcomes.  Small area estimation is
              becoming increasingly popular in survey sampling owing to the demand for small
              area estimates from both public and private sectors.  In typical instances of
              small area estimation, only a few samples are available from individual areas. 
              The direct survey estimates, therefore, tend to have large standard errors and
              coefficients of variation.  Incorporating information from similar neighboring
              areas typically improves an estimate of a certain area mean, or the
              simultaneous estimation of several area means.  Empirical and hierarchical
              Bayes methods are particularly well-suited to meet this need of `borrowing
              strength` from related small areas.  The new methods of estimation will provide
              much more reliable estimates with reduced standard errors.  The investigator
              will apply the new methods to the analysis of various social, medical, and
              environmental data; e.g., the investigator will estimate the percentage of
              people satisfied with their job in several local areas cross-classified by age,
              sex, and race.  Other possible applications include exposure to health hazards
              in jobs, estimation of cancer mortality rates, analysis of mortality rates in
              the presence of hazardous waste sites, and analysis of spatial data.  Another
              aspect of the investigator's research will concentrate on hierarchical and
              empirical Bayes analysis of latent structure models.  The celebrated Rasch
              model will be included as a special case.  This analysis will provide unified
              method for the analysis of social and psychological data.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
