Title       : Molecular Genetics of Organized Gliding Motility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1997     
File        : a9423182

Award Number: 9423182
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303852             (Estimated)
Investigator: Armin D. Kaiser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9423182  Kaiser  The bacterium myxococcus exhibits multicellular gliding
              movements that are highly coordinated.   Coordination spans the range of few to
              many thousands of cells. While growing, a dozen cells   may associate and move
              as a cohort. In fruiting body development, many thousands of cells move  
              coordinately. The aim of this project is to work out the cellular and molecular
              basis for movement   coordination. Despite the apparent complexity of their
              movements, myxobacterial cells have the   structural, chemical and genetic
              simplicity of Gram-negative bacteria.  Previous work on   Myxococcus had
              distinguished two motility patterns called "adventurous" and "social". This  
              project is seeking to identify many of the genes that control social motility
              and to learn their   biochemical functions.  For this purpose, mutants
              defective in social motility are being isolated.   Earlier work had identified
              pili, long thin hairs that projected from one pole of each cell, as   necessary
              for social motility. This project is investigating the way that pili support
              social motility,   by seeking mutants that assemble normal pili, yet fail to
              show social motility. Steps in transducing   a pilus "signal" might be found in
              this way.  The motors responsible for gliding movement have   not yet been
              uncovered in any of the gliding bacteria. The search for mutants is being
              structured in   a way that should allow mutations which inactivate the gliding
              engines to be detected, a step   toward understanding the mechanism of gliding.
               %%%  Multicellular movements are particularly important in the embryonic
              development of vertebrates,   but little is known about how they are organized
              or regulated. Myxobacteria offer a realistic way   to begin to investigate this
              general problem.  ***
