Title       : Measuring Greenhouse Gas Emissions: Science in Global Environmental Politics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9423373

Award Number: 9423373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45004              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark A. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sheila S. Jasanoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This fellowship supports training in science and technology studies and research
              on the science of greenhouse gases and its relationship with national and
              international politics.  The fellowship recipient is an electrical engineer
              whose work has focused on the science of greenhouse gases.  With this award, he
              will take coursework and directed readings under the guidance of a scholar on
              the comparative politics of science and technology.  This assistance will
              continue as he undertakes field studies and document analysis exploring the
              science of greenhouse gases in three contexts:  measurements of methane
              emissions from agricultural sources by academic scientists, estimation of a
              national inventory of U.S. agricultural methane emissions by Environmental
              Protection Agency scientists, and the standardization of an international
              methodology for compiling methane inventories by scientists working with the UN
              Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.  The fellowship will address the
              influence of politics on the science of greenhouse gas emissions, the role of
              greenhouse gas scientists in international climate change negotiations, and the
              role of scientific knowledge in shaping our understandings of the global
              environment.  This fellowship will help the investigator to integrate science
              and technology studies scholarship into his future scientific and engineering
              research and teaching, to incorporate social and environmental issues into
              engineering curricula, and to improve the ability of non-technical people to
              make informed public policy decisions regarding science and technology.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
