Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rendering Visible the Unseen. The Creation of
               Photographic Language in Science and Culture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  1995   
File        : a9423055

Award Number: 9423055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Modern computer technology has made it possible to alter photographs in order to
              show almost anything one wants.  Indeed, this new technology has even been used
              in motion pictures to insert actors (Woody Allen in Zelig,  Tom Hanks in
              Forrest Gump) in historical films.  It is important to note, however, that the
              verisimilitude of photographs has been problematic from the beginning. 
              Photographs are not always accurate in their portrait of reality.  The problems
              with the veracity of photographs has been a major problem in science since the
              19th century.  This issue is what is being examined in this dissertation
              research.    Despite the significance of photography in science, no detailed
              study has been made of the production and circulation of scientific and medical
              photographs from its beginning in late nineteenth century British science. In
              her dissertation research under the direction of Professor Robert Smith, Ms.
              Jennifer Tucker is addressing such questions as: How did different disciplinary
              communities decide if photographic evidence was truthful? In what instances in
              science was the realism of photography contested, and on what basis?    During
              a preliminary search in Britain in academic year 1994-1995, Ms. Tucker
              discovered hundreds of original scientific and medical photographs and glass
              lantern slides in over forty institutions. Most of these images have never been
              catalogued or reproduced. This grant enables her to reproduce selected
              scientific photographs from these unique historical archives. She is also
              traveling to Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona to consult photographs
              and manuscript correspondence that shed light on debates over astronomer
              Percival Lowell's controversial photographs of Martian canals. This research
              promises to greatly enhance our understanding of the nature of evidence and
              proof in science today.
