Title       : Genetics in the Atomic Age
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1998   
File        : a9423196

Award Number: 9423196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64975              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Beatty beatt001@staff.tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              While science and the cold war usually brings physics to mind, the atomic age
              and cold war issues also influenced and reflected developments in biology. 
              This research investigates the influences  of genetics on popular culture,
              military strategy, civil defense, diplomacy and ideology, and of cold war
              concerns on concepts and methods in genetics.  A central issue in the research
              involves the extent to which geneticists in postwar America played an active
              role to establish and maintain their social relevance.  This relevance depended
              on geneticists being able to evaluate the significance of radiation-induced
              mutation for human individuals and populations, and to maintain the distinction
              between genetics and eugenics.  There were tall hurdles to overcome in order to
              reach the goal.  For instance, geneticists disagreed greatly about the
              significance of mutations.  Using archival sources, interviews, and surveys of
              research support and popular reports, this investigation will undertake a
              careful and detailed analysis of the theoretical, conceptual, methodological
              and empirical issues in contention, and how they were overcome.  The
              investigation will focus on three interelated areas of disagreement:  the
              `genetic load` disputes, the `classical/balance` controversy, and arguments
              over the interpretation of genetic research on humans vs. non-human `model`
              organisms.  It will consider the role of disciplinary and professional
              differences in these controversies.  It will consider the relationships between
              Federal research sponsors and their scientific clients.  It will examine how
              the scope and direction of scientific effort reflected scientific and social
              concerns and  how sponsors and clients handled socio-scientific controversies. 
                Results will be published in articles and a book.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
