Title       : SARA: Undergraduate Research Experiences in Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1998   
File        : a9423922

Award Number: 9423922
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104022             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry D. Oswalt oswalt@luyten.astro.fit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James B. Rafert  (Principal Investigator former)
              James R. Webb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary D. Henson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew A. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Scott Shaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth S. Rumstay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harry D. Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Florida Institute of Tech
	      150 West University Blvd
	      Melbourne, FL  329016975    305/768-8000

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1207,1215,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9423922  Rafert    The Southeastern Association for Research in Astronomy (SARA)
              will  conduct a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site in the  area
              of astronomical science.    The Southeastern Association for Research in
              Astronomy (SARA), which is  composed of the Florida Institute of Technology
              (FIT), East Tennessee  State University (ETSU), Florida International
              University (FIU), the  University of Georgia (UGA), and Valdosta State
              University (VSU), has  an emphasis on undergraduate education and on one-on-one
              student  involvement in faculty research projects.  SARA is a cohesive and 
              collegial consortium which spans the geography and culture of the  southeastern
              United States.    The SARA Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
              emphasis  will be on the preparation of students for careers in science and 
              engineering through active interaction with faculty professionals who  have a
              shared vision about the importance of independent undergraduate  student
              research.  The range of research projects available within the  SARA REU Site
              program spans observational, theoreticaL and instrumental  areas of astronomy. 
              Each of the faculty who is involved in this  project has previously
              demonstrated a high interest in undergraduate  student research activities.   
              SARA's primary astronomy facility, and current focal point for research 
              activity, is a 0.9-meter telescope located at the Kitt Peak National 
              Observatory (KPNO).  Each of the participating SARA institutions has a 
              substantial array of additional instructional astronomy equipment,  facilities,
              and instructional expertise which will be available for the  students.  The REU
              Site program will serve to further develop astronomy  education and research
              within the southeastern United States.   Participating students will come into
              contact with the broad  educational and research resources of the five SARA
              institutions.  Each  of the SARA institutions has a recruiting policy which
              strongly  encourages minority applicants, gender  equality, and student
              diversity.
