Title       : Neuroanatomical Basis of Endocrine-Mediated Behavioral Development in the Honey
               Bee
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1997    
File        : a9423164

Award Number: 9423164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Fahrbach susanfah@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gene E. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # 9423164  Susan E. Fahrbach, PI  Gene E. Robinson, co-PI    Behavioral
              development occurs in many species, including humans.  As individuals age and
              pass through different stages of their life, their genetically determined
              behavioral responses to specific environmental stimuli change in predictable
              ways.  Often these changes involve increasingly complex behavioral responses
              that involve learning.  The goal of Drs. Fahrbach and Robinson is to understand
              how changes in brain structure relate to the development of behavior,
              particularly behavior that is characterized by a high degree of plasticity. 
              Dr. Fahrbach and Dr. Robinson will test two hypotheses that explain the role of
              neuroanatomical plasticity and behavioral plasticity.  The first hypothesis
              predicts that changes in brain structure occur in anticipation of changes in
              behavior, perhaps as a result of a specific neuroendocrine signal.  According
              to this hypothesis, the neuroanatomical changes are necessary to support the
              transition to a more complex behavior.  The second hypothesis predicts that
              changes in brain structure occur as a consequence of changes in behavior. 
              According to this hypothesis, the neuroanatomical changes are necessary to
              support the continued performance of a more complex behavior.  Drs. Fahrbach
              and Robinson will explore these hypotheses by studying brain structures insects
              after endocrine and experiential factors are experimentally manipulated. 
              Studies of brain region volumes, synapse formation and molecular events leading
              to neural plasticity will be undertaken.  The principal significance of this
              research will be to contribute to our understanding of the neuroanatomical
              basis for hormone-mediated behavioral plasticity in adult animals and humans.
