Title       : Instruments in Hindu Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1995     
File        : a9423340

Award Number: 9423340
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64971              (Estimated)
Investigator: Virendra N. Sharma also 414-832-2667  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Martin Harwit, now director of the Air and Space Museum at the Smithsonian, has
              written a history of astronomy that demonstrates the major impact of new
              instrumentation in the advance of this science.  As each new instrument is
              added, a whole new range of discoveries have been made.  The last major
              instrument to be added to astronomy was the radio telescope.  One of the major
              arguments for the development of LIGO, NSF's  new "big science" instrument for
              the measurement of  the hypothesized gravity waves, is that if it is
              successful, it will provide a new instrument for examining the universe.  We
              can only conjecture how this new instrument may transform our understanding of
              the heavens.    Despite the importance of instrumentation in the astronomy,
              most histories have examined the theoretical development of this science.  
              Professor Sharma is thus leading the way in a new kind of study of the history
              of astronomy.  In fact, Professor Sharma's study is exemplary in another
              respect as well:  not only is it a study of instrumentation, but it is the
              study of instrumentation in a non-Western scientific tradition.  If we are to
              understand fully the impact of instrumentation on science, we must understand
              its impact on science, wherever it is undertaken.  Rare, however, is the person
              who can carry out this kind of research.  Fortunately, Professor Sharma has not
              only the technical scientific skills to understand what is going on in the
              science, but also the language skills to pursue this subject.  He is examining
              the development of Hindu observational astronomy and its impact not only in
              India, but also on Western astronomy as well.   He is comparing Indian
              astronomical instruments with Western and Islamic instruments of observation
              and is investigating their similarities and differences in construction, use
              and purpose.  Thus his study will shed light on the development of Hindu
              astronomy as well as its mutual interaction with Western and Islamic astronomy.
               This kind of study is essential if we are t o understand how science develops
              in society.
