Title       : Dissertation Research: The Development of Spatial Memory in Honeybees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1995    
File        : a9423576

Award Number: 9423576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9400               (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred C. Dyer fcdyer@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Dyer, Fred  IBN-9423576                        Non Technical Summary    Many
              animals, ranging from insects to human beings, face the  problem of using
              features of a landscape to find places to  feed or nest, and spatial
              orientation has been studied  intensively by generations of biologists and
              psychologists.  Honey bees have long been an important model organism for 
              studies of how visual features of the environment can be  used for orientation.
               Worker bees move over an enormous  space, traveling up to 10 km from the nest
              in search of  food, using landmarks and celestial cues to find their way. 
              Furthermore, they do this with a very small brain.  Thus  they present an
              extreme version of a problem that arises on  some level for all animals: given
              that there are limits to  the capacity of a nervous system to store and process
               information,, how can the brain be designed to produce  appropriate behavior
              in a complex environment?    Previous work on how bees use features of the
              landscape for  orientation has focused of the specific features of the 
              landscape that bees learn about.  In this project, the  complementary issue of
              how the bees' spatial memory develops  is addressed.  The research will examine
              what bees learn as  a consequence of their first short (less than 10 minutes) 
              orientation flight in a new landscape.  By studying the  homing ability of bees
              that have been displaced from the  hive following their first orientation
              flights, the  experiments will address questions about how widely and 
              uniformly bees learn about a landscape around the nest,  whether the landscape
              to be learned influences the extent of  the bees' exploration of the landscape,
              and what role the  sun plays in learning landmarks during the orientation 
              flight.  This work should pave the way for studies of the  neural mechanisms of
              spatial learning in bees and other  insects.  Also, to the extent that other 
              animals face  navigational problems parallel to those faced by honey bees, 
              these studies may contribute to the d evelopment of general  theories about how
              spatial memory is generated.
