Title       : Power-at-a-Distance and Power Reversals: Testing New Predictions for Exchange
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9423231

Award Number: 9423231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262430             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Willer willer@gwm.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of power in social exchange networks that will test two
              extensions of Network Exchange Theory (NET) through laboratory experimentation.
               In the first extension, NET offers predictions for power-at-a-distance, where
              unlike previous studies power exercise is not limited to immediately adjacent
              positions, but reaches outward two or three network steps.  In the second
              extension, NET predicts that coalitions which eliminate power under some
              network conditions will bring power reversals under other conditions.  In the
              research, a system of linked microcomputers called ExNet connects human
              subjects in experimental networks allowing communications and facilitating
              resource transactions.  The existing versions of ExNet would not permit the
              intended experiments, so software will be written to add these and other
              capabilities to ExNet, and the system will be made available to the community
              of laboratory exchange researchers to facilitate experiments of many kinds.   
              %%%     This work is an important step in linking laboratory experimentation on
              social exchange with phenomena in the real world, most notably because it
              increases the size and complexity of social network processes that can be
              studied.  These experiments are fundamental research on social-capital aspects
              of human capital theory, exploring the ways that structural location in a
              social network can be a vital resource conferring power and thus resources,
              quite independently of the individual characteristics of the person occupying
              that location.  An extension of one of the most promising lines of work in
              social-psychological research on group processes, this project will contribute
              fundamental insights on how the structural properties of social exchange
              networks influence the fates of human beings.
