Title       : Marine Climates of the U.S. Alaskan Coastal Plain During the Late Neogene and
               Quaternary Interglacials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1995     
File        : a9423663

Award Number: 9423663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42366              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Krantz dkrantz@strauss.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5212      POLAR EARTH SCI (ARCTIC RES)
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract    This award supports a project to compare the modern marine 
              climate with that of the last interglacial episode in the Bering  Strait
              region.  The two primary goals of the project are to: (1)  produce detailed
              records of seasonal temperature ranges as  recorded in the stable isotopic
              composition of mollusk shells for  the modern and the last interglacial, and
              (2) infer from the  stable isotope data the distribution of the major water
              masses  during each time slice.    In the first phase of the project, stable
              isotope methods will be  applied to an evaluation of the modern hydrography of
              the Bering  Sea - Chukchi Sea region.  Stable oxygen and carbon isotope 
              analyses of ostracodes and mollusks from the shelf will allow  quantification
              of regional differences in water-mass distribution  and latitudinal temperature
              gradients.  Isotope profiles of the  mollusks will provide a record of the
              seasonal range of  temperature and might be useful in distinguishing seasonally
              ice-  free from ice-covered conditions.  This calibration experiment in  the
              modern system will verify the relationship between the  isotopic composition of
              shell carbonate and seawater and identify  the geochemical signature of the
              principal water masses.    In the second phase, the results from the modern
              system will be  used to evaluate conditions during the highstand of the last 
              interglacial.  Stable isotope analyses will be performed on  fossil mollusks
              and ostracodes collected from the emergent  coastal plain deposits of the
              Pelukian transgression.  Collection  sites span a relatively broad latitudinal
              range from St. Lawrence  Island to Skull Cliff near Point Barrow; this
              distribution of  sites samples different water masses and points along the
              north-  south temperature gradient.  Ostracode specimens collected at  discrete
              intervals from vertical outcrop sections will provide a  record of isotopic
              composition changes within the transgressive  units.  Temperature ranges and
              water-mass variations can be  interpreted  from isotope profiles of mollusks as
              a complement to  the ostracode data to quantify the seasonal components of
              marine  paleoclimate.    The underlying scientific goal of the project is to
              investigate  the physical processes which control the advection of heat into 
              the Arctic Ocean through the Bering Strait, and to determine  whether these
              processes have varied significantly between  interglacial episodes.
