Title       : Atmospheric Transport and Deposition of Chemical Constituents at Summit,
               Greenland: Interpretation of the GISP-2 Ice Core
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1997     
File        : a9423410

Award Number: 9423410
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297362             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cliff I. Davidson cliff@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is the continuation of an investigation of the  transport of
              chemical trace elements and species from source  regions through the atmosphere
              to the Greenland ice sheet.  Its goal is to provide information for the
              interpretation of  the trace element distribution in the long ice core that has
               been obtained through the Greenland Ice Sheet Program (GISP-  2) drilling
              effort.  The ice core will provide a detailed  record spanning 200,000 years.  
               The project has three specific objectives: (1) the  identification of source
              regions and atmospheric pathways  for the chemical constituents reaching the
              drill site,  including the possible changes in air mass characteristics  during
              transit, (2) the quantification of relationships  between chemical species in
              the atmosphere and those in the  ice sheet, and (3) the interpretation of the
              deep ice core  data using this information.  Prior field work has resulted  in
              the collecting of samples of air, aerosol, precipitation,  and deposited snow,
              which will be analyzed for various  anions and cations, trace elements, carbon
              compounds, and  trace gases.  This project will emphasize the deposition 
              mechanisms.    The first objective will be achieved by measuring 
              concentrations of chemical species in air and snow, and then  combining this
              information with meteorological data of other  investigators.  Concentrations
              of major anions and cations  will be determined by ion chromatography in our 
              laboratories, while concentrations of trace elements and  other species will be
              obtained by collaboration with other  groups.  The second objective involves
              measurement of wet,  dry, and fog deposition, as well as changes that occur in 
              the snow pack after deposition of chemical species.  The  third objective will
              be achieved by developing models to  explain the processes influencing air and
              snow chemistry at  the site in collaboration with GISP-2 researchers who are 
              actively working with the core data.  The results will be a  better
              interpretation of the ice c ore data, and the  reduction of uncertainties
              involved in using the core data  to determine past atmospheric conditions.  ***
