Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Incremental Specialization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9423961

Award Number: 9423961
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31365              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia L. Lawall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9423961  Lawall      The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twenty-four months of research abroad. The  program's awards provide
              opportunities for joint research,  and the use of unique or complementary
              facilities, expertise  and experimental conditions abroad.    This award will
              support a twelve-month postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Julia L. Lawall to
              work with Professor Charles  Consel of the University of Rennes/Irisa in France
              on the  development of an incremental specialization system.    The French side
              of this collaboration is already  collaborating with a group in the U.S. on
              using incremental  specialization in the development of portable micro-kernel 
              operating system.  Micro-kernel is a system built out of  modules on top of a
              very small kernel.  Incremental  specialization would allow an operating system
              built in this  manner to perform efficiently, by specializing the  interactions
              between the modules to the demands placed on  the operating system.  The U.S.
              group is focusing on the  operating systems aspects of the project, while the
              French  group (which will now include Dr. Lawall) is focusing on the 
              development of the incremental specialization systems.   ***
