Title       : Dissertation Research: Settlement Organization of a Major Pre-Columbian Polity:
               Archaeological Survey at Cotzumalguapa, Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1995      
File        : a9423976

Award Number: 9423976
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11860              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur A. Demarest arthur.a.demarest@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,5926,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Demarest    Under the direction of Dr. Arthur Demarest, Mr. Oswaldo  Chinchillia
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  Building on previous work he
              will conduct a settlement survey in  the piedmont area of the Pacific coast of
              Guatemala. This region  is well known for the classic period (500-1000 AD)
              sites ascribed  to the Cotzumalguapa culture and for the elaborate sculptures
              and  writing system associated with it. Although attention has been  drawn to
              this area since the nineteenth century, current  knowledge is restricted to
              chronology, architecture and  sculpture. Little effort has been devoted to
              understanding social  and political organization. Mr. Chinchillia will conduct
              a  systematic regional survey in the immediate environs of the three  largest
              known sites. He will locate and record data from smaller  centers, map their
              position and qize, and based on the resultant  distributions reconstruct both
              settlement and social systems. He  will also conduct limited excavations in
              order to compare surface  and subsurface materials. Through this process, he
              will determine  how accurately suface distributions mirror buried materials and
               what potential bias surface data might contain.    Middle America is famous
              for the complex societies which  developed in an often inhospitable tropical
              environment.  Archaeologists wish to understand the processes which led to the 
              emergence and development of these complex entities and which  ultimately
              resulted in their downfall. Very little systematic  work has been done in the
              piedmont of Guatemala even though the  complex and elaborate nature of
              archaeological remains indicates  that such attention is merited. Mr.
              Chinchillia's research will  shed new light on the rise of complex society. It
              will provide  data of interest to many archaeologists and assist in the 
              training of a promising young scientist.
