Title       : Collaborative Research on Domestic and International Conflict Linkages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1995      
File        : a9423762

Award Number: 9423762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44102              (Estimated)
Investigator: Will H. Moore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9423762  Moore    Theoretical perspectives in the social sciences have 
              traditionally treated domestic and international conflict as  independent. 
              However, the investigators contend that linkages  exist and are important for
              understanding the dynamics of  conflict at either the domestic or international
              levels.  Recent  history provides numerous examples of domestic and
              international  conflict linkages including the Kurdish uprising in Iraq 
              following the Gulf War, the Argentine invasion of the  Falklands/Malvinas
              Islands, and the Contra War in Nicaragua.   Yet, do such linkages exist as
              general patterns of conflict  behavior or are they only manifest during
              significant events such  as inter-state crises, wars, riots and rebellions? 
              The current  investigation will answer that question with respect to middle 
              powers that are undergoing liberalization and/or facing ethno-  nationalist
              challenges.  It will also help address the weaknesses  that exist within the
              literature by developing and testing a  dynamic theory of
              domestic-international conflict linkages.    The project has been underway for
              one year with support from  Emory University and the Institute for Global
              cooperation and  Conflict.  During that time the investigators have specified a
               theoretical model, developed a coding scheme for collecting  relevant data and
              begun the data collection on eight cases.   their model builds on work in the
              international relations  literature that examines conflictual and cooperative
              behavior  among nation-states.  In addition, the research team makes use of 
              the recent call for two-level modelling and contend that the  linkage can best
              be clarified by arguing that domestic groups  hostile to the state, the state
              itself, and relevant other states  in the international system all monitor, and
              respond to, one  another's behavior in conflict situations.  In other words,
              the  investigators develop a modes where the behavior of any of these  actors
              is argued to be conditioned by the behavior of each of the   other actors.  ***
