Title       : New Methods for Polyhedral Borane Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1997  
File        : a9423951

Award Number: 9423951
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $441000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry G. Sneddon lsneddon@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Larry G. Sneddon, Chemistry Department, University of Pennsylvania,  is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  Program
              of the Chemistry Division to develop new general methodologies  that enable the
              systematic, high yield preparation of polyhedral boron  clusters. In this
              project a variety of new approaches for the syntheses  and modification of
              polyhedral boron compounds will be designed. These  include: new types of
              carbon and nitrogen cage-insertion reactions  involving the nucleophilic attack
              of polyhedral boron anions on nitriles  and polar-acetylenes; metal-catalyzed
              reactions of polyhedral boranes  with acetylenes, olefins, and/or carbon
              monoxide; and new types of  sulfur-atom insertion reactions leading to thia-
              and dithiaboranes. A  second primary goal will be a systematic exploration of
              the chemistry and  applications of the clusters which will be made available by
              the first  part of the project.  The polyhedral boranes are cage shaped
              molecules which possess unique  chemical bonding and unusual properties.
              Besides being of theoretical  interest, they are thought to be starting
              materials from which novel  ceramics and polymers may be obtained. However,
              there are presently no  good ways in which large quantities of the polyhedral
              boranes can be  prepared in an economical fashion. The aim of this project is
              the  development of new, efficient synthetic methods for the generation of 
              these compounds. This will be accompanied by comprehensive investigations  of
              the chemistry of the newly available molecules. These investigations  will set
              the stage for the practical applications of polyhedral boranes  as precursors
              to ceramic and polymeric materials.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
