Title       : Investigation of the Effects of Climatic Change and Human Activities on
               Discontinuous Permafrost in Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9423426

Award Number: 9423426
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246679             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Osterkamp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,5219,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9423426  Osterkamp  This award supports a study of discontinuous permafrost in 
              northern Alaska.  Permafrost exists in arctic and subarctic  regions where
              changes in climate are most likely to be largest  and to occur first. Warm
              discontinuous permafrost will be the  first to thaw in the event of any
              climatic warming. Climatic data  indicate that Alaska is currently warming at a
              rate of about  2.4 C per century.  Data has been obtained which shows that the 
              discontinuous permafrost south of the Yukon river in Alaska has  recently
              warmed by as much as 1.5 C and that some of it is  already thawing. The
              objective of this research is to develop a  better understanding of the
              response of discontinuous permafrost  to changes in climate and human
              activities.  The significance of  permafrost in the context of climatic change
              studies is that  permafrost can detect and record climatic changes in its
              thermal  regime. In thawing, it can act as an agent of environmental  changes
              that influences ecological and human communities and it  can amplify climatic
              change by feedback effects associated with  the release of carbon stored in the
              permafrost.    This research includes analyses and interpretations of an 
              extensive long-term (18 years) data set obtained at more than a  dozen sites
              representing a wide range of environmental conditions  that span the
              discontinuous permafrost zone along a north-south  transect of Alaska,
              measurements of current conditions, and  assessing changes that have occurred
              and those that are still  occurring. Six sites will be instrumented to measure
              temperatures  in the air, active layer, and permafrost, moisture contents 
              (including unfrozen water), thermal parameters, snow cover and  active layer
              characteristics, and heave. Less detailed  measurements will be made at eight
              other sites. This research  will also include an investigation of temporal and
              spatial trends  in the data, the flow of heat and moisture (including several 
              existing hypotheses), and the application of an analyti cal model  and of two
              existing numerical models for predicting the thermal  regime and talik
              development in warm and thawing permafrost. A  sensitivity analysis will be
              carried out on the effects of  changes in climatic variables and active layer
              characteristics on  the thermal regime of the discontinuous permafrost.
