Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Dynamic American Ethos: Value Conflict and
               Racial Policy Preferences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1995   
File        : a9423125

Award Number: 9423125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4745               (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Stimson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9423125  Stimson    This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support addresses the 
              question:  Why at some times, does the American public favor  governmental
              action to promote racial equality, whereas at other  times, the public opposes
              such action?  Existing theories of  racial attitudes cannot account for such
              swings between  liberalism and conservatism.  The dissertation student will 
              propose a theory of public opinion that can explain such  variation over time. 
              It begins with the premise that most  citizens feel value conflict on issues of
              public policy,  sympathizing with both sides of most issues.  The balance of 
              these "competing considerations" is tipped by a variety of  personal and
              situational forces.  Among these the national media,  which frame political
              issues in the context of values, become the  keys to accounting for over time
              macro movements of opinion.  As  the media's framing of issues changes over
              time, as it did in the  case of race, then so will the balance of competing 
              considerations in the minds of individuals, and hence the balance  of policy
              preferences in the aggregate.  Specifically, when the  national media frame
              their coverage of racial issues in the  context of egalitarianism, the public
              comes to prefer a more  active government to promote equality.  In contrast,
              when the  media frame their coverage in the language of individualism, the 
              public becomes less enthusiastic about such government activity.   These shifts
              in public opinion, it is argued, lead to changes in  public policy, which in
              turn have significant consequences for  relative equality between blacks and
              whites.  The thesis is  tested in a longitudinal design where racial public
              opinion is  measured from existing survey materials, media framing is tapped 
              by content analysis, and other plausible influences are included  for full
              model specification.  ***
