Title       : Novel Electron Transport Studies of Metallic Multilayers at Low Temperatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1998      
File        : a9423795

Award Number: 9423795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Pratt pratt@pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Bass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Schroeder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9423795  Pratt  This  research  project  extends  research  based  on  their 
              has  pioneering approach to the study of giant magnetoresistance (GMR)  in 
              artificially structured multilayers of ferromagnetic and non-  magnetic 
              multilayers.  The technique  involves  low  temperature  measurements  with
              current flow perpendicular to  the  multilayer  planes,  and is termed CPP-MR.
              These measurements exhibit  larger  magnetoresistance than analogous in-plane
              measurements  (CIP-MR),  and  also  provide  more direct access to the 
              fundamental  spin-  dependent  scattering  parameters and to  the 
              interface-specific  resistance.   The  research  will  compare  CPP-MR   and  
              CIP-MR  measurements  on  the same ferromagnetic/non-magnetic  interface.  New 
              methods have been developed to analyze such data to  extract  fundamental  
              information   about   magnetic   interfaces.   This  information is also of
              great current interest in the  context  of  applications of magnetic
              multilayers in the field of  information  storage technology.  %%% 
              Non-Technical   Abstract:   Appropriately   fabricated   magnetic  multilayers,
              composed of alternating layers of magnetic and  non-  magnetic  metals, each
              only a few atoms thick, have the  property  that  their  electrical  resistance
               decreases  drastically  upon  application of a magnetic field. They can thus
              be used to  detect  very  small magnetic fields. Combined with their small 
              size  and  fast  response, this capability has made them of interest to  the 
              recording   industry  for  extracting  information  from   future  generations
              of higher density magnetic disks and tapes. They also  show  promise  for  use 
              in determining  position  or  speeds-of-  rotation  of  auto  engine
              components. This  project  focuses  on  better understanding the fundamental
              physical phenomena involved,  so  as  to achieve the ability to tailor magnetic
              multilayers  to  meet specific technological needs. The present research group
              has  pioneered  unique  techniques for developing  such  understanding.  These 
              techniques will be further improved  and  applied  to  new  materials in the
              current project.  ***
