Title       : The Negotiation of Legal Identity Among Salvadoran Immigrants in Los Angeles,
               California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1995     
File        : a9423023

Award Number: 9423023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan B. Coutin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass Coll of Liberal Arts
	      375 Church Street
	      North Adams, MA  01247    413/664-4511

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9423023  Coutin  This research seeks to shed light on the ways in which illegal
              immigrants seek to shape the transnational forces that compel their movements. 
              To do so, it investigates the ways in which Salvadoran immigrants in Los
              Angeles define and negotiate their legal identities in the United States.  It
              builds on recent studies of immigration that have emphasized the global
              structural forces that drive immigration, in preference to models that
              emphasize individual choice.  However, it challenges the assumption that
              immigrants are powerless subjects of such forces by concentrating on the
              Salvadoran immigrant efforts to use law to define and alter their status in
              society and reinterpret concepts of citizenship.  Its investigation focuses on
              the legal strategies devised by Salvadoran immigrants to the United States
              since the late 1970s.  If concentrates in particular on the change in focus
              from the status of refugee to that of immigrant.   The research will consist of
              18 months of fieldwork within the Los Angeles Salvadoran community, one of the
              largest and best-organized in the United States.  It will involve work with two
              Salvadoran immigrant organizations, community organizations, individual
              Salvadoran immigrants, and observation of immigration proceedings.  Analysis of
              the research data will improve our scientific understanding of the conceptions
              of the nation-state of individuals who have experienced transnational forces
              first hand.  %%%%  This research investigates the ways in which Salvadoran
              immigrants in Los Angeles define and negotiate their legal identities in the
              United States.  It challenges the assumption that immigrants are powerless
              subjects of transnational forces that drive their migration by concentrating on
              the Salvadoran immigrant efforts to use law to define and alter their status in
              society and reinterpret concepts of citizenship.  Its investigation focuses on
              the legal strategies devised by Salvadoran immigrants to the United States
              since the late 1970s.  If concentrat es in particular on the change in focus
              from the status of refugee to that of immigrant.   Fieldwork within the Los
              Angeles community will enlarge our knowledge of the role and behavior of
              immigrants in American democracy and shed light on the concepts of citizenship
              and nationhood devised by individuals who have experienced transnational forces
              first hand.  ****
