Title       : Prehistoric Craft-Specialization in Non-Hierarchical Societies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1998      
File        : a9423194

Award Number: 9423194
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97672              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine A. Spielmann kate.spielmann@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Spielmann    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Katherine Spielmann 
              and her students will analyze large collections of ceramic  materials excavated
              from three late prehistoric pueblo sites in  the Salinas area of central New
              Mexico. Chemical analyses of  paste and included temper will be combined with
              detailed  examination of surface design. On this basis it will be possible  to
              reconstruct the system of ceramic manufacturing and exchange  across a large
              region and to determine how this changed over  time. The work will provide
              important insight into prehistoric  social organization and the processes which
              give rise to complex  society.    Archaeologists have noted that in many parts
              of the world a  correlation appears to exist between population growth, 
              population aggregation into regional centers and the emergence of  craft
              specialization. A number of models have been postulated to  explain this
              observation and the most popular argues that with  population growth, food can
              become more difficult to obtain and  therefore a number of individuals become
              craft specialists and  barter goods such as ceramics to obtain necessary
              subsistence  resources. Population growth, aggregation and craft 
              specialization occurred concurrently in the U.S. Southwest and as  a result of
              many years of fieldwork, Dr. Spielmann has developed  a data base which
              provides detailed documentation of this  process. Through her proposed
              analysis, she shall disentangle  cause and effect and gain insight into the
              mechanisms involved.    This research is important because it will provide data
              of  interest to many archaeologists as well as Native Americans. It  will shed
              new light on how complex societies emerge and are  maintained and will assist
              in the training of graduate students.
