Title       : Theory of Liquid Crystals and Related Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1997   
File        : a9423114

Award Number: 9423114
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tom C. Lubensky tom@dept.physics.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9423114  Lubensky  This project involves theroetical investigations of three 
              subprojects related to liquid crystals:  the  quasicrystalline
              twist-grain-boundary C phase, the shape of  droplets in Langmuir films, and
              multiple scattering of light  from liquid crystals.  The twin-grain-boundary
              phase has  recently been observed experimentally.  The PI proposes to  study
              this thoroughly, including the development of a guage  theory for the Smectic-C
              phase that will be used to  calculate dislocation energies in type II systems,
              an  analysis of dipolar interactions, and a search for the  origins of
              quasicrystalline lock-in.  The possibility that  chiral pinwheel droplets of
              Langmuir which have been  observed recently are reproduced by effective
              anisotropic  negative line tension favoring large perimeter and the  capture of
              a topological defect will be investigated.  The  extension of diffusion-wave
              spectroscopy formalism to  nematic liquid crystals in which multiple scattering
              in an  anisotropic medium is produced by long-range fluctuations in  the
              dielectric constant will be studied.  %%%  In this project Lubensky will
              continue his theoretical study  of complex fluids, such as liquid crystals.  He
              is  considered a world leader in the theory of these materials.  The first part
              involves the investigation of a phase (just  recently discovered in
              experiments) of unique structure and  symmetry which may prove to be
              technologically important.  The second part, involving the study the shapes of 
              droplets  of molecular films, will help understand interactions within  the
              molecules that make up monolayers, a topic of great  interest to both
              physicists and biologists.  The third part,  analyzing the application of a
              relatively new experimental  technique to liquid crystals,  may provide an
              important tool  for studying liquid crystals.  It is worth noting that 
              Lubensky has just finished his collaboration with Chaikin of  a new textbook in
              graduate level condensed matter physics  that many believe will replace  the
              textbook currently  considered the standard in this area.  ***
