Title       : Contact, Deformations, and Adhesion Between Rough Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1997     
File        : a9423780

Award Number: 9423780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170098             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Kyle Vanderlick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F                                  C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       ;       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                      i      
              i          4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                           (   )   *   +   ,   -   .   /   0   1                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                ABSTRACT
              CTS-9423780 T. Kyle Vanderlick University of Pennsylvania   The focus of this
              proposal is to elucidate how surface chemistry and topography control the
              interactions between solids as they are into an out of  molecular contact.  The
              primary tool of our investigations is the surface forces apparatus, a device
              designed to measure the forces acting between two opposed surfaces as their
              separation is varied.  Recently, we extended the capabilities of the surface
              forces apparatus to new level with the development of Extended Spectral
              Analysis Multiple Beam Inteferometry (ESA-MBI).  This optical technique, which
              is used to determine surface separation, allow metals to be used as substrates
              in the surface force apparatus. In addition to breaking open the application of
              the surface forces apparatus to this important class of material, ESA-MBI
              boasts another advantage:  the technique provides information on the degree and
              form of surface roughness, in-situ, under states of stress that result when one
              surface is in contact with, or near to another.  We propose to take advantage
              the fundamental interac tions occurring across rough interfaces.  Such
              interfaces will be formed upon bringing two surfaces-one or both of them
              rough-into and out of molecular contact.  A particular focus of this research
              will be to study the contact, deformations, and adhesion between surfaces with
              different chemical and mechanical properties.  Our studies will take advantage
              of self-assembled monolayer formation as a vehicle for surface modification.   
                                   ;                                                         
               Oh     +'  0                     S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n          
                              (                                                   '          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  $       H       l                                               D       h  
                                                              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT  
                                                  Derrick Myers                       Derrick
              Myers               @      ?                            @      ?               
                          @      ?                                                           
                                                      @                                      
                  Microsoft Word 6.0                                                      2  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 e =       e                 
               ;                                                           j       j   j     
               j       j       j                                                             
                                   1                                                         
                                                   &                   j           T       . 
                                       j                                                     
                                                 j       j                                   
                                                 j               j                           
                         j       r       j       j       j       j                           
                                                                                             
                               ABSTRACT CTS-9423780 T. Kyle Vanderlick University of
              Pennsylvania   The focus of this proposal is to elucidate how surface chemistry
              and topography control the interactions between solids as they are into an out
              of  molecular contact.  The primary tool of our investigations is the surface
              forces apparatus, a device designed to measure the forces acting between two
              opposed surfaces as their separation is varied.  Recently, we extended the
              capabilities of the surface forces apparatus to new level with the development
              of Extended Spectral Analysis Multiple Beam Inteferometry (ESA-MBI).  This
              optical technique, which is used to determine surface separation, allow metals
              to be used as substrates in the surface force apparatus. In addition to
              breaking open the application of the surface forces apparatus to this important
              class of material, ESA-MBI boasts another advantage:  the technique provides
              information on the degree and form of surface roughness, in-situ, under states
              of stress that result when one surface is in contact with, or near to another. 
              We propose to take ad
