Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolution of Breeding Systems in Hawaiian Psychotria: A
               Phylogenetic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1995   
File        : a9423590

Award Number: 9423590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Sytsma kjsytsma@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SYTSMA  9423590   This award will support a study of the Hawaiian species of
              Psychotria and their relatives, including (1) a molecular phylogenetic anaylsis
              and (2) comparative analysis of changes in the breeding breeding system among
              different lineages.  Due to lack of good morphological characters, the
              infra-generic classification of Psychotria has not been resolved and the genus
              has only been treated at a regional level.  In particular the relationship(s)
              of the Hawaiian members to the rest of the genus is in question. There is
              considerable debate over whether the Hawiian species of this genus really
              constitute a monophyletic group (a natural, related unit) or are the result of
              multiple introductions to the islands.  This study will determine the number of
              independent introductions of Psychotria to Hawaii.  Molecular data from two
              sources, nuclear ribosomal ITS and chloroplast (matK) DNA sequences will be
              analyzed in a phylogenetic context to clarify these issues.  The information
              provided by the phylogeny will be used to infer patterns of colonization and
              speciation within and between islands.  Preliminary results indiacte that
              patterns of colonization and speciation of Psychotria in the Hawiian islands do
              not confrom to previously established patterns for other groups of organisms
              studied in which oldest islands contain basal elements of radiations.   The
              Hawaiian Psychotria provide an ideal model system to test theories on the
              origin and maintenance of plant breeding systems on islands.  The Hawaiian
              Psychotria are one of only six known cases where dicliny (male and female
              organs in separate flowers) has arisen from distyly (single flowers including
              both male and female parts but with individual flowers having an exaggeration
              of the organs of one sex).  Field studies will be undertaken to formally
              characterize the breeding systems of different species at a population level
              and examine characteristics of pollinator systems for the Hawaiian species of
              Psychotria.  The phylogeny generated in  one part of the study will provide the
              necessary historical background to examine patterns and processes in the
              development of different breeding systems.  The potential occurrence of
              multiple introductions to the islands may provide a unique opportunity to
              examine selective forces in the origin of dicliny in replicate systems.  %%% 
              This study will clarify the relationships of a group of plants occurring in the
              Hawaiian islands.  It will also address important questions concerning the
              breeding systems of colonizing organisms that may be relevant to issues
              involving introduced pest species in other groups.  ***
