Title       : Dissertation Research: The Influence of Isolated Trees on Forest Succession on a
               Pasture in the Tropical Wet Lowlands of Costa Rica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1995  
File        : a9423554

Award Number: 9423554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol C. Horvitz carolhorvitz@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9423554  Horvitz   Pasture ecosystems now cover huge areas in the neotropics.
              Forest succession on these pastures is poorly understood, but preliminary
              evidence suggests that isolated trees in pastures may serve as "establishment
              foci" for colonizing forest species. Patterns of succession stemming from
              pasture isolated trees can be predicted with a nucleation model of succession. 
               The aim of this dissertation research is to develop understanding of how
              isolated trees facilitate forest recovery on an abandoned pasture in a lowland
              tropical wet forest life zone. The project will quantitatively examine the
              species composition of woody seedlings and the seed rain in open pasture and
              beneath the canopies of isolated trees and will examine the relative importance
              of isolated tree species, tree size, and distance to seed sources on seed rain
              and the woody seedling species composition found under the canopies of four
              isolated tree taxa. In addition, the project will attempt to determine the
              effect of cattle herbivory on woody species regrowth under isolated trees by
              excluding cattle from isolated tree plots, and will also attempt to separate
              the effects of differential seed rain beneath the isolated tree taxa from other
              factors that may differentially affect woody seedling establishment. This
              latter experiment will be done by collecting seed rain under each taxa and
              placing it under the canopies of the other taxa. Finally, this project will
              descriptively study the light environment under the isolated tree taxa.   This
              project will expand our understanding of successional patterns in tropical
              abandoned pastures and also our knowledge on the effects of disturbance on
              tropical forest ecosystems. In addition, this project will be able to suggest
              strategies for managed forest recovery on abandoned pastures.
