Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Solution of Algebraic Problems Arising in
               Fluids Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1995      
File        : a9423133

Award Number: 9423133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard C. Elman elman@cs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This work concerns the development and analysis of methods for computing the 
              numerical solution of the linear and nonlinear algebraic systems arising in 
              models of viscous incompressible fluid flow.  The emphasis is on iterative 
              methods, specifically, preconditioned Krylov subspace methods, for solving the 
              linear systems arising from discretization and linearization of the 
              steady-state Navier-Stokes equations subject to incompressibility constraints.
              Primary goals include the formulation and analysis of preconditioners that are 
              effective for large Reynolds numbers, the construction of efficient methods for
              parallel architectures, and the study of effects of linearization strategy on 
              performance and overall costs.  The investigator studies these issues for a 
              variety of stable finite element and finite difference discretization schemes 
              and considers the influence of discretization on the algebraic properties of 
              the discrete problems and on performance.  The methods are studied and compared
              using both analytic bounds on convergence rates and assessment of performance 
              in computational experiments with benchmark problems.   The equations to which
              these solution algorithms are applied are fundamental in computational fluid
              dynamics, for simulating the effects of flow (that is, estimating quantities
              such as velocities, pressures and temperatures) in a wide variety of physical
              settings.  Examples of areas where they can be applied  include vehicle
              aerodynamics and aerospace models, models of environmental  flows, biomedical
              models (blood flow), cooling models for nuclear reactors, and thin film coating
              (e.g., of adhesives or optical fibers).  Mathematical  models of such processes
              enable the study of the effects of different physical  parameters, for example,
              wing shape in an airplane or chemical content of a  thin film.  Determination
              of such effects using purely experimental techniques, i.e., through the
              construction of prototypes and scale models, is prohibitively expensive, time
              consuming  and subject to inaccuracies introduced by the presence of measuring
              devices.  Mathematical models do not replace experimental work but complement
              them and allow for efficient identification of promising prototypes.  Accurate
              solution of the mathematical models is only feasible, however, if reliable and
              fast computational algorithms are available.  The goal of the project is to
              develop such algorithms for use with these models.
