Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: Workstations for Computational Studies in
               Large-Scale Simulation and Mathematical Programming Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1997      
File        : a9423929

Award Number: 9423929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Georgia-Ann Klutke                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36012              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon H. Jacobson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hanif D. Sherali  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9423929  Jacobson   This is a research equipment grant (REG) for the purchase of
              workstations to support computational research projects in the areas of
              large-scale simulation and mathematical programming. The equipment is to be
              housed in an existing laboratory on simulation and optimization. The new
              equipment will be used to support a host of research projects , including
              computational  research necessary to assess the viability of new algorithms for
              verifying simulation model structural properties, test new simulation
              algorithms that study the design of efficient and effective manufacturing
              processes, assess the efficiency of new steady state simulation sensitivity
              estimators, as well as design and test algorithms for solving large-scale mixed
              integer zero-one problems, nonlinear and nonconvex engineering design problems,
              and various transportation and distribution problems.    Because of the
              enhanced speed and memory storage capacity, the workstations requested will
              provide the resources necessary to undertake in-depth testing and analysis of
              algorithms in several areas of research currently pursued by the investigators.
              This could lead to improvement that would otherwise not be possible. In
              addition, both graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from the new
              hardware. The use of the equipment by graduate students will allow them to
              investigate larger and more meaningful research problems. For undergraduates,
              the use of the equipment in support of classroom instructions will expose them
              to the applications of modern computing facilities to solve large-scale
              engineering problems.
