Title       : Lightning in Hurricanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1997      
File        : a9423229

Award Number: 9423229
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294080             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Molinari molinari@atmos.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent P. Idone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Molinari & Idone/Abstract           The objective of this research is to
              determine the structure  and mechanisms of lightning occurrence in hurricanes. 
              This study  will include nine hurricanes that have come within the nominal 
              range of the National Lightning Detection Network.  Of primary  interest are
              the convective structure of hurricanes as revealed by  the lightning, the
              potential for lightning as an early warning  indicator of storm
              intensification, and the reasons for variation  in lightning among storms.  The
              variation of lightning between  early and late stages of tropical cyclones will
              also be examined.   This should provide information on the role of convection
              during  hurricane development, and the role of eye wall debris in  suppressing
              lightning as the hurricane matures.         In addition, the lightning data
              will be combined with Doppler  and non-Doppler radar data at the Hurricane
              Research Division of  NOAA and with rawinsonde data in order to study rainbands
              in  Hurricane Andrew and the fluctuation of eye wall lightning in  Hurricane
              Elena (1985).  In the former study the goal is to  understand the dynamics and
              thermodynamics of a rainband for which  simultaneous and coincident sounding
              data are available.  In the  latter, our interest is in the mechanism of eye
              wall lightning and  what processes turn it on and off.         Finally,
              hurricanes which occur within the grant period will  be investigated using data
              from the National Lightning Detection  Network.  This data should allow
              examination of both intra-cloud  and cloud-to-ground strokes.  Of primary
              interest is the nature of  hurricane eye wall electrification.
