Title       : Pleistocene Glacial Ice Cover and Interglacial Paleoclimatic History in the NE
               Russian Arctic - Comparisons with Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9423730

Award Number: 9423730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Brigham-Grette juliebg@geo.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1592      PROF OPPOR FOR WOMEN IN RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract    This award supports a project to study the late 
              Pleistoceneglacial geology of the regions bordering the Bering  Strait.  Field
              work and laboratory analyses of fossil materials  collected on Chukotka
              Peninsula over the last three years  indicates that the late Cenozoic
              stratigraphic framework for NE  Russia is in need of significant revision. 
              This work casts doubt  on the number of glacial events recorded in the coastal 
              stratigraphy and undermines the correlation by Russian workers of  disjunct
              interglacial marine sequences that has been based on  biostratigraphy and
              elevation above sea level.  The development  of a unified stratigraphic scheme
              for those parts of Beringia on  both sides of the Bering Strait requires that
              the Pleistocene  stratigraphy of NE Russia be more firmly based upon modern 
              concepts of glacial sedimentology, isostasy, and eustasy and  secured with
              better geochronology.  Knowledge of glacial ice  extent in the Russian Arctic
              is important for establishing  accurate boundary conditions for paleoclimatic
              modeling.  Likewise, knowledge of interglacial marine conditions in the  region
              is important for understanding changes in the distribution  of watermasses and
              heat transport as well as understanding the  role of the Bering Strait in
              global ocean circulation models.    Based upon past field work and a complete
              inventory of moraines  and other glaciogenic deposits using European Space
              Agency  synthetic-aperture-radar images across NE Russia, this project  will
              revise the Late Cenozoic stratigraphy of the region and  provide an opportunity
              for both US and Russian researchers to  compare and exchange field methods and
              laboratory techniques via  joint study of crucial stratigraphic sections and
              moraine  sequences on both sides of the Bering Strait.   Special attention 
              will be given to the paleoclimatic and paleoceanographic  significance of
              similarities and contrasts in the Pleistocene  records.  The correlation and
              geochronology of the deposits will  be based upon  a variety of modern
              techniques, including amino  acid geochronology of mollusks, soft sediment
              paleomagnetism,  cosmogenic isotope surface exposure dating and quantitative 
              geomorphology of moraines, along with traditional  biostratigraphy.  The
              results of this project will be important  to developing a complete picture of
              paleoenvironmental conditions  in this region.    Beyond the scientific work
              described here there are ancillary  benefits to this US-Russian cooperative
              venture.  Collaboration  and joint field work between U.S. and Russian
              Quaternary  researchers active in areas of Beringia is beneficial due to the 
              shared earth and cultural history of our common border.  The  proposed
              development in the Bering Strait region of a jointly  managed Beringian
              Heritage Park by the National Park Service and  Russian counterparts highlights
              this shared legacy.  Shared  problem-solving in the field is necessary due to
              national  differences in sedimentologic and stratigraphic terminology and 
              concepts.  An important benefit will be the opportunity to expose  our Russian
              colleagues to geochronological techniques not  presently  available in their
              country.
