Title       : Thin Liquid Films - Structure and Stability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1998  
File        : a9423584

Award Number: 9423584
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200191             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darsh T. Wasan wasan@iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS9423584  Wasan, D.T.  Illinois Institute of Technology    The
              objective of this research is to examine, both experimentally and
              theoretically, the phenomenon of multilayered microstructuring or
              stratification in sub-micron thin liquid films with fluid surfaces stabilized
              by surfactant micelles of Brownian particles; further to explore its use as a
              probe for investigating order inducing long-range structural forces in
              colloidal dispersions.  A unique feature of this continuing study lies in the
              use of its newly instrumented surface force balance for curved films with fluid
              interfaces for investigating the influence of multilayered microstructuring on
              film thickness stability.  Surface force balance will be used in conjunction
              with differential interference microscopy to study symmetric foam and emulsion
              films as well as asymmetric films such as those between approaching small oil
              droplets and an air-water surface or water droplets and an air-oil surface. 
              X-ray diffraction using synchrotron radiation from the advanced Photon Source
              at Argonne National Laboratory will be used to directly observe the intrinsic,
              in-layer structure within thin liquid films with fluid surfaces.  Experiments
              using differential and common microinterferometric methods will be performed to
              obtain the local mean curvature of the film meniscus and the film/meniscus
              contact angles and, thereby, the film excess energy and the disjoining pressure
              attributable to the presence of micellar structure inside the film.  It is
              proposed to investigate the micellar/particle structure in the region between
              the thin liquid film and the meniscus, i.e., inside the wedged film by using
              Confocal Scanning Laser Fluorescence Microscopy as well as low-angle,
              transmitted light diffraction technique.    The experiments will be compared
              with our Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics simulations.  Important
              technological factors affecting the film structure and stability, such as
              effective micelle/particle volume fraction, film size and i ts thickness,
              particle size, shape and polydiserpisity, will be evaluated.  Systems to be
              investigated will include both spherical and non-spherical micelles, mixed
              micelles (such as mixtures of anionic and nonionic micellar solution),
              proteins, and differentially charged colloidal particles such as latexes and
              silica, and hydrocolloids such as gums and starches.  This study on thin liquid
              film phenomena is aimed at understanding the role of surface-induced
              structural/depletion forces in stabilizing or destabilizing foams, emulsions,
              and collodical dispersions.
