Title       : Formative Period Household Socio-Economics at La Joya, Veracruz, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9423592

Award Number: 9423592
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179192             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Arnold YLAPAP@LUCCPUA.BITNET  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Arnold    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Philip Arnold and  his
              colleagues will conduct two field seasons of archaeological  research at the
              site of La Joya which is located in the Tuxtla  Mountains of Mexico. The Olmec
              culture is one of the earliest and  also best known in Middle America. The
              large sculpted stone heads  which weigh many tons each and were made by Olmec
              peoples bespeak  a surprisingly high level of social organization at an early 
              date. While the overall importance of the Olmecs has long been  recognized,
              very little is archaeologically known about them and  the two sites which have
              been excavated are both located along  the Gulf coast of Mexico. The adjacent
              Tuxtla Mountains have both  fertile well drained soils. They also served as the
              source for  the basalts used for the monumental sculpture, elite tombs and 
              utilitarian ground stone artifacts at Gulf Olmec centers. With  the exception
              of Dr. Arnold's reconnaissance, very little  archaeological work has been
              focussed on the Olmec in this  region. At La Joya Dr. Arnold has discovered a
              large site which  dates to the early Olmec period and therefore has the
              potential  to shed light on the rise of this culture.    Several goals guide
              the excavation and subsequent analyses. Dr.  Arnold wishes to  focus on
              households and to determine how  individual households were organized and how
              they changed over  time.He will also characterize subsistence strategies and
              land  use practices which the La Joya residents employed and finally  will
              investigate how utilitarian craft objects were produced.  Together these data
              will provide information on how La Joya  people related both to each other and
              to their environment. To  accomplish this goal Dr. Arnold will combine both
              survey and  excavation. This will allow him to plot the distribution of sites 
              over the landscape and to determine the context of several of  these.    This
              research is important for several reasons. It will provide  data of interest to
              many archaeologists. It  will shed light on  the rise of complex society in the
              New World and help scientists  to understand how groups at relatively simple
              technological  levels interact with their environment.
