Title       : Dissertation Research: Dispersal, Evolution, and Phylogeny of Membranipora
               (Bryozoa: Cheilostomata)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1995   
File        : a9423868

Award Number: 9423868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. D. Harvell CDH5@CORNELL.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9423868  Harvell  Dispersal of organisms and gene flow among populations are
              poorly understood in open systems like the ocean where the life history of many
              marine groups includes long distance dispersing stages.  This is in contrast to
              terrestrial and fresh water organisms with their often obvious physical
              discontinuities in habitat to explain genetic structure of populations and,
              with a more long-term view, allopatric speciation or the origin of new species
              from geographically isolated populations.  This project will focus on the
              marine bryozoan genus Membranipora (Bryozoa: Cheilostomata) and the species M.
              membranacea to investigate whether ocean currents are a major factor in
              structuring gene flow.  Molecular genetic methods (primarily mitochondrial DNA
              sequencing with a small component of protein electrophoresis) will be used to
              investigate patterns and rates of gene flow among populations.  In addition, a
              phylogeny or diagram of relationships among species in the genus Membranipora
              will be constructed using mtDNA sequence data and interpreted in a geographic
              context to address hypotheses about the causes of speciation in the genus
              Membranipora.  %%%  This study will contribute to our knowledge of marine
              biodiversity by studying a genus in the group of organisms known as Bryozoa. 
              These are most commonly seen in their plant-like branching colonies but the
              small larval dispersing phase is very important to gene flow among populations.
               The project will investigate current gene flow patterns within one species and
              begin to address geologically historical gene flow by determining relationships
              among species in the genus and examining their geographic distributions.
