Title       : The Synthesis, Characterization, and Surface Chemistry of Ultra-thin Oxide Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1999      
File        : a9423707

Award Number: 9423707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Goodman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9423707    The goal of this project is the synthesis,
              characterization, and  surface chemistry of well defined, ultra-thin (less than
              10 nm)  oxide films. Ultra-thin oxide films will be prepared on  refractory
              single crystal substrates and characterized using an  array of surface science
              techniques, including low energy  electron diffraction, Auger electron
              spectroscopy, X-ray and  ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy and, ion
              scattering  spectroscopy,  reflection absorption Fourier transform infrared 
              spectroscopy, high resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy,  scanning
              tunneling microscopy/atomic force microscopy, and  temperature programmed
              desorption. Ordered, oxide surfaces in  thin film form will be prepared on
              single-crystal, refractor  metal substrates. This approach will be extended to
              include a  variety of oxide and mixed-oxide types. A methodology utilizing 
              these highly ordered, stoichiometric oxide thin films offers a  promising new
              strategy for studying the surface chemistry of  these materials in ways
              precluded utilizing the bulk materials  and traditional  techniques.    %%% 
              This study impacts the basic science of oxides and various  practical
              technologies such as environmental waste remediation,  device fabrication, and
              catalysis. Because of the highly  insulating nature of many oxide materials,
              their surface  geometrical and electronic properties, in general, have received
               much less attention than, for example, metal surfaces. To date,  extensive
              work on the chemisorption and catalytic properties of  oxide materials have
              been conducted, however, the microscopic  reaction mechanisms occurring on
              oxide surfaces are still not  well understood. The principle reason for this is
              that these  studies have been performed primarily on powder samples. 
              Therefore, the information represents an average of the various  crystal faces
              exposed in addition to a variety of defects which  are inevitably present in
              the powdered samples. On the other  hand, high-purity single cr ystals of many
              oxide materials have  been difficult to obtain and studies of these insulating 
              materials have often encountered the difficulties associated with  surface
              charging, sample heating and cleaning. Therefore, there  is a clear need for
              the synthesis of high quality, thin oxide  films. Structural and chemisorptive
              properties of oxide materials  can be obtained by preparing well-defined, thin
              oxide films whose  properties are identical to their single-crystal bulk 
              counterparts, thereby facilitating surface chemical studies of  these materials
              under controlled conditions.
