Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Systems, Complexity and Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1995      
File        : a9423279

Award Number: 9423279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Faybusovich leonid.faybusovich.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The role of dynamical systems arising in connection with optimization  problems
              will be analyzed.  Special attention will be paid to optimization problems with
              inequality constraints.  Among problems to be considered are: semidefinite
              programming, nonconvex problems on  polytopes, general nonlinear convex
              mathematical programming problems, and linear-quadratic control problems with
              quadratic constraints.  The Hamiltonian structure of corresponding dynamical
              systems and its relation to the problems of constraint mechanics will be
              studied. The dependence of qualitative properties of dynamical systems on the
              choice of barrier functions will also be considered.  Various approaches to the
              construction of algorithms based on dynamical systems are compared.  New
              approaches to semidefinite problems, optimization problems in spaces of
              measures, and infinite-dimensional quadratic problems will be suggested.  As a
              result of the project, it is expected that substantial progress will be made
              toward construction of interior-point algorithms for the above mentioned
              classes of problems. More im portantly, the combination of interior-point
              techniques and sequential quadratic programming approaches will lead to
              efficient algorithms for solving broad classes of optimal control problems with
              both state space and control inequality constraints.  Control theory has
              numerous applications to practical problems ranging from missile guidance to
              laser CD tuning.  It is quite natural to expect that the choice of control 
              strategy is  determined by the available resources and the performance index. 
              This is the main  paradigm of so-called optimal control theory. Until very
              recently only few optimal control problems  could be solved in real time. The
              very fast development of so-called interior-point algorithms  completely
              changes the situation. It is now quite possible to address optimal control and
              other  infinite-dimensional problems involving inequality constraints. Robotics
              (including  motion planning,  dexterous grasping force optimization) and
              control of quantum processes (important for the development  of new materials)
              are good examples of problems where such techniques can be used. The exciting
              aspect  of interior-point algorithms is that their efficiency grows with the
              size of the problem.  In this  proposal, a program of development
              interior-point algorithms is suggested which would unable one to  apply this
              methodology to a broad class of optimal control problems.  Ways are outlined to
              generalize  interior-point algorithms while keeping their efficiency (measured
              by complexity estimates).  Dynamical system theory provides an important
              theoretical tool for the realization of the project. As  a result, it is
              expected that the efficient interior-point  algorithms suitable for optimal
              control  applications will be developed.  Complexity  estimates will be
              obtained fot these algorithms.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
