Title       : Instantaneous Measurements of Molecular Mixing in High Reynolds Number Shear
               Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9423280

Award Number: 9423280
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John F. Foss                            
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243474             (Estimated)
Investigator: J.Craig Dutton j-dutton@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Lucht  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              CTS-9423280  J. C. Dutton & Robert Lucht  University of Illinois      This
              research seeks to develop and apply a new technique for quantitative
              measurements of the structure of high Reynolds number gaseous shear flows,
              including the capability of measuring the extent of mixing at the molecular
              level.  The extent of mixing at the molecular level in shear flows will be
              measured instantaneously by using two different lasers and two different lasers
              and two different cameras to excite and then detect laser-induced fluorescence
              (LIF) from nitric oxide (NO) and acetone simultaneously.  NO will be added as a
              seed species to air in the other stream.  In pure nitrogen, the NO LIF
              quenching rate is orders of magnitude smaller than the quenching rate in air. 
              Consequently, if the two streams mix at the molecular level to even a small
              extent, the NO LIF signal will virtually disappear.  The acetone LIF signal is
              proportional to the acetone number density in the fluid volume, whether or not
              the fluids have mixed at the molecular level.  The simultaneous NO-acetone LIF
              imaging technique will allow quantitative measurement of the fraction of the
              seeded fluid that has been macroscopically stirred with the unseeded fluid, as
              well as the extent to which the streams have mixed at the molecular level. 
              Quantitative measurement of molecular mixing are of tremendous importance,
              particularly in chemically reacting systems where mixing of the fuel and
              oxidant streams at the molecular level is required for chemical reaction.  As
              an important practical example, fundamental understanding of mixing at the
              microscale as well as the macroscale is necessary for accurate calculation of
              pollutant formation in flames.
