Title       : SBIR Phase II: Development of a Bioremediation System for the Degradation of
               Ozone-Depleting Substances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1995 
File        : a9423987

Award Number: 9423987
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary F. DeFlaun 74024.3076@compuserve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Envirogen, Inc.
	      4100 Quakerbridge Road
	      Lawrenceville, NJ  086484702    609/936-9300

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1312,9104,9187,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Deflaun  9423987  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              involves  the development of a biocatalyst-based reactor system for the 
              destruction of hydrohalocarbon compounds known to contribute to  ozone
              depletion and global warming.  During Phase I work,  Mycobacterium vaccae JOB5
              was selected as uniquely suited for use  in biotrickling filters designed to
              treat air emission.  Phase II  research will attempt to: (1) establish
              potential co-substrates for  hydrohalocarbon oxidation; (2) develop an on-line
              gas  chromatographic method for continuous monitoring of pollutant  halogenated
              hydrocarbons; (3) show the feasibility of using M.  caccae JOB5 in bench-scale
              biotrickling filters and verify  mineralization of target compounds; (4)
              establish the optimal  feeding rate to these biofiltering devices; (5) obtain
              data on the  long-term use of the biotrickling filter; (6) use this information
               in cost analyses of estimates for construction of a full-scale  biotrickling
              filter, and in projecting capital and operating costs  in comparison with those
              of conventional physical/chemical  treatment technologies; and (7) incorporate
              this information into  a final report and commercialization plan for the
              technology.  It  is suggested that the development of a bioreactor system for
              the  removal and destruction of hydrohalocarbon vapor emissions  potentially
              could offer significant cost reductions and overall  savings compared to
              today's conventional air treatment options.  %%%  This Small Business
              Innovation Research Phase II project involves  the development of a
              biocatalyst-based reactor system for the  destruction of pollutant compounds
              that contribute to ozone  depletion and global warming.  During Phase I work,
              Mycobacterium  vaccae JOB5 was selected as best suited for use in biotrickling 
              filters designed to remove these pollutants from the air.  Phase II  research
              will attempt to: (1) find out what kind of compounds can  be removed from air
              with this microbe-based filter system; (2)  deve lop an on-line gas
              chromatographic method to continuously  measure the concentration of these
              pollutants in air; (3) show the  feasibility of using M. caccae JOB5 in
              bench-scale biotrickling  filters and verify that the filtering device destroys
              the target  compounds; (4) establish the rate at which the filter system can 
              destroy pollutants; (5) obtain data on the long-term use of the  biotrickling
              filter; and (6) use this information in cost analyses  for building a
              full-scale biotrickling filter, and comparing  capital investments and
              operating costs for this novel  biotechnology with conventional
              physical/chemical treatment  technologies.  Finally, these data will be
              incorporated into a  final report and commercialization plan for this novel
              technology.   It is suggested that the development of a bioreactor system could
               provide significant cost reductions and overall savings compared to  today's
              conventional air treatment options.  ***
