Title       : Dissertation Research: Evaluating Indirect Estimates of Gene Flow: A Comparative
               Life History Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1995     
File        : a9423603

Award Number: 9423603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nelson G. Hairston ngh1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9423603  HAIRSTON   The magnitude of dispersal between natural populations
              of organisms is known to affect a wide array of biological events, including
              speciation, extinction, and local adaptation.  The genetic consequence of
              dispersal, termed gene flow, is commonly inferred from the geographic
              distribution of gene frequencies.  However, the accuracy of such estimates is
              difficult to ascertain.  Measuring gene flow in closely related species which
              vary in dispersal ability allows such indirect estimates to be evaluated.    
              This proposal outlines a sampling regime for 19 species disperse of Arrenurus
              water mites across a range of spatial scales.  The majority of these species
              disperse only once in their lifetime on the adult stages of aquatic insects,
              while a few do not disperse at all.  Dispersal ability of the mite species can
              be ranked categorically based on known attributes of the host and the
              host-parasite relationship.  Analyses of genetic population structure will be
              made for each mite species from allozyme data, as will the population structure
              of some insect hosts.  Data regarding the insects will provide insight into the
              genetic consequences of the parasitic association to the parasites.  For the
              water mites, correlations between dispersal and gene flow will be assessed
              statistically, and phylogenetic relationships will be considered.  Because
              these mites are closely related, occur in similar habitats, and their dispersal
              potential is well understood, differences between them other than dispersal
              ability are minimized.  This study will be the first attempt to assess
              population genetic structure in a large group of co-occurring, closely related
              species.
