Title       : Altithermal Occupation of the High Plains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1994  
File        : a9423198

Award Number: 9423198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Meltzer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Meltzer    The goal of this research is to conduct intensive archaeological  and
              geophysical survey and testing at Gibson Ranch which is located  near Earth,
              Texas. Dr. Meltzer will attempt to determine whether  archaeological materials
              of Altithermal age (ca 7,500 to 5,000  before the present) occur. The work will
              focus on a ca. 125,000  meter square area of the draw and use ground
              penetrating radar to  examine the buried Altithermal surface for traces of
              water wells  and other humanly produced features. Any detected features will be
               checked in test trenches/excavations. A surface survey of the  surrounding
              dune fields and uplands will also be conducted to  search for associated
              habitation sites. The goal of the research is  to determine whether humans
              groups occupied the area during the  Altithermal and, if so, to map their
              extent of their archaeological  sites. Dr Meltzer will collect preliminary data
              on site age,  artifacts, paleoecological and sedimentary context.     Humans
              were clearly present in the New World by at least 12,000  years ago. Over the
              succeeding period climate changed dramatically  and has been marked by periods
              both warmer and cooler than today.  Archaeologists wish to understand how
              humans adapt to and make use  of their environment and the archaeological and
              geological records  which provide long term information on environmental change
              and  human response. They thus provide an excellent context to study  such
              questions. The Altithermal is a particularly interesting  period because it
              marks an extreme fluxuation. On the High Plains  of the U.S., temperatures
              peaked, evapotranspiration increased and  effective rainfall decreased. Where
              most pronounced, loss of soil  moisture and reduced vegetative cover triggered
              sediment  weathering, arroyo cutting, and dust and dune accumulation. In  areas
              hardest hit, lakes shrank or evaporated and aquifer recharge  failed to keep
              pace with discharge. There were also changes in  flora and fauna. This
              situation provides an excellent co ntext to  understand how human adapt in
              extreme conditions and such is the  goal of Dr. Meltzer's research.
