Title       : MRI: Changes in Uterine Gene Expression During Embryo Implantation in the Mouse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1995     
File        : a9423382

Award Number: 9423382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yvette M. Huet-Hudson FBI00yhh@unccvm.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Yvette Huet-Hudson                                                IBN#9423382 
                         The objective of the proposed research is to examine changes  in
              gene expression in the pregant mouse uterus following exposure  to the hormone
              estrogen.  Estrogen is required for embryo  implantation.  Successful
              establishment of pregancy, resulting in  the birth of healthy rodent offspring,
              depends upon normal  implantation in the uterus.  Implantation is a complex
              process  regulated by the hormones progesterone and estrogen.  The  initiation
              of implantation is triggered in the progesterone-primed  uterus by estrogen. 
              One current theory is that  progesterone/estrogen mediated regulation of embryo
              implantation is  modulated indirectly through gene expression.  It has also
              been  shown that embryos require exposure to the maternal uterus within  one
              hour of estrogen exposure for implantation to occur.  In order  to better
              understand how this process is initiated, this  investigator will compare the
              genes that are expressed prior to,  and one hour after, estrogen in a
              progesterone-primed uterus.  This  will be accomplished by producing uterine
              cDNA subtraction  libraries.  This will allow the investigaor to determine
              which  genes are turned on or turned off by estrogen in the uterus during  the
              critical one hour time period required for successful  implantation.  In
              gaining information concerning which genes are  differentially expressed, it is
              hoped that a foundation will be  laid for future studies of uterine physiology
              during early  pregnancy.             This new investigator, a minority
              scientist, has a strong  background in reproductive biology, including a recent
              publication  in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy.  She will use 
              this initiative funding to begin her independent investigation, in  preparation
              for the submission of a full proposal.
