Title       : B Mating-type Specificities and Phermones in Schizophyllum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1996       
File        : a9423994

Award Number: 9423994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlene A. Raper craper@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9423994  Raper  The aim of this research is to understand how a simple eukaryote
              distinguishes itself from  many nonselves in regulating mating and development.
              The specific objective is to discover the molecular mechanism by which the
              multiallelic B mating-type genes trigger sexual development in the
              mushroom-type fungus Schizophyllum commune. The B genes reside in two linked
              loci, B( and B(, each of which has nine different specificities in the
              world-wide population. A mating pair must be heteroallelic at either B( or B(
              to be compatible: any of 36 possible pairings of different specificities at
              either locus results in initiation of the identical developmental pathway. How
              is this possible? The recent cloning and sequencing of  B(1 has revealed genes
              for putative pheromones and a pheromone receptor similar to those found in
              other fungi; all previously described fungal systems, however, possess only two
              allelic versions of such genes. It is likely that the basis for
              multispecificity of the B mating-type loci in S. commune is a unique system of
              multiple pheromone and pheromone receptor genes which act as master regulators
              of sexual morphogenesis. Evidence for other linked genes involved in specific
              events of sexual morphogenesis has been produced by a mutational dissection of
              the B(3 and B(2 loci. It is hypothesized that these other genes act downstream
              in a pheromone response pathway to affect particular steps in B-regulated
              development.  The focus of this project is to test these hypotheses by
              characterizing the functional genetic components of the B(3 and B(2 loci. These
              will be compared with the B(1 and B(1 loci as part of a collaborative effort
              with two European laboratories.  The number and kind of genetic elements that
              define given specificities of B( and B( is being determined by using standard
              techniques of DNA sequencing and DNA-mediated transformation of Schizophyllum. 
              Preliminary analyses of the coding regions of relevant genes will be obtained
              by in vitro rnutagenesis and cDNA sequ encing. The existing deletion mutations
              within the loci will be used to isolate and characterize genes that affect
              specific developmental events in the B-regulated pathway. Genes of interest
              will be identified by using a set of overlapping clones within the wild-type
              B(3 - B(2 region as probes to determine differences in mutated versus
              progenitor DNA. Mutant strains will be used as transformation recipients to
              test for function of the wild-type genes.  %%%  Preliminary evidence suggests
              that B gene regulation of self/nonself recognition in S. commune is based on a
              ligand/receptor system similar to those known to regulate cell-to-cell
              communication and differentiation in a broad range of organisms. This study
              will take advantage of a unique opportunity to define the genetic determinants
              of what appear to be multiple versions of such molecules in a genetically
              accessible organism.  ***  ??
