Title       : Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Polymer Miscibility in Confined
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0328205

Award Number: 0328205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159387             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanat K. Kumar kumar@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The phase behavior of confined, multicomponent polymer mixtures is interesting
              in the context of application, e.g., paints and packaging, since important film
              properties, such as surface roughness and hence the optical quality and
              friction of the film surface, change dramatically when the mixture phase
              separates.  While this problem has been the focus of theoretical interest for
              the last two decades, very little experimental work exists due to the
              challenges in obtaining reliable data from films in the 0.01-1nm thickness
              range.  The PI has recently extended a standard characterization technique,
              small angle neutron scattering, to films as thin as D=10 nm and finds that
              experimental measures of thin film coexistence are in qualitative disagreement
              with past experiments and theory on comparable systems.  Resolving these
              discrepancies is a primary thrust of the proposed research.
%%%
An important
              element in the proper delineation of thin film behavior is a quantitative
              understanding of their bulk miscibility.  While there is considerable research
              on these issues, it remains hard to a - priori predict the miscibility of two
              arbitrarily chosen polymers.  For example, current molecular simulations which
              account for all of the chemical details of the molecules are limited to chain
              lengths which are too short to be in the range where normal polymer mixtures
              phase separate.  As part of this research the PI has developed a quantitative
              lattice-based method which alleviates these concerns.

The primary focus of
              the proposed work, which exploits the availability of these novel and
              complementary theoretical and experimental tools, is to quantitatively
              understand the bulk phase behavior of model polymer blends, and how they are
              modified by the constraints and surface interactions in a thin film geometry in
              an integrated manner.

