Title       : Large Area Detector for X-Ray Diffraction Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1993   
File        : a9261557

Award Number: 9261557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Squillante msquillante@rmdinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Radiation Mon Devices Inc
	      44 Hunt Street
	      Watertown, MA  024724699    617/926-1167

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1108,9126,
Abstract    :
              New techniques for digital X-ray imaging have been under                       
              investigation for decades.  Some of the most promising techniques              
              incorporate solid-state X-ray detectors, which are attractive                  
              because of their compactness.  High-Z semiconductor X-ray                      
              detectors have further advantages due to their high stopping                   
              power.  One of the drawbacks of high-Z semiconductor detectors                 
              was the cost of producing large-area arrays.  The usual approach               
              was to assemble an array of isolated, individually-fabricated                  
              detector elements.  A competing technology is to enhance large                 
              area arrays of amorphous silicon (a-Si) photodiodes by coating                 
              them with a film of high-Z scintillating material (e.g. CsI) by                
              evaporation.  While this technique is more effective in stopping               
              X-rays than using "naked" silicon photodiodes, the poor                        
              conversion efficiency of scintillators limits the signal                       
              amplitude.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              We propose producing sublimed films of a new, high-Z                           
              semiconductor (thallium bromide), and to characterize their                    
              utility as pixilated detectors for X-ray image detection.  We                  
              have made measurements of sublimed TlBr films produced in our                  
              laboratories and have noted that these detectors maintain                      
              surprisingly good charge carrier transport properties in spite of              
              their poor crystallinity.  We propose that these films will be                 
              read out by depositing them on an amorphous silicon thin-film                  
              transistor array.  These detectors would yield a larger signal                 
              than the scintillator-enhanced detectors, due to their high                    
              conversion efficiency while maintaining high X-ray stopping                    
              power.
