Title       : Anti-Predator Vigilance: The Basics Reconsidered
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1993     
File        : a9221925

Award Number: 9221925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25314              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Lima lslima@scifac.indstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana State University
	      200 North Seventh Street
	      Terre Haute, IN  478091202    812/237-3085

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Virtually all animals are both predators (in some sense) and                   
              potential prey for other animals.  Understanding the behavioral                
              implications of this simple truism has been a major focus of                   
              ecologically-based behavioral research over the past 10 to 15                  
              years.  This research has led to considerable insight into the                 
              nature of animal decision-making, and has enhanced the ability of              
              biologists to predict animal behavior under natural conditions.                
              Research on anti-predatory behavior has also yielded much insight              
              into both the evolution of behavior and the nature of large-scale              
              ecological systems.                                                            
                                                                                             
              Dr. Lima's research follows in this tradition and focuses                      
              specifically on a prominent area in anti-predatory behavior: the               
              detection of predators by socially-feeding animals.  A great deal              
              of work in this area indicates that animals somehow coordinate                 
              their anti-predatory vigilance (that is, alert behavior), and, in              
              essence, detect predatory attack as a socially-integrated unit.                
              This work has many ecological and evolutionary implications,                   
              particularly for the evolution of cooperative behavior in                      
              animals.  However, Dr. Lima's recent NSF-funded research reveals               
              that dark-eyed juncos do not coordinate their vigilance, nor do                
              they detect attack as an integrated unit.  These discoveries                   
              raise several interesting questions, which Dr. Lima will now                   
              pursue.  He will see if his anomalous findings hold across                     
              several bird species.  Dr. Lima also will investigate how flock                
              members find out that a predator has been detected by other                    
              individuals; previous work indicates that there is very little                 
              direct transfer of information within the flock.  This research                
              will indicate whether or not a major reassessment is needed in                 
              this important and long-standing area in the study of anti-                    
              predatory behavior.
