Title       : Dissertation: Prehistoric Development and Change in Southern Scandinavia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1993  
File        : a9221225

Award Number: 9221225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tina L. Thurston  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. T. Douglas Price, Ms. Tina L. Thurston              
              will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will continue             
              her archaeological and associated documentary studies into change              
              in the district of Jarrestad which is located in the province of               
              Skane, southern Sweden. Throughout the Early and Middle Iron Age               
              (ca. 500 BC - AD 800) Skane was composed of a number of stratified             
              autonomous political systems. During the Late Iron Age or Viking               
              period (AD 800 - 1100) these polities passed not only from                     
              prehistory into history, but also from existing as several middle-             
              range societies to unification with an emergent centralized state              
              which was developing in Western Denmark. The goal of this research             
              is to understand how this change took place and what were the                  
              processes which underlay it. To achieve this goal MS Thurston will             
              make use of early written documents and will also rely on the                  
              excellent archaeological data base available. In addition she                  
              wishes to study changes in the size and location of settlements and            
              to determine the extent to which a changed settlement pattern                  
              reflects outside imposition by a dominant power. She will use the              
              technique of soil phosphate analysis. Extensive research has shown             
              that prolonged human habitation changes soil characteristics and               
              results in a significant enrichment in phosphorus. Through                     
              controlled excavation in known sites - which will allow the                    
              construction of precise stratigraphies -, soil sampling and                    
              subsequent phosphate analysis, settlement size can be determined.              
              Settlement hierarchies and the pattern of relationships between                
              individual sites can then be established.                                      
                                                                                             
              While archaeological data make it clear that in some regions states            
              emerge through a process of internal development, perhaps more                 
              often such complexity develops through a secondary process in which            
              local groups unify in response of changes in neighboring regions.              
              This took place in areas as disparate as lowland Middle America and            
              Northern Europe. However relatively little archaeological attention            
              has been devoted to secondary state formation and MS. Thurston's               
              research will help to remedy this situation.                                   
                                                                                             
              The work is important for several reasons. It will provide data of             
              interest to many archaeologists. It will, hopefully, shed new light            
              on how social complexity develops and finally it will assist in the            
              training of a promising young scientist.
