Title       : Do Mammals and Insects Control Tropical Forest Diversity? A Community-level
               Experimental Test
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1995      
File        : a9221032

Award Number: 9221032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278846             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Hubbell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal challenges the prevalent view about tropical                
              forests that gap phase dynamics is the most important part of the              
              regeneration cycle for determining species composition of                      
              tropical forests. This research is the first to experimentally                 
              test the hypothesis that mammals and insects in the understory of              
              mature tropical forest control tree species diversity. This                    
              hypothesis has important ramifications for tropical forest                     
              dynamics, diversity, conservation, and management.  Recent                     
              observations suggest that when forests lose their mammalian                    
              herbivores and seed predators they develop low plant species                   
              diversity.  Forests with intact mammalian fauna have high species              
              diversity. Poaching and over-hunting in many tropical forest                   
              reserves are threatening mammalian herbivore populations. If                   
              mammalian herbivores are important, than forests that lose their               
              fauna are likely to lose tree species diversity at an accelerated              
              rate.  The forest on Barro Colorado Island (BCI), Panama, will be              
              studied in this research. Our findings indicate that gaps do not               
              affect species diversity in these forests; therefore, the                      
              abundance of tree species must be determined in the understory                 
              where seeds, seedlings, and saplings are exposed to intensive                  
              herbivory. We propose to test the hypothesis that herbivory and                
              seed dispersal control the establishment, composition, and                     
              diversity of tree species in species-rich tropical forests.                    
              %%%                                                                            
                   For the past ten years, research in tropical forests has                  
              focused on the role of gap-phase dynamics as the primary                       
              determinant of tree species diversity. Although studies of seed                
              predation are common, this project represents the first attempt                
              to conduct a community-level experimental test of the effects of               
              mammalian and insect herbivores on tropical forest diversity. The              
              results have important implications for the conservation and                   
              management of biodiversity in tropical                                         
              regions.
