Title       : Regulatory Mechanisms of Metabolic Repression in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1996     
File        : a9221086

Award Number: 9221086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $426840             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jen Sheen sheen@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research project is to understand the regulatory              
              mechanisms mediating metabolic repression of photosynthetic genes              
              in higher plants.  Recent studies in this laboratory have shown                
              that sugars and acetate specifically and coordinately repress seven            
              maize photosynthetic gene promoters.  The repression is effective              
              at physiological concentrations of these metabolites, and overrides            
              regulation by light, cell type, and developmental stage.  Metabolic            
              repression of transcription appears to be a major regulatory                   
              circuit in maize and is susceptible to biochemical and molecular               
              genetic analyses using protoplast transient expression methods                 
              established in this laboratory.                                                
                                                                                             
              The project can be divided into two parts: the first part is to                
              continue the study of transcriptional mechanisms directly involved             
              in glucose- and acetate-mediated photosynthetic gene repression.               
              Using a well characterized maize photosynthetic gene promoter (the             
              cabZm5 promoter) fused to an assayable reporter gene, the                      
              investigator will begin to define the cis-acting regulatory DNA                
              elements mediating metabolic repression.  The investigator will                
              also characterize the changes in DNA-protein interactions which                
              follow and/or mediate repression.  The second part aims to                     
              understand how the glucose concentration is sensed and transduced.             
              Various glucose analogues, chemical inhibitors, and maize                      
              hexokinase mutants will be used to determine whether glucose                   
              phosphorylation or metabolism is required for repression.  Because             
              preliminary results suggest cAMP can be a relevant second messenger            
              in the maize system (as in yeast and vertebrates), the effects of              
              agents impacting cAMP or cAMP-dependent protein kinases will be                
              investigated.  Finally, to test regulatory concepts generated by               
              work using protoplast transient expression assays, the investigator            
              will begin to create a transgenic maize system and analyze                     
              transgenic maize plants.  The results from this project will                   
              provide much needed insight into metabolite-mediated signal                    
              transduction and gene regulation essential to plant growth and                 
              development.
