Title       : Collaborative Research: Linking Environmental Heterogeneityto Foraging Behavior:
               Plant Community Geometry and Herbivore Functional Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1994      
File        : a9221610

Award Number: 9221610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149530             (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Thompson Hobbs nthobbs@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Wunder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              0510302   Energetics & Thermodynamc               
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                   The ecological consequences of heterogeneity in resources                 
              depend on the way resources are arranged in space and on the                   
              functional properties of organisms seeking them. The PI's derived              
              a model of consumption by herbivores that incorporates variation               
              in spatial arrangements of plants, and velocities and food                     
              processing abilities of animals. The model generated the                       
              following hypotheses: 1) Increasing patchiness in plant                        
              communities causes encounter rate with resources to decline as                 
              foraging time increases. 2) The decline in encounter rate is                   
              opposed by increasing resource apparency and size. 3) Spatial                  
              pattern fails to influence intake rate when resource encounter                 
              rate exceeds an animals food processing rate. 4) At a given                    
              scale, the influence of spatial pattern on intake rate will be                 
              greatest for animals of intermediate body sizes. To test these                 
              hypotheses, the PI's will manipulate spatial patterns of                       
              resources, resource apparency, and resource size available to                  
              herbivores in laboratory and field experiments. Results from                   
              these experiments will provide an assessment of the model's                    
              ability to predict intake rate of consumers in comparisons with                
              predictions from more traditional predictive theory.                           
              %%%                                                                            
              The PI's have developed one of the first models that relates                   
              resource patchiness, resource abundance, foraging movements of                 
              herbivores, and body size to resource acquisition by herbivores.               
              The model has generated a series of testable hypotheses, some of               
              which are unique and counter-intuitive. Tests of these hypotheses              
              will provide an important contribution toward a much needed                    
              general theory of herbivore foraging.  Results from this research              
              have important implications for landscape scale management of                  
              grazing systems, and for a general understanding of foraging                   
              behavior in light of the habitat fragmentation currently                       
              occurring in many natural systems.
