Title       : Flowing Afterglow - Guided Ion Beam Studies of Reactive Organic Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1996    
File        : a9221480

Award Number: 9221480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $718500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Squires   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A combined experimental and theoretical investigation of the                   
              formation, thermodynamic stability, and chemical reactivity of                 
              neutral and ionic organic fragments in the gas-phase will be made.             
              This study will measure sequential carbon-carbon and                           
              carbon-hydrogen dissociation energies for simple organic compounds             
              such as cyclopropane, benzene, toluene, and naphthalene, and                   
              characterize the gas-phase  reactivity of selected ionic fragments             
              involved in the bond-by-bond disassembly of these molecules. A                 
              flowing afterglow-guided ion beam instrument will be used to                   
              measure activation energies for collision-induced dissociation                 
              reactions of selected carbynes, biradicals, triradicals, and their             
              corresponding negative ions. These data will allow an examination              
              of thermochemical issues such as the energetic consequences of                 
              electronic promotion (hybridization) effects in chemical bonding,              
              the intrinsic Bronsted acidities of radicals and carbenes, the                 
              relative magnitudes of the first, second, and third carbon-hydrogen            
              bond dissociation energies in benzene and related aromatic                     
              compounds, and the energetic benefit of through-bond coupling and              
              spin polarization effects in organic biradicals.                               
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              continuing work of Professor Robert R. Squires at the Purdue                   
              University. This study will measure sequential carbon- carbon and              
              carbon-hydrogen bond dissociation energies of some simple organic              
              molecules and characterize the gas-phase reactivity of selected                
              ionic fragments involved in this bond- by-bond disassembly. These              
              experiments will provide new thermochemical data for neutral and               
              ionic carbon-centered reactive intermediates. Analysis of these                
              data will allow an evaluation of some important theoretical                    
              concepts in chemistry, which include chemical bonding and acidity              
              of molecules.
