Title       : Superconductor-Based Electron Transfer Studies Below the Critical Temperature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1995     
File        : a9221589

Award Number: 9221589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. McDevitt mcdevitt@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research is focussed on the induction of superconductivity                
              into organic conductors via the proximity effect through the use of            
              hybrid organic conductor/high temperature superconductor                       
              structures.  Using chemical and electrochemical techniques, a                  
              number of structures suitable for the study of superconducting                 
              proximity effect are fabricated.  One major goal of this work is to            
              study electron transfer phenomena which occur at or near                       
              superconductor/molecular phase interfaces.  Measurements are                   
              conducted above and below the superconducting transition                       
              temperature to search for superconducting quantum electron transfer            
              phenomena.  Cuprate superconductors are used for the majority of               
              the studies because measurements below transition temperature can              
              be completed readily.  The second goal of this research is to                  
              fabricate proximity devices based on high temperature                          
              superconductor thin films coated with molecular conductors.  The               
              modulation of the superconducting transition temperature of the                
              underling cuprate material then is examined.  Also, the influence              
              of polymer layer on the transition temperature of the                          
              superconductor film is explored.                                               
                                                                                             
              In recent studies, we have demonstrated the first molecular switch             
              for controlling superconductivity.  The ultimate goal of the                   
              proposed research is to develop new types of organic conductor/                
              superconductor circuits, devices and sensors.  Through the study of            
              a variety of molecular conductor/high temperature superconductor               
              structures, information will be acquired that may help to elucidate            
              the nature of superconductivity in the ceramic superconductors and             
              shed light on the conduction mechanism in the polymers.  The use of            
              conductive polymers also should provide alternative strategies for             
              making electrical contacts to high-temperature superconductors.  By            
              incorporating an organic conductor into such systems, some of the              
              degradation at these interfaces may be eliminated.
