Title       : Dissertation Research: Longterm Evolution of a Political Boundary:
               Archaeological Research in Jalisco, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1994     
File        : a9221787

Award Number: 9221787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11965              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Monaghan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Houston  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher S. Beekman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Stephen Houston, Mr. Christopher Beekman            
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will continue              
              his ongoing archaeological research in the Atemajac and Tala-                  
              Ahualulco-Teuchitlan valleys in Jalisco Mexico. The region is                  
              extremely interesting because during the Classic period (A.D. 200-             
              900) it marked the boundary between two large complex polities, one            
              centered at Teuchitlan the other at the Central Mexican site of                
              Teotihuacan. What Mr. Beekman wishes to study is the interaction               
              between these two "states", how they changed over time, and what               
              specific adaptations were made in the border region between the                
              two. In order to accomplish this goal he will conduct a site survey            
              and note architectural forms and site distribution. He will also               
              collect surface materials including both pottery and obsidian stone            
              tools. Since designs on pottery relfect ethnic affiliation, be will            
              analyze the ceramics from this perspective to determine whether or             
              not ethnic differences are clearly defined and how this may change             
              over time. By conducting chemical analysis to determine clay source            
              as well as the points of origin for obsidian stone tools, he will              
              also gain insight into economic and trade relationships.                       
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it will provide insight into how            
              complex polities interact and how boundaries are established,                  
              maintained and altered over a long period of time. Over the ca. 700            
              time interval under study the relative powers of these two polities            
              changed and it will be possible to determine how direct contact and            
              relations varied along with this. The work will provide data of                
              interest to many archaeologists. It will also assist in the                    
              training of a promising young scientist.
