Title       : Phylogenetic Relationships Among Spire-bearing Articulate Brachiopods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1993   
File        : a9221452

Award Number: 9221452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60244              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra J. Carlson carlson@geology.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,
Abstract    :
                   Brachiopods are fascinating but poorly understood bivalved                
              marine animals.  They look similar to clams, at least externally,              
              but are only distantly related in a genealogical sense.  Even                  
              though brachiopods are not commonly found along seashores today,               
              except in parts of New Zealand and Australia, they were common and             
              diverse over 250 million years ago in the Paleozoic Era and were               
              important elements of the Paleozoic marine biota.  For this reason,            
              paleontologists are interested in learning about aspects of their              
              ecology, morphology, growth and behavior, and their temporal and               
              geographic distribution, in part to understand their decline and               
              near extinction.  Dr. Sandra Carlson of the University of                      
              California at Davis is studying the spire-bearing articulate                   
              brachiopods, those bearing distinctive structures inside their                 
              valves that look much like two cone-shaped springs and that are                
              involved in obtaining food and oxygen and in reproductive                      
              behaviors.                                                                     
                   The current classification of these organisms suggests that               
              these structures have evolved only once, but preliminary work by               
              Dr. Carlson indicates that is not likely the case.  If spire-                  
              bearing brachiopods have evolved several times, then placing them              
              together in a single taxonomic group confuses their evolutionary               
              history and constrains work on ecological factors responsible for              
              spire evolution.  Study of other morphological features of the                 
              fossil and extant organisms will help improve the classification               
              and phylogeny of brachiopods, and help in understanding their                  
              geological rise and fall in the Paleozoic.
