Title       : The Relation of Phenotypic Plasticity to Ecological Breadth in Four Annual
               Polygonum Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1993      
File        : a9221034

Award Number: 9221034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sonia E. Sultan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                   Phenotypic plasticity permits individuals to express                      
              different, functionally adaptive phenotypes in response to                     
              different environmental circumstances.  It has long been speculated            
              that such plasticity increases the range of habitats that a species            
              may occupy.  I propose to determine whether phenotypic plasticity              
              enhances ecological breadth by comparing two weedy, ecologically               
              broad species with two ecologically restricted species in the genus            
              Polygonum.  The comparative study will consist primarily of                    
              greenhouse experiments with field-collected material, supplemented             
              with field work to quantify the habitat differences among the                  
              species and their populations.  The major experiment will be a                 
              growth study of several populations of each species in a                       
              multifactorial set of light, moisture, and nutrient treatments,                
              designed to determine whether the four species differ in the range             
              of environments in which they can successfully survive and                     
              reproduce.  By evaluating the mechanisms of morphological and                  
              physiological response to the treatments, I can determine whether              
              differences in environmental tolerance among the species are                   
              associated with differences in the amounts or patterns of                      
              functionally adaptive phenotypic plasticity.  Finally, I will                  
              compare the environmental tolerance of populations within species              
              to determine whether the degree of plasticity influences the degree            
              to which conspecific populations in different habitats                         
              differentiate genetically.  A second, smaller greenhouse experiment            
              will examine in detail the specific aspects of root system                     
              plasticity that contribute to species tolerance or intolerance of              
              variation in soil nutrients and moisture.//
