Title       : ENDOR and Optical Studies of Fractional S = 1/2 Spins and Haldane Gap in S = 1
               Antiferromagnetic Linear Chains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1998  
File        : a9221187

Award Number: 9221187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233310             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley Geschwind   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research involves an extended series of EPR and optical                   
              experiments on S=1 linear antiferromagnetic chains in a variety of             
              different materials.  These chains which when closed have a singlet            
              ground state and a gap in their excitation spectrum (the Haldane               
              gap) are representative of the strong current interest in quantum              
              disordered ground states.  Open chains have the very novel property            
              of displaying fractional spin, S=1/2, (spinons) at the chain ends.             
              Electron- nuclear double resonance (ENDOR) will be used to map out             
              the spatial distribution of the spin 1/2 on the sites extending in             
              from the chain ends.  Breaks in the chains and resulting open ends             
              with spinons will be created by substituting small amounts of non-             
              magnetic ions for the Ni ions(S=1) in a variety of organic and                 
              inorganic compounds with Ni chains.  Efforts will also be made to              
              create these chain breaks by optically pumping some of the Ni ions             
              out of their ground state.  In this way chain lengths can be varied            
              by changing the light intensity and interaction between the spinons            
              may be observed.  In addition Raman scattering is underway with                
              collaborators at The Francis Bitter lab to measure the Haldane gap             
              at k=0 to help resolve some of the important questions involving               
              its nature and magnitude relative to the gap at k=..                           
              %%%                                                                            
              The magnetic behavior of compounds in which the magnetic centers               
              are arrayed in chains with negligible interaction between the                  
              chains represents an intersection of a forefront topic in                      
              theoretical magnetism with creative materials synthesis.  Until                
              recently such ideal chain compounds did not exist as it was                    
              difficult to keep the magnetic chains far enough apart to inhibit              
              interaction among the chains, ultimately resulting in three                    
              dimensional magnetic behavior.  However, new materials have been               
              synthesized in recent years which display this ideal one-                      
              dimensional magnetic behavior.  The principal investigator works               
              closely with materials scientists at AT&T Bell Laboratories who are            
              creating these materials for the experiments mentioned above.  It              
              is hoped that an enhanced understanding of these one dimensional               
              systems will lead to further insight into two-dimensional systems              
              and by extension to high temperature superconductivity.
