Title       : RUI: An Attributional Model of the Mere Exposure Effect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1993  
File        : a9221546

Award Number: 9221546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150262             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Bornstein   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. D'Agostino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gettysburg College
	      North Washington Street
	      Gettysburg, PA  17325    717/337-6000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
               Research suggests that repeated, unreinforced exposure to a                  
              stimulus (e.g.,image, object, person) results in increased liking              
              for that stimulus. This phenomenon has been termed the "mere                   
              exposure effect". Recent experiments in the PI's laboratory                    
              indicate that awareness of stimulus content inhibits the mere                  
              exposure effect, so that subliminal stimuli produce significantly              
              stronger mere exposure effects than do stimuli that are clearly                
              recognized.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                No extant model of the exposure effect can accommodate this                  
              pattern of results. Thus these experiments are designed to test a              
              new theoretical model of the mere exposure effect. This model                  
              contends that exposure effects result from "perceptual fluency"                
              (i.e., an increase in the ease with which a stimulus is perceived              
              and processed) that is induced by repeated stimulus exposures. When            
              stimulus exposures are subliminal, subjects attribute perceptual               
              fluency effects to properties of the merely-exposed stimulus based             
              on cues provided by the experimenter. In contrast, when clearly-               
              recognized stimuli are used, subjects can attribute fluency effects            
              to the stimulus familiarization procedure, diminishing liking                  
              ratings of the merely- exposed stimuli.                                        
                                                                                             
                Five sets of experiments will test the attributional model. The              
              first experiment compares the magnitude of the mere exposure effect            
              for attended vs unattended stimuli, replicating and extending                  
              previous work in this area. In the second set of experiments, the              
              PIs examine directly the processes that underly perceptual fluency             
              effects for merely-exposed stimuli. The third set of experiments is            
              designed to assess the relationship between stimulus awareness and             
              perceptual fluency effects in the mere exposure paradigm. In the               
              fourth set of experiments, the PI's examine various experimental               
              manipulations that affect the attribution of liking to previous                
              stimulus exposures in mere exposure effect studies. In the fifth               
              set of experiments, other theoretical issues related to the                    
              attributional model will be investigated.                                      
                                                                                             
                The results of these experiments will have important applications            
              in several areas. First, these results can inform us in important              
              ways about the affective and cognitive processes involved in                   
              attitude formation and attitude change. In addition, these findings            
              may help to enhance the efficiency of various persuasion techniques            
              that are based on repeated exposure to a message, concept or                   
              argument. Finally, these results can be used to increase the                   
              efficacy of physiological treatment procedures wherein individuals'            
              attitudes toward stimuli that are disliked or feared are enhanced              
              via repeated, unreinforced exposure to the aversive stimulus (e.g.,            
              systematic desensitization).
