Title       : U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research: On Carbon Dioxide inthe Atmosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1993   
File        : a9221777

Award Number: 9221777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18802              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Hendrey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Associated Univ Inc Upton
	      
	      Upton, NY  11973    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510101   Climate Models                          
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1577,5941,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides support for a team of U.S. investigators                   
              under the direction of Dr. George Hendrey of the Brookhaven                    
              National Laboratory to travel to New Zealand over a two year                   
              period to work with researchers under the leadership of                        
              Dr. Bruce Campbell and Dr. Paul Newton at government facilities                
              in Palmerston North, New Zealand. Government and university                    
              investigators in New Zealand have proposed establishing a free-                
              air carbon dioxide enrichment (FACE) experiment to investigate                 
              the effects of CO2 enrichment of the atmosphere on a grassland.                
              Increasing carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is expected to result              
              in changes in terrestrial plant production and carbon storage                  
              that may exert feedback regulation on the rate of increase in                  
              atmospheric carbon dioxide.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The team under Dr. Hendrey has collaborated in the conception of               
              this experiment and will design the FACE apparatus, build                      
              electronic control assemblies, erect the apparatus in New                      
              Zealand, and provide technical support and training to insure the              
              success of the operation. The U.S. group has developed the                     
              technological means for maintaining close control over carbon                  
              dioxide concentrations in an open field setting without any form               
              of containment. Support for this project in New Zealand comes                  
              from the Public Good Science Fund under the direction of the                   
              Ministry of Research, Science and Technology (MORST).
