Title       : Searching Behavior and its Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1993     
File        : a9221848

Award Number: 9221848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77314              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah M. Gordon gordon@ants.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1160,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              How an ant colony responds to conflict with another one, or how                
              much effort ants put into some task, often depends on the number               
              of ants present.  But no individual ant is capable of counting.                
              Individuals must use some simple cue to assess nestmate density.               
              Dr. Gordon will investigate one way that individuals could                     
              perceive changes in numbers of nestmates:  Ants may respond to                 
              the interval between encounters with nestmates.  When the number               
              of nestmates is altered, the rate of encountering nestmates will               
              change.  Patrolling ants search for new food sources and respond               
              to disturbances. The research will involve computer analysis of                
              video films of ants patrolling new areas.  Path shape and                      
              encounter rates will be examined when numbers of nestmates                     
              change, and when non-nestmates are introduced.  Patrolling                     
              tactics of a variety of ant species will be compared.  In many                 
              social organizations, encounter patterns may be a crucial link                 
              between individual decisions and group behavior.                               
                                                                                             
              Social insects present an intriguing opportunity to study a                    
              system that has many features in common with other biological                  
              systems, from brains to embryos.  Simple units (cells, neurons,                
              individual ants) follow local rules but generate amazing global                
              complexity.  Just as no cell directs differentiation in the                    
              embryo, and no neuron directs thinking in the brain, no insect                 
              directs the behavior of the rest in a social insect colony.  In                
              the many fields of biology that study such systems, the same                   
              fundamental question must be resolved:  How do local rules                     
              produce global behavior?  Dr. Gordon's research is an                          
              investigation of how one type of rule, response to the rate of                 
              brief antennal contact, may operate in ant colonies.                           
              Understanding the details of colony organization in ant colonies               
              may eventually help to elucidate some general principles about                 
              the behavior of any system in which interactions among simple                  
              units create global complexity.                                                
                                                                                             
              New computer software to be developed for analyzing the shape of               
              paths on curved surfaces will be useful in many areas of study                 
              besides behavioral biology.
