Title       : Effect of Environmental Stress and Inbreeding on Multilocus
               Heterozygosity-Fitness Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1995     
File        : a9221094

Award Number: 9221094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lisa D. Brooks                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter J. Diehl wjdiehl@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,
Abstract    :
                   Individual organisms with high levels of genetic variation                
              often show superior physiological performance in contrast to                   
              individuals with lower levels of genetic variation.  It has proven             
              extremely difficult, however, to predict the precise environmental             
              circumstances under which high genetic variation is related to                 
              superior abilities.  This is in part due to a lack of understanding            
              about the interaction between environmental, genetic and                       
              physiological effects, and also to a lack of understanding about               
              the specific mechanisms responsible for these relationships.                   
                   This project will examine the interaction between                         
              environmental stress, genetic variation and performance in a model             
              population of earthworms.  Earthworms were chosen because of their             
              short life cycles, their availability in the large numbers                     
              necessary for this work, and their importance in terrestrial                   
              ecosystems.  Experiments will involve both short term (one                     
              generation) and long term (many generations) of environmental                  
              stress.  The proposed mechanisms responsible for the phenomena will            
              be investigated using genetic experiments.  This will be the most              
              extensive characterization of the relationships between genetic                
              variation and physiological performance in any organism to date.               
              The research will help to identify genetic attributes common to all            
              species that promote optimal performance under environmental                   
              stress. //
