Title       : New Synthetic Approaches towards Non-Oxidic Glasses and their Structural
               Characterization by Solid State NMR Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1995  
File        : a9221197

Award Number: 9221197
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hellmut Eckert eckert@sbmm1.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this work is to prepare and characterize non-oxidic                
              glasses, based on sulfides, selenides, tellurides, and phosphides              
              of the Main Group III, IV and V elements.  New synthetic routes for            
              these systems are developed to exert and maintain tighter                      
              structural and compositional control of these glasses than                     
              presently possible by melt-quenching techniques.  These routes                 
              involve precipitation from solution using well-defined molecular               
              precursors, and plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD)              
              of amorphous films from gaseous reactants.  The structures of these            
              materials are characterized by state-of-art solid-state NMR                    
              methods.  An integral part of this project is the development of               
              new heteronuclear X-Y double resonance NMR methodology, and its                
              application to the system under study.  In addition, detailed in-              
              situ high-temperature NMR measurements provide information about               
              structure, dynamics, and chemical equilibria of these materials in             
              the molten state above glass transition temperature.                           
              %%%                                                                            
              The goal of this work is to prepare and characterize new glasses               
              that have important technological significance as low-frequency                
              waveguides, photoconductors, and solid electrolytes.  While the                
              latter two applications already are being commercially utilized,               
              potential uses of infrared fibers include laser power delivery,                
              remote tempearture monitoring, thermal imaging, and chemical                   
              sensing.  The project aims at developing more versatile preparation            
              strategies that maintain closer structural and compositional                   
              control of these glasses through synthesis than presently possible.            
              In addition, a fundamental understanding of the physical properties            
              of these glasses in terms of their structural organization is                  
              sought.  Innovative spectroscopic techniques are used to uncover               
              the atomic arrangements in the proposed glasses.  By virtue of this            
              approach, the project is instrumental in developing and testing                
              fundamental theoretical concepts for the structural description of             
              amorphous and glassy covalent solids.  The combination of new                  
              preparation methods and structural analysis will aid in the                    
              development of glasses with improved technological properties.
