Title       : Genetic and Immunological Analysis of Gas Vesicles in Halobacterium Halobium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1997  
File        : a9221144

Award Number: 9221144
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309860             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth S. Stuart esstuart@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shiladitya DasSarma  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9106,9161,9181,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9221144  DasSarma       Gas vesicles are buoyant intracellular organelles found
              in  many aquatic bacteria including halobacteria, cyanobacteria, and 
              methanogens.  The vesicles are filled with ambient gas and  surrounded by a
              membrane composed only of protein (no lipids).  Gas  vesicles come in a variety
              of shapes but generally contain a  cylindrical mid-section with conical ends. 
              Although their exact  function is controversial, their buoyancy induces cells
              to float  and thereby increases the availability of light for photosynthesis 
              and oxygen for respiration.  Biosynthesis of gas vesicles proceeds 
              bidirectionally starting from the apicies of the cones with  incorporation of
              additional subunits in the central region.  The  vesicle membrane is
              impermeable to water and accumulation of gases  in the vesicle interior is
              thought to occur only as a result of  passive diffusion of dissolved gases in
              the medium.  Our analysis  of high-frequency gas vesicle-deficient mutants of
              the halophilic  archaebacterium, Halobacterium halobium, resulted in the 
              identification of a cluster of thirteen genes, gvpMLKJIHGREDACN,  involved in
              gas vesicle synthesis.  We are studying the function of  these genes in gas
              vesicle synthesis using a combinaton of  molecular genetic methodology that we
              have recently developed for  H. halobium and immunocytochemical localization
              techniques.  We  will utilize an E. coli-H.halobium shuttle plasmid containing
              the  gvp gene cluster and specifying gas vesicle synthesis in H.  halobium for
              genetic analysis by linker scanning and cassette  insertion mutagenesis.  The
              effects of mutations on gas vesicle  synthesis will be analyzed by electron
              microscopy of vesicles and  vesicle fragments.  Antibody probes will be used
              for localization  of gvp products by Western blotting analysis and electron 
              microscopic analysis after immunogold staining vesicles, vesicle  fragments and
              ultrathin frozen sections of cells.  These studies  should provide definitive
              information on the function of gvp  gene  products and a detailed picture of
              gas vesicle structure and  synthesis.  %%%  These studies should lay the
              groundwork for genetically engineering  bacteria to float, a process with
              significant potential for  applications in biotechnology.  ***
