Title       : Accelerator Mass Spectrometer Dating of Prehistoric Domestication from the
               Americas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1993   
File        : a9221554

Award Number: 9221554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Kaplan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Lawrence Kaplan will              
              obtain thirty-three accelerator radiocarbon dates on early                     
              domesticated beans (genus Phaseolus) obtained from archaeological              
              sites. Although indirect dates are available (based on charcoal and            
              other organic materials associated with beans) very few direct                 
              determinations have been made and these vary significantly from the            
              ages suggested by the indirect dates. The result is that very                  
              little is known about the timing and places of origin on this major            
              New World domesticate. In conjunction with other chemical analyses,            
              this project will permit archaeologists and biologists to                      
              understand the process of the domestication and spread of this food            
              crop.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The genus Paseolus includes five species of beans which were                   
              domesticated and widely used in the pre-Columbian New World.                   
              Together with corn and squash they formed the basis for much of the            
              prehistoric diet over North, Middle and South America and were                 
              crucial for survival because they contain essential amino acids                
              which are otherwise lacking. Given the presence of wild progenitors            
              it is clear that domestication did take place in the New World but             
              beyond that archaeological understanding is limited. The problem is            
              of interest not only to biologists but also to archaeologists who              
              wish to understand how complex chiefdoms developed. Until recently             
              it was believed that the subsistence base necessary to support such            
              a form of organization required a major domesticate. However recent            
              work has suggested that such social complexity predates the                    
              domestication of corn and possibly beans as well. It seems likely              
              that less well known and less productive crops played an important             
              role. Dr. Kaplan's research will help to answer this question.                 
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to both biologists and anthropologists. It will               
              also shed light on the origins of plant domestication and the                  
              development of complex societies.
