Title       : Phase Diagrams of Partially Ordered Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1996        
File        : a9221596

Award Number: 9221596
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Widom widom@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical research will be conducted on the structural and                   
              thermodynamic properties of complex, partially ordered materials.              
              Two types of materials, quasicrystalline alloys and ferrofluids,               
              will be described by models which capture the most relevant                    
              energetic and geometrical constraints, while remaining simple                  
              enough to perform accurate, analytic calculations of statistical               
              properties.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Quasicrystals, a common but complex structure type in intermetallic            
              alloys, appear to be intermediate between conventional crystals and            
              metallic glass.  Employing geometrical tiling models as a shorthand            
              description of real atomic positions, the phase diagram and phase              
              transitions among equilibrium structures will be investigated as               
              functions of interactions, composition and temperature.                        
                                                                                             
              Ferrofluids are colloidal suspensions of microscopic permanent                 
              magnets.  In addition to technological applications, these                     
              materials are of intrinsic scientific interest because they provide            
              an approximate realization of a dipolar hard sphere fluid.  This               
              work will establish the nature of phases between the dilute                    
              isotropic gas and the close-packed magnetically ordered solid.                 
              %%%                                                                            
              Theoretical research will be conducted on the basic properties of              
              two partially ordered complex materials.  Quasicrystals, which were            
              discovered over a decade ago in certain intermetallic alloys,                  
              remain a mystery as to the mechanisms which produce this unusual               
              structure.  Ferrofluids, artificial magnetic materials with many               
              applications, are interesting on a fundamental basis and as a real             
              material system.  Both of these fascinating materials will be                  
              studied using the latest techniques in statistical physics and                 
              computational science.
