Title       : Investigation of Foundation Rehabilitation Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1993   
File        : a9221517

Award Number: 9221517
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155423             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sunirmal Banerjee   (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles W. Roeder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1497      ARCHITECTURE & MECHAN SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Existing buildings which do not satisfy modern seismic                         
              design requirements may be strengthened by the addition of                     
              steel bracing or reinforced concrete shear walls.  This                        
              strengthening, however, can transfer more loads to the                         
              foundation.  This research will examine the seismic                            
              vulnerability of such structure-foundation systems.  The                       
              study will review the major methods of strengthening and                       
              rehabilitating buildings for seismic loading.  The demands                     
              of these rehabilitation methods on the foundation will be                      
              evaluated and typical deficiencies of commonly used                            
              foundation systems will be ascertained.  A range of                            
              foundation rehabilitation schemes including:  a) use of                        
              additional piles, b) provision of an additional footing                        
              around the perimeter of the building, c) reinforcement of                      
              existing footings and pile caps with additional concrete and                   
              steel, and d) improvement of structure-foundation                              
              connections will be considered.   The improved connections                     
              may include mechanisms for safely transmitting short                           
              duration overloads to the soil or may allow temporary                          
              separation of parts of the structure from the foundation to                    
              prevent damage to critical elements.  The study will involve                   
              analyses of a variety of structures and broad categories of                    
              foundation systems and soils.  Several earthquake induced                      
              acceleration records will be used as base excitations for                      
              analysis and evaluation.  The analytical studies will be                       
              correlated with past performance of buildings and                              
              foundations during earthquakes.  The emphasis will be on                       
              developing guidelines and recommendations for selecting the                    
              foundation rehabilitation techniques for buildings of                          
              intermediate height (approximately 4 to 20 stories).  The                      
              results will be summarized in a final report and                               
              professional publications.
