Title       : Tyrosine Hydroxylase in Primary Somatosensory Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1996       
File        : a9221136

Award Number: 9221136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel K. Hartline                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223194             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim B. Seroogy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Primary sensory neurons located along the length of the spinal cord            
              in structures known as spinal ganglia convey information about the             
              body (somatosensory information; e.g. pain, temperature) to the                
              central nervous system.  Defining the anatomical, biochemical, and             
              molecular characteristics of these sensory nerve cells is                      
              prerequisite to determining their function.  Dr. Seroogy has                   
              recently discovered that substantial subpopulations of spinal                  
              ganglion cells contain the biosynthetic machinery for an enzyme                
              called tyrosine hydroxylase, an enzyme crucial for the synthesis of            
              a class of chemical messengers called catecholamines.  This finding            
              raises the possibility that catecholamines play a role in the                  
              transfer and coding of sensory information from the body.  The                 
              primary goals of the proposed research are to thoroughly                       
              characterize the organization of tyrosine hydroxylase (and                     
              catecholamines) within spinal ganglia and to determine the specific            
              parts of the body that may be associated with catecholamine                    
              signalling.  Dr. Seroogy will accomplish this by using molecular               
              biological and neuroanatomical techniques.  The results of these               
              studies will add significantly to our understanding of the                     
              functional organization of catecholamines in spinal ganglia and                
              will serve as the basis for future correlations with physiological             
              studies in order to understand the involvement of catecholamines in            
              transmitting sensory information.
