Title       : Initial Stages of Epitaxial Growth of Silicides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1995       
File        : a9221201

Award Number: 9221201
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Bennett peter.bennett@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Fundamental aspects of the interaction of transition metals                    
              with silicon surfaces, particularly Ni, Co and Pd on Si(111)                   
              will be studied using advanced surface characterization                        
              techniques including "hot STM" with on-stage deposition for                    
              in situ, real time observations of atomic scale processes,                     
              synchrotron X-ray diffraction for studying buried                              
              interfaces, and Low Energy Electron Microscopy (LEEM) which                    
              allows real time observations of crystal growth at high                        
              temperature.  With these complementary techniques, we aim to                   
              first characterize stages of overlayer growth from atoms to                    
              clusters to islands to layers, and secondly to monitor the                     
              growth process between these stages, emphasizing the                           
              connection between bulk and surface silicide phases. The                       
              long term goal is to develop quantitative and predictive                       
              models for reactive crystal growth processes relevant to                       
              advanced processing methods including low temperature                          
              molecular beam epitaxy, codeposition and template layers.                      
              %%%                                                                            
              This research is expected to provide fundamental new                           
              information about metal-semiconductor interfaces,                              
              particularly in the silicide systems, which are widely used                    
              for interconnects in VLSI technology.  State-of-the-art                        
              surface characterization instruments and methods will reveal                   
              atomic scale features of surface interactions in real time                     
              as reactions occur.  The metal/semiconductor materials under                   
              study have wide applicability in electronic and                                
              optoelectronic devices, and a greater understanding of their                   
              primary materials science properties is expected to improve                    
              the performance of devices made from these materials.  New                     
              devices and device configurations may result from these                        
              studies as well as significant improvements in devices and                     
              integrated circuits currently used in computing, information                   
              processing, and telecommunications.
