Title       : Strengthening Research and Science Education Through the Participation of Puerto
               Rican
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9221708

Award Number: 9221708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Luker                           
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oscar Hernandez   (Principal Investigator current)
              Juan Melendez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra Santos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eduardo Rivera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Loran-Santos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ana G. Mendez Univ
	      P. O. Box 21345
	      San Juan, PR  00928    809/751-0178

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
                   The Ana G. Mendez University System, in representation of the             
              Corporation for the Academic, Scientific, and Research Network of              
              Puerto Rico (CRACIN for it spanish acronym) requests support to                
              help enhance and upgrade the connection with the National Science              
              Foundation Network (NSFNET).                                                   
                   This is part of a comprehensive plan to communicate the                   
              potential network user institutions among themselves,m and with the            
              major academic and research institutions in the mainland and U.S.              
              Virgin Islands, to improve collaborative research in science,                  
              technology and engineering at the local and national levels.                   
                   The primary objective f the proposal is to provide a dedicated            
              line of access between Puerto Rico and the U.S. NSFNET for                     
              competitive researchers within the Academic, Scientific, and                   
              Research Network of Puerto Rico, who are involved in research and              
              scholarly activities at their respective institutions.  The                    
              enhanced connection to NSFNET will also provide access to and                  
              promote the development of linkages between the Caribbean countries            
              and the U. S. mainland.                                                        
                   The universities need greater functionality and network speed             
              to be able to access supercomputers, libraries, and make file                  
              transfers along with being able to implement a more reliable mail              
              system. Students and faculty research will benefit from the link.              
              This is also a unique opportunity for the schools to explore                   
              innovative educational resources.
