Title       : Molecular Systematics of the Non-pedicellate Rust Fungi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1994     
File        : a9221472

Award Number: 9221472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John R. Gold                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Bruns boletus@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,
Abstract    :
                   The so-called rusts are an important group of obligately                  
              parasitic plant pathogenic fungi.  Wheat rusts are probably the                
              best known because of their serious effects on crop yields.                    
              Although host plant specificity is a hallmark of the rusts, little             
              is known about the evolutionary patterns of host tracking and host             
              shifting.  This lack of understanding is caused by our rudimentary             
              knowledge of the evolutionary relationships, or phylogeny, of the              
              rusts, both among the rust species and genera and with related                 
              basidiomycetes.  Dr. Thomas Bruns of the University of California-             
              Berkeley will use molecular genomic techniques to investigate                  
              evolutionary relationships at several taxonomic levels among the               
              rust fungi.  At the broadest level, DNA nucleotide sequences of the            
              ribosomal genes will be analyzed and mutational differences will be            
              compared among the major groups of rusts and their putative fungal             
              relatives.  At lower taxonomic levels, evolutionary relationships              
              among species of two genera, Cronartium and Melampsora, that are               
              important pathogens on pine trees will be investigated by DNA                  
              sequencing methods.  Patterns of relationship among the rust fungi             
              will be compared with patterns of relationship among pine species              
              to detect lineages where hostplant shifts have occurred.  Results              
              from this work should provide a better understanding of host                   
              tracking and host shifting in obligate plant pathogens, and will               
              also develop the database and methodology needed to facilitate                 
              rapid identification of species within the two selected genera.
