Title       : Hydrogen Tunneling in Enzyme Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9221072

Award Number: 9221072
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith P. Klinman klinman@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Numerous examples exist in the literature documenting the                      
              importance of electron tunneling in enzymatic processes.  Although             
              much larger than the electron, protium possesses a de Brogile wave             
              length which is similar to the expected dimension of the reaction              
              coordinate in simple H transfer reactions.  This property has led              
              to the recognition that the behavior of protium is poised between              
              classical and quantum mechanical behavior.  Published studies from             
              this laboratory have demonstrated that quantum effects contribute              
              significantly to several enzyme catalyzed H transfer reactions at              
              room temperature.  Ongoing experiments suggest that this phenomenon            
              will be a general one for enzyme catalyzed reactions.  A major                 
              difficulty in the unambiguous demonstration of tunneling has been              
              the absence of suitable experimental probes. A series of protocols             
              have been developed toward this end: these include the comparative             
              study of H/T and D/T isotope effects and their temperature                     
              dependences.  Investigations during the next funding period will               
              include the following areas: (1) A number of new enzyme catalyzed              
              H transfer reactions will be examined for tunneling, in order to               
              establish a data base for this phenomenon.  In particular, the PI              
              plans to focus on the flavin containing enzymes, monoamine oxidase             
              and glucose oxidase: (2) Studies of the influence on tunneling of              
              specific protein substrate interactions will be pursued through the            
              use of site-specific mutagenesis; and (3) Computational work will              
              be continued, with the goal of reproducing experimental data and               
              providing suitable models for the mechanism of tunneling in enzyme             
              reactions.                                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              Although electron tunneling in proteins has been extensively                   
              studied, little attention has been paid to nuclear (hydrogen)                  
              tunneling.  Dr. Klinman's elegant work has shown that nuclear                  
              tunneling contributes significantly to certain enzymatic reaction              
              rates under biologically relevant conditions.  This project builds             
              and expands upon these groundbreaking observations.
