Title       : Mechanisms of Cutaneous Receptive Field Reorganization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1996      
File        : a9221956

Award Number: 9221956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153021             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harris D. Schwark schwark@casl.unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                A nerve cell in the primary somatosensory cortex of the brain               
              responds to stimuli, such as touch, over a restricted part of the              
              body surface.  The peripheral area of stimulation that elicits                 
              activity in the cell is called the cell's "receptive field."  When             
              such a cell is deprived of its normal input, its receptive field               
              shifts so the cell now responds to stimuli in areas that were                  
              ineffective earlier.  These shifts may involve mechanisms similar              
              to those the brain uses for other forms of plasticity, where change            
              occurs during growth or during learning, by changing the                       
              effectiveness or presence of the connections called synapses among             
              nerve cells.  There are several levels of synaptic connections in              
              the neural pathway from the skin to the cortex of the brain.  This             
              work uses electrophysiological recording, pharmacological agents to            
              block specific kinds of normal synaptic activity, and local                    
              anesthetic to induce effects of temporary denervation in the                   
              cortex.  These studies on single cells allow investigating the                 
              changes that occur over minutes rather than days, so the emphasis              
              is on the fast mechanisms of neural signalling and transmission                
              rather than the slow mechanism of new growth.  In the novel                    
              approach here, not only the cortex will be studied, but also                   
              activity of subcortical single cells to define how shifts occur,               
              and to determine the influence of cortical feedback connections on             
              subcortical neurons.  This integrative approach is likely to have              
              impact beyond somatosensory work alone to the whole field of neural            
              plasticity and the role of sensory experience to sensory and                   
              behavioral function.
