Title       : Scanning Probe Microscopy for Materials Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1994   
File        : a9221781

Award Number: 9221781
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul K. Hansma prasant@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Fundamental materials research is proposed with scanning probe                 
              microscopes:  1) crystal growth and etching will be observed in                
              real-time as they occur at liquid-solid interfaces for detailed                
              comparison with theoretical models, 2) the imaging of molecular                
              crystals and other soft materials will be investigated and improved            
              by focusing on static and dynamic probe-surface interactions, and              
              3) the development of new scanning probe microscopes for materials             
              research will be continued with special emphasis on new techniques             
              for imaging ultra-fast processes.                                              
              %%%                                                                            
              Scanning probe microscopes, in particular the Atomic Force                     
              Microscope, are evolving into powerful tools for materials                     
              research.  They can image processes involved in the formation of               
              materials at unprecedented resolution.  They can image these                   
              processes as they occur in many cases.  Commercially available                 
              microscopes can already do many jobs in materials research and are             
              finding there way into more and more materials research                        
              laboratories.  This research is focused on pushing the frontiers               
              and developing new microscopes and new methodologies for handling              
              more and more problems and finding solutions that are impossible               
              with current instrumentation.  For example, the possibility of                 
              getting ultra-fast time resolution to study fast processes such as             
              magnetic domain wall motion will be explored.  As another example,             
              fundamental research on the imaging of soft materials is proposed.             
              Soft materials are hard to image for currently available                       
              microscopes because the tips can deform them.  Though much progress            
              has been made, more remains to be done.  Microscopes can now image             
              some soft surfaces but they have a hard time imaging polymers                  
              weakly attached to surfaces or processes involving aggregation of              
              polymer chains.  The long term goal is the creation of better                  
              materials as the result of fundamental studies done on the                     
              formation of materials with new microscopes and new ways to operate            
              those new microscopes.
