Title       : The Metallicity of Surfaces and Metal Thin Film Overlayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1993  
File        : a9221655

Award Number: 9221655
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Dowben   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research program will investigate why some materials exhibit              
              nonmetallic behavior when deposited on metallic substrates.  This              
              unusual behavior has been confirmed recently by several different              
              spectroscopies including experimental band structure mapping,                  
              resonant photoemission, core level spectroscopy and electron energy            
              loss.  Nonmetallic overlayers undergo a nonmetal to metal                      
              transition with increasing coverage and the nonmetal to metal                  
              transition is typically accompanied by a structural transition                 
              indicative of a first order transition.                                        
                                                                                             
              University-industry collaborations will assist in characterizing               
              nonmetallic overlayers which exhibit an excitonic insulating                   
              behavior.  Microscopic probes of structure will be correlated with             
              the more conventional photoemission and resonant photoemission                 
              techniques for studying electronic transitions.  The similarities              
              between the nonmetal to metal transition in free clusters and at               
              metal surfaces are remarkable, particularly for the metal mercury.             
              The fundamental reasons for the similar variations in metallicity              
              with coordination number, and cluster size (film coverage or                   
              thickness) can only be established with further electronic and                 
              structural studies.  Divalent metal overlayers such as Mg, Ba, and             
              Hg will be investigated and compared with other overlayers                     
              exhibiting no nonmetal to metal transition.                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              This research program addresses a very basic and fundamental                   
              question:  are the surfaces of metals metallic?  Conventional                  
              measurements to determine metallic character, such as conductivity             
              measurements for example, are difficult to apply to a thin film of             
              material one or two atoms thick deposited on a metal substrate.                
              New approaches to establishing what it means for a metal to be a               
              metal have been developed and can now be applied to materials                  
              normally considered metals.  There is a need to explore why the                
              sufaces of some material have such fundamentally different                     
              properties form those normally associated with that material.                  
              Increasing number of examples of this phenomenon of nonmetallic                
              behavior at metal surfaces or on metal substrates have been                    
              observed; however, general rules or principles to quide our                    
              understanding remain elusive.
