Title       : Multivalent Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9221905

Award Number: 9221905
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166043             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard E. Egeth egeth@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Breckler  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                            
              Social attitudes are typically described as being either                       
              positive, neutral, or negative.  However, people often express                 
              ambivalence on important social topics -- attitudes that contain               
              a mixture of both positive and negative sentiments.  For example,              
              research over the past 20 years has shown that many Americans are              
              ambivalent in their attitudes toward racial minorities and toward              
              physically disabled persons.  Ambivalence helps to explain why a               
              person might sometimes treat members of a stigmatized group in a               
              favorable or helpful way, and at other times in an unfavorable or              
              hurtful way.  The present research addresses two important but                 
              unresolved problems in research on attitude ambivalence.  The                  
              problem is that satisfactory methods do not yet exist for                      
              measuring ambivalence.  Thus, one part of this research focuses                
              on developing a valid and reliable measurement procedure.  The                 
              new procedure will facilitate research progress and can be                     
              applied in ongoing efforts to document and archive public opinion              
              on important social concerns.  The second problem is that                      
              relatively little is known about the structure and function of                 
              ambivalent attitudes.  it is currently believed that ambivalence               
              is caused by a conflict in fundamental values, and that people                 
              truly adhere to both positive and negative sentiments at the same              
              time.  However, ambivalence may also reflect poorly developed                  
              social attitudes, or it may reflect deliberate efforts to present              
              whatever social image is most desired at the time.  This research              
              seeks to distinguish among the alternative explanations by                     
              studying cognitive processes associated with the storage and                   
              retrieval of ambivalent attitudes.  The studies will provide a                 
              deeper understanding of why people often hold ambivalent                       
              attitudes.  Ultimately, the research will provide a theoretical                
              basis for developing interventions that promote interracial                    
              harmony, that encourage healthful lifestyles, and that mobilize                
              the Nation's efforts to remove the social and physical barriers                
              that often confront disabled persons.
