Title       : Temporal Predictability in Daphnia pulex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9221027

Award Number: 9221027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel M. Scheiner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   Organisms live in environments that vary in complex ways in               
              space and time.  Although this statement is obvious, our                       
              understanding of how complex environments affect evolutionary                  
              processes is still rudimentary.  This study will be one of the                 
              first to investigate the evolutionary response to environmental                
              changes over time.  The experimental organism is a small pond                  
              dwelling crustacean, the water flea Daphnia pulex..  The                       
              experiment will contrast evolutionary responses to three types of              
              temporal variability:  constant, variable and predictable,                     
              variable and unpredictable.                                                    
                   The benefits of this study are two-fold.  First, this study               
              will greatly extend our fundamental understanding of the                       
              evolutionary processes.  It will be one of the first forays into               
              an area of evolution that has been long recognized as important,               
              but until now has not been studied.  The results have the                      
              potential for being a significant next step in the merging of the              
              fields of evolutionary biology and developmental biology.                      
              Second, the results of this study will be useful in the                        
              development of crop strains.  A crucial goal in agricultural                   
              genetics is the breeding of strains that will do well over a wide              
              range of growing conditions.  This goal is especially critical                 
              for farmers in underdeveloped or developing nations where control              
              of growing conditions is poor.  By understanding the constraints               
              on how organisms can adapt to variable environments, we can                    
              better meet this goal.
