Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Single-atom Effects Responsible for
               the Generation of High Harmonics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9302168

Award Number: 9302168
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Justin B. Peatross   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign                                        
              centers of proven excellence.  The program's                                   
              awards provide opportunities for joint                                         
              research, and the use of unique or                                             
              complementary facilities, expertise and                                        
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Justin                                      
              Peatross of the University of Rochester to go                                  
              to Moscow, Russia to the General Physics                                       
              Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences to work                                 
              with Professor M. V. Fedorov.                                                  
                                                                                             
              It has recently been discovered that high-order                                
              harmonics of laser light can be created when an                                
              intense laser interacts with atoms.  The                                       
              efficiency of generating the higher harmonics                                  
              relative to the lower ones can be surprisingly                                 
              high, outside of the range wherein perturbative                                
              approximations can be used.  The high harmonics                                
              appear when a laser drives atoms so strongly                                   
              that they are on the verge of ionization.  The                                 
              problem of understanding high-harmonic                                         
              generation has two parts:  1) the single-atom                                  
              response to incident laser light, and 2) the                                   
              collective behavior of the atoms regarding the                                 
              matching of the phases of the emitted harmonic                                 
              light.  The proposed research centers primarily                                
              on the single-atom effects responsible for the                                 
              generation of high harmonics.  An investigation                                
              will be made into the relevance of the                                         
              classical equations of motion of a driven                                      
              electron trapped in a non-linear potential                                     
              well.  Other single-atom descriptions of                                       
              harmonic generation will also be investigated.                                 
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel, a stipend for                                      
              twelve months, a dependent allowance and money                                 
              for lab fees.
