Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Multiplicative Structures on Free Resolutions & Local
               Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1995     
File        : a9302735

Award Number: 9302735
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ann K. Boyle                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hema Srinivasan hema@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The principal investigator will study three areas of                      
              commutative algebra.  The first area is concerned with                         
              multiplicative structures on free resolutions.  She will find a                
              criterion for the existence of an associative commutative                      
              differential graded algebra structure on the minimal free                      
              resolution on cyclic modules.  She will also determine if such a               
              structure exists for the minimal resolutions of the cyclic                     
              modules defined by the ideals in the linkage class of a complete               
              intersection.  The second area is concerned with fundamental                   
              groups and equivalences of singularities.  In particular, she                  
              will determine a number k such that for a given determinantal                  
              ideal I in a power series ring R and for any other ideal J of the              
              same height, J equivalent to I modulo the kth power of the                     
              Jacobean ideal of I guarantees the existence of an isomorphism of              
              R which maps I onto J so that J is also a determinantal ideal.                 
              The third area is to determine, in positive characteristics, if                
              the symbolic algebra of a monomial prime is finitely generated.                
                   This is reasearch in the field of algebraic geometry, one of              
              the oldest parts of modern mathematics, but one which has had a                
              revolutionary flowering in the past quarter-century.  In its                   
              origins, it treated figures that could be defined in the plane by              
              the simplest equations, namely polynomials.  Nowadays the field                
              makes use of methods not only from algebra, but from analysis and              
              topology, and conversely is finding application in those fields                
              as well as in theoretical computer science and robotics.
