Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Interactions of Macropolymers with
               Microcolloids in Aqueous Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1993   
File        : a9302228

Award Number: 9302228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46310              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon D. Chorover   (Principal Investigator current)
              Garrison Sposito  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign centers                                
              of proven excellence.  The program's awards                                    
              provide opportunities for joint research, and                                  
              the use of unique or complementary facilities,                                 
              expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Jon D.                                      
              Chorover of the University of California,                                      
              Berkeley, to work with Professor Jacques Buffle                                
              of the University of Geneva in Switzerland.                                    
                                                                                             
              The transport of chemicals in natural aquatic                                  
              systems is regulated by the partitioning of                                    
              solutes between the solid and aqueous phases.                                  
              Colloids, the smallest of the solid particles,                                 
              may be readily entrained and transported by the                                
              mobile fluid, thereby providing transport for                                  
              sorbed inorganic and organic adsorptives.                                      
              Although colloid mediated transport is                                         
              considered an important mechanism for                                          
              contaminant transport, the basic processes                                     
              affecting colloidal behavior are poorly                                        
              understood.  Organic-polymer/inoranic colloid                                  
              associations are ubiquitous in natural aquatic                                 
              and soil systems and these aggregates have                                     
              profoundly different colloidal properties than                                 
              the inorganic particles alone.  The technology                                 
              for in situ study of colloidal systems has                                     
              improved dramatically over the last decade, yet                                
              the effects of experimental artifacts are not                                  
              well  known.  Careful investigations of                                        
              colloidal structure and stability therefore                                    
              incorporate several complimentary analyses.  In                                
              the proposed project, Dr. Chorover and                                         
              Professor Buffle will study interactions                                       
              between anionic macropolymers and inorganic                                    
              microcolloids.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel, a stipend for                                      
              twelve months, travel to meetings, and a                                       
              dependent allowance for Dr. Chorover's family.
