Title       : Role of Two-Way Ocean-Atmosphere Interaction on Extratropical Climate
               Variability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1994      
File        : a9302884

Award Number: 9302884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Houghton ddhought@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Gallimore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1324,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                   The role of ocean-atmosphere interactions on climate                      
              variability in extratropical latitudes, both within the season and             
              during transitions between seasons, will be examined.  The focus of            
              the proposed research will be on assessing the two-way interactive             
              relationship between temperature anomalies produced in the ocean               
              and synoptic scale transient activity (e.g. locations and paths of             
              high and low pressure systems) and related low frequency flow                  
              patterns produced in the atmosphere.  The results will aid in                  
              understanding the causes of climate variability and the potential              
              for predictability on seasonal time scales.  This research builds              
              upon (1) past studies which investigated the one-way forced effects            
              of SST anomalies (prescribed) on atmospheric transient eddy                    
              processes and (2) past work which investigated the two-way                     
              interaction between mid-latitude SST and atmospheric circulation               
              anomalies as deduced in long multi-year seasonal integrations of a             
              low resolution atmospheric model coupled to a constant depth mixed             
              layer ocean.                                                                   
                   For these studies a higher resolution atmospheric model (NCAR             
              CCM1) will be used so that the climatic behavior of transient eddy             
              processes can be simulated more realistically.  The simple mixed               
              layer ocean model has been chosen to permit examination of the ways            
              that the important ocean-atmosphere energy exchange influences the             
              evolution of middle latitude SST anomalies.  Three experiments are             
              planned: (1) a 100-year seasonal integration of the atmospheric                
              model (CCM1) using prescribed climatological SSTs, (2) a 100-year              
              seasonal integration of CCM1 coupled to a constant 50 m depth mixed            
              layer ocean (CCM1CO) and (3) a 40-50 year seasonal integration of              
              CCM1 coupled to a constant 50 m depth mixed layer ocean but with               
              prescribed forcing of observed tropical SST variability                        
              (CCM1CO/TROPSET).  The variability of transient eddy activity                  
              (storm tracks) and abrupt seasonal shifts in circulation in the                
              absence of SST variability wil be investigated in Experiment 1.                
              The two-way influence between model produced extratropical                     
              anomalies and storm tracks (and the associated time mean                       
              atmospheric circulation) will be examined in Experiment 2.  The                
              modifying influence of tropical SST variability (which includes El             
              Nino cycles) on middle latitude SST anomalies and variability of               
              extratropical atmospheric transient eddy activity will be assessed             
              by comparing the results of Experiments 2 and 3.  The behavior of              
              synoptic scale storm tracks will be characterized by examination of            
              model variation in RMS time-filtered 1000 mb and 500 mb heights and            
              in the processes of baroclinic eddy momentum and heat fluxes; the              
              determination of abrupt seasonal changes in atmospheric circulation            
              will include an analysis of model energetics.  Dominant SST anomaly            
              patterns and their relationship to atmospheric processes will be               
              examined using various statistical and composite analyses including            
              EOF, lag correlation, singular value decomposition and canonical               
              correlation methods.
