Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Cretaceous Volcanism in the Pacific:
               Distribution in Space, Time, and Source Composition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1993       
File        : a9302809

Award Number: 9302809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm S. Pringle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign centers                                
              of proven excellence.  The program's awards                                    
              provide opportunities for joint research, and                                  
              the use of unique or complementary facilities,                                 
              expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Malcolm S.                                  
              Pringle to work with Professor Dr. Hubert                                      
              Staudigel at the Free University in the                                        
              Netherlands.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The Cretaceous volcanism of the western Pacific                                
              is thought to be an ancient analog of the                                      
              anomalous intraplate volcanism seen in the                                     
              southern Pacific today, and may have a causal                                  
              relationship with the systematic, global                                       
              changes which culminated in the Mid-Cretaceous                                 
              Greenhouse.  The proposed research project will                                
              more fully characterize the distribution in                                    
              space and time of this volcanism and its mantle                                
              source, and investigate whether this volcanism                                 
              is the result of one large "Superplume" or a                                   
              series of smaller, more discrete events.  The                                  
              principal tools of this study will be                                          
              radiometric age determinations, to determine                                   
              the original position of each site of                                          
              Cretaceous volcanism, and radiogenic isotope                                   
              analyses, to characterize the mantle source at                                 
              that particular location and time.                                             
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel to the Netherlands,                                 
              an allowance to attend research-related                                        
              meetings and a stipend for twelve months.
