Title       : Integrating Process Fundamentals, Facility Design and Production Control in
               Semiconductor Manufacturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1996   
File        : a9302099

Award Number: 9302099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141216             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reha M. Uzsoy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Christos G. Takoudis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9302099   Uzsoy    The widely acknowledged importance of the semiconductor
              industry to the economic well being of the country has led many different
              disciplines to study problems in this area.  Process analysis, design and
              characterization have been addressed in the electrical, chemical and materials
              engineering literature. However, this body of research has concentrated on
              demonstrating the feasibility of producing functional devices in a research
              environment, in a manner isolated from the production planning and control
              problems encountered in manufacturing facilities.  While production planning
              and control problems in this industry have been studied by a growing body of
              researchers, such work has not been used to provide insights into the design of
              more effective unit processes and has accepted existing unit process and
              facility designs as given.  There is an emerging need for an interdisciplinary
              effort to develop an integrated framework within which to address the problem
              of designing and controlling semiconductor manufacturing facilities coupled
              with a fundamental understanding of materials processing and characterization. 
              The researchers experiences and interactions with industrial partners in the
              semiconductor industry indicate there is considerable interaction among unit
              process selection and design, interrelationships between process environments
              and microelectronic material properties, and production control and facility
              layout methods.   This research is directed towards developing a basic,
              quantitative understanding of these interactions for thin film deposition and
              etching processes.  Fundamental studies to develop an understanding of the
              complex dynamics among underlying material processing operations, their
              interactions with each other, and their environments that will enable
              integrated, innovative methodologies to be developed for design and control of
              semiconductor manufacturing facilities.  Such knowledge will be used to develop
              novel, effective, scheduling methodologies for  these types of workcenters and
              to examine how different workcenters may be combined into manufacturing systems
              that are cost effective and easy to control.  The research will require a
              strong continuous synergy between detailed unit process models and techniques
              for production system design, control and performance evaluation.
