Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Low Dimensional Topology and Infinite Group Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1995       
File        : a9302520

Award Number: 9302520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Shalen shalen@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc E. Culler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   A striking feature of the development of mathematics in the               
              past decade has been the extent to which the diverse branches of               
              mathematics have interacted, with methods from one branch being                
              used to solve outstanding problems in another.  Culler and                     
              Shalen's ongoing program for obtaining lower bounds for volumes                
              of hyperbolic manifolds is in large measure an application of                  
              qualitative results from topology to quantitative estimates in                 
              geometry.  Their program for the Property P conjecture would be                
              likely to exploit K-theory and arithmetic geometry in attacking a              
              problem from the topological theory of 3-manifolds.  Culler's                  
              project of implementing Manin's program by means of Thurston's                 
              theory of pleated surfaces is a way of using synthetic hyperbolic              
              geometry to obtain insight into number theory.  Finally, Shalen's              
              project involving fundamental groups of 2-complexes lies in the                
              domain of geometric and combinatorial group theory but is                      
              motivated in part by the prospect of applications to the study of              
              discrete subgroups of algebraic groups and Kac-Moody groups.                   
                   Three-dimensional manifolds are the mathematical models of                
              our physical universe.  While the cosmological question of                     
              whether our universe is finite may be unresolved, it is certain                
              that the study of finite-volume 3-manifolds is of fundamental                  
              importance in understanding the physical universe.  The                        
              quantitative estimates obtained by Culler and Shalen may be                    
              regarded as being mathematical analogues of measurements of                    
              fundamental physical constants, such as the speed of light.  The               
              geometry, as well as the topology, of the universe is important                
              in physics.  While the non-euclidean geometries may have been                  
              considered curiosities in the nineteenth century, the development              
              of general relativity shows that negatively curved spaces, such                
              as hyperbolic 3-manifolds, are the appropriate models for the                  
              universe.  Recent mathematical research has shown that they are                
              ubiquitous and mathematically rich as well.  The research                      
              proposed here is aimed at expanding our understanding                          
              of these important spaces.
