Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Chromosome Geometry and Chromosome Aberrations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1995   
File        : a9302704

Award Number: 9302704
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rainer K. Sachs sachs@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9302704  Sachs       The investigator models chromosome aberrations in live 
              mammalian cells, emphasizing implications for large-scale  chromosome geometry
              and for the biology of ionizing radiation  damage.  The study entails
              developing computer algorithms,  explicitly solving stochastic process models,
              and collaborating  with various experimental groups.  Production of chromosome 
              damage (for example, illegitimate recombinations, involving the  exchange of
              fragments between two different chromosomes) after  induction of DNA double
              strand breaks during the interphase part  of the cell cycle is analyzed, using
              probabilistic models for DNA  geometry, motion, and reactions at the
              macromolecular level, in  particular polymer models for large-scale chromosome
              structure  and motion.       Comparisons of the effects of densely ionizing
              radiation to  those of sparsely ionizing radiation, relevant to chromosome 
              geometry and to biological dosimetry, are made.  Statistical  questions that
              arise when very detailed experimental information  about specific individual
              chromosomes is made available by modern  fluorescent labeling techniques are
              answered by extending already  developed Monte-Carlo simulations based on
              previously analyzed  biological models.       Understanding how ionizing
              radiation damages chromosomes is  important in understanding cancer induction
              by  radiation, understanding how to cope with radiation accidents or  waste,
              and improving tumor radiotherapy.  Such understanding  requires geometric
              information about the chromosomes in a live  human cell; conversely,
              information about radiation damage  contributes to understanding chromosome
              geometry, which is of  fundamental biological importance.  While much effort
              has been  devoted to sequencing the DNA in chromosomes and to modeling  local
              geometry of chromosomes, quantitative geometric models of  the larger scales of
              main interest in analyzing radiation  produced chromosome aberrations are just
              now being developed, by  the principal investig ator and others.  The project
              combines  standard information on the physics of ionizing radiation with  these
              new biological models of chromosome geometry to analyze how  the damage is
              formed. In particular, preliminary mathematical  investigations and a
              literature search show that, due to  geometric effects, densely ionizing
              radiations, such as alpha  particles from radon daughters, make a larger
              fraction of certain  specific kinds of damage (e.g. centric chromosome rings)
              than  other kinds of chromosome damaging agents, including sparsely  ionizing
              radiations such as x-rays. This "signature" of densely  ionizing radiations
              should help in realistic assessments of  radiation hazards and will help in
              understanding chromosome  geometry.  ***
