Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Conley Index Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9302970

Award Number: 9302970
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Konstantin M. Mischaikow mischaik@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9302970  Mischaikow       Mischaikow is using the Conley index to study the
              global  dynamics of evolution equations.  The first question which  Mischaikow
              is trying to answer is: given a parameterized family  of differential equations
              what minimal dynamic structure is  common to the system at all parameter
              values.  For equations such  as Cahn-Hilliard, Ginzburg-Landau, Fitz
              Hugh-Nagumo, differential  delay with negative feedback and others the goal is
              to derive  nontrivial model flows and continuous surjections from the global 
              attractors of the systems of interest onto the model flows.  For  other
              dynamical systems such as the Henon map, the Lorenz  equations, non-monotone
              cyclic feedback systems the goal is to  obtain a semi-conjugacy from an
              invariant set to subshift  dynamics on a finite set of symbols. The second
              question involves  singular perturbation problems.  The goal in this case is to
               compute Conley indices for the perturbed system (and thereby gain  information
              about the dynamics) using only the dynamics of the  singular system.  The
              problems being considered include thin  domains and fast slow systems.      
              Most mathematical models are not derived from first  principals, and hence, are
              based on heuristics, intuitive  understandings, and approximations of the
              physical system.  This  means that it is impossible to know precisely the
              appropriate  parameter values or even nonlinearities used in the model.  
              Therefore, it is important that the qualitative dynamic  structures observed in
              the mathematical system be  robust with respect to changes in the
              nonlinearities and  parameters.       The goal of Mischaikow's work is to
              develop applicable  mathematical techniques which can identify such robust
              dynamics  structures.  ***
