Title       : Ozone and Water Vapor Balloon Sounding During the Central Equatorial Pacific
               Experiment (CEPEX)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1993    
File        : a9302954

Award Number: 9302954
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel J. Oltmans   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NOAA-Environ Research Lab
	      325 Broadway
	      Boulder, CO  803033328    /   -

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9302954  Otlmans       The "thermostat hypothesis" depends upon three
              postulates.   First, a super-greenhouse effects exists.  Satellite data reveal 
              that the atmosphere over the warmest oceans is very humid, causing  it to trap
              a significant fraction of the infrared energy emitted by  the ocean. 
              Furthermore, the infrared trapping - known as the  greenhouse effect -
              increases very sharply with increasing SST in  regions of convection.  This
              creates an instability which requires  some sort of negative feedback (e.g.
              thermostat) in order to keep  the ocean and atmosphere in their present, stable
              state.  Second,  there is a threshold temperature above which reach altitudes
              of 16  km (55,000 ft.) and extend over tens o thousands of square  kilometers,
              reflect significant amounts of solar energy back to  space so that the sea
              surface cools down, hence, the thermostat.         The goal of CEPEX is to test
              the thermostat hypothesis and  thus understand the role of the water vapor
              greenhouse effect,  cloud-radiative interactions and evaporation in regulating
              SSTs.         Three aircraft will be deployed in CEPEX: A high altitude 
              aircraft - flying above the anvil clouds at altitudes of 55,000 -  60,000 feet
              - to collect data on solar energy reflected by clouds,  infrared energy
              radiated by the surface-atmosphere system, and the  top and bottom altitudes of
              the cirrus anvils; an intermediate  aircraft - flying below the anvils at
              35,000 - 40,000 feet - to  measure the super-greenhouse effect, the energy
              regulation by anvil  clouds, and the vertical distributions of water vapor and 
              temperature; and a low altitude aircraft to measure the evaporation  and heat
              release from the ocean to the atmosphere from an altitude  of about 150 feet.  
                    Since the central objective is to measure the impact of SST  differences,
              flights tracts will span the central equatorial  Pacific, about 700 nautical
              miles to either side of the data line.   This region encompasses the desired
              SST range, with frequent  convection  west and south of the date line, but
              little to the east.   The flights measuring radiant energy will originate from
              FIJI  island (17oS, 178oE).  The region between Fiji and the equator also 
              contains large SST gradients in the desired range between 27oC and  30oC.  
              Evaporation measurements will be made along the equator  between Nauru Island
              and Christmas Island.         The high altitude measurements will be made over
              a one month  period beginning approximately March 1, 1993.  The high and 
              intermediate aircraft will fly about every other day for a total of  100 flight
              hours each.  Surface evaporation measurements will be  taken by the low-level
              aircraft during the first half of the  experiment.         The question of how
              tropical SSTs are regulated is important  to understanding the regulation of
              the Earth's climate in  general:in particular, the atmospheric behavior in the
              warm pool  region may become more widespread in the event of anticipated 
              global warming.***
