Title       : FASEB Summer Research Conference: Genetic Recombination and Genome
               Rearrangements to be held at Copper Mountain, Colorado from July 25-30, 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1993      
File        : a9302546

Award Number: 9302546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney J. Rothstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              9302546  Rothstein  This grant provides partial funding for a FASEB Surnmer
              Research  Conference on Genetic Recombination and Genome Rearrangements,  which
              is being held July 25 to July 30, 1993 in Copper Mountain,  CO.  The conference
              is under the auspices of the Federation of the  American Societies of
              Experimental Biology (FASEB).  The format of  this meeting will be the same as
              that used by the Gordon Research  Conferences.  There will be nine major
              sessions with 36 invited  speakers.  The chairperson of each session will give
              an  introductory talk on the historical background and the current  problems to
              acquaint all participants with the topics in that  session.  Poster sessions
              will be held throughout the meeting.   Informal workshops of small groups will
              be arranged before or at  the meeting.  Topics will cover a broad range of
              organisms from  mammalian cells to bacteria.  Both in vivo and in vitro
              approaches  will be presented.  This conference is the only regularly scheduled
               meeting in the United States that is devoted exclusively to genetic 
              recombination and genome rearrangements.  The topics to be covered  at this
              meeting are current approaches to gene therapy, genome  rearrangements that
              lead to cancer and other diseases, problems in  linkage analysis, genetics of
              homologous recombination, enzymology  of homologous recombination (strand
              transferases, nucleases, and  resolvases), physical structure of recombination
              intermediates,  repair of mismatch sites in heteroduplex recombination 
              intermediates, site-specific recombination and regulation of gene  expression,
              and bacterial and eukaryotic transposition.  %%%  This meeting provides a
              crucial interface between scientists  interested in the basic mechanistic
              aspects of recombination and  those interested in practical applications, such
              as gene therapy,  creation of animal models of disease, and remodeling of
              genomes to  test functional alterations of gene regulatory sequences.  ***
