Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Three Measures on Fractals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1993       
File        : a9302728

Award Number: 9302728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander L. Volberg volberg@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award supports mathematical research focusing on                     
              holomorphic dynamical systems in the plane, exploiting the                     
              interaction between classical function theory and ergodic theory.              
              Particular emphasis is placed on thermodynamical formalism.  Such              
              systems are given by holomorphic functions defined in                          
              neighborhoods of compact sets defined to be the infinite past                  
              history of the neighborhood.   Of the three objects of this work,              
              the first is to establish the singularity of harmonic measure on               
              the compact set with respect to one-dimensional Hausdorff                      
              measure.  The second objective is finding the description of                   
              those cases where the harmonic measure is equivalent to the                    
              measure of maximal entropy.  The third goal is to investigate the              
              rigidity of harmonic measure in the sense that if two holomophic               
              dynamical systems are quasiconformally conjugate with equivalent               
              measures, can one determine if they are actually conformally                   
              conjugate?                                                                     
                   All of these problems have their roots in potential theory,               
              combining probabilisitic and ergodic theoretic techniques.                     
              The research is related to analysis of fractal sets, since the                 
              most interesting compact sets formed by the infinite past                      
              of holomorphic functions are often of this type.
