Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Regulation of Gene Expression in
               Drosophila Neurogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1993      
File        : a9302015

Award Number: 9302015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah Eastman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research abroad at research                                
              centers of proven excellence.  The program's                                   
              awards provide opportunities for joint                                         
              research, and the use of unique or                                             
              complementary facilities, expertise and                                        
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Deborah                                     
              Eastman to the Institute of Molecular Biology                                  
              and Biotechnology, Crete to work                                               
              with Dr. Christos Delidakis.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Their research will focus on the role of the                                   
              neurogenic Enhancer of Split ?E(spl)! gene                                     
              products during embryonic neurogenesis.                                        
              These genes code for proteins with a conserved                                 
              Helix-Loop-Helix motif, which makes them                                       
              members of a family of proteins that                                           
              regulate transcription.  Dr. Delidakis has                                     
              focused on elucidating the role of the E(spl)                                  
              HLH proteins in the lateral inhibition                                         
              during embryonic neurogenesis and in later                                     
              developmental events.  Dr. Eastman will focus                                  
              on several of the E(spl) HLH proteins.                                         
              Her main objective will be to biochemically                                    
              characterize them in order to determine their                                  
              function and to determine the regulation                                       
              of that function by other neurogenic gene                                      
              products in the signalling pathway.  These                                     
              characterization studies will begin by                                         
              determining whether these proteins bind DNA.                                   
              DNA binding activity will be assayed and                                       
              specific DNA binding sites will be                                             
              determined.  Putative DNA binding sites will be                                
              sequenced and genes downstream of these sites                                  
              will be cloned and sequenced.  It will also be                                 
              determined whether other proteins are complexed                                
              with specific E(spl) HLH proteins and if                                       
              disruption of these complexes affects DNA                                      
              binding.  Additionally, a genetic screen will                                  
              be performed to detect other gene products                                     
              which may interact with the E(spl) HLH                                         
              proteins.                                                                      
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel and a stipend for                                   
              twelve months.
