Title       : Applications of Neutron Scattering Techniques to the Investigation of
               Prototypical Magnetic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1995  
File        : a9302380

Award Number: 9302380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey W. Lynn jl70@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project will explore three general avenuew of research using              
              both polarized and unpolarized neutron scattering techniques.  The             
              first involves the magnetic ordering and spin fluctuations                     
              associated with copper and rare earth moments in the oxide                     
              superconductors.  the second concerns the superconducting aspects              
              of these systems, including the investigation of the nature of the             
              vortex state in these 'magnetic-superconductor' materials, as well             
              as the determination of the magnetic penetration depth in                      
              superconductors via polarized neutron reflectometry.  The third                
              project deals with the spin dynamics of isotropic ferromagnets.                
              Polarized beam techniques will be used to separate the longitudinal            
              and transverse spin dynamics of materials, such as Invar alloys                
              where substantial discrepencies have been found between the                    
              magnetic excitation spectrum observed directly with neutrons and               
              the temperature dependence of the magnetization.  Investigation of             
              the longitudinal and transverse fluctuation spectra just below the             
              Curie temperature, and their behavior as a function of applied                 
              field will be undertaken.                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              This project will explore three general avenues of materials                   
              research using neutron scattering techniques.  The first involves              
              the fundamental structural and magnetic properties of the cuprate              
              superconductors, in an effort to establish the origins of the                  
              superconducting state in these novel systems.  The second aspect               
              concerns the determination and understanding of the materials                  
              properties which control the superconducting parameters of central             
              importance to commercial applications, such as vortex pinning to               
              produce high critical current materials.  The final area deals with            
              the fundamental and practical properties of soft magnetic                      
              materials, which have commercial applications as transformer cores,            
              magnetic shielding, etc.  Particular emphasis will be placed on the            
              Invar class of soft magnets, as these are of technical importance              
              because their density does not change with temperature, in contrast            
              to most metals which expand upon heating.
