Title       : Cooperative Phenomena in Systems of Restricted Dimensionality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9302882

Award Number: 9302882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sebastian Doniach doniach@drizzle.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9256,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical research will be conducted on two general areas of                 
              modern condensed matter physics: the electronic structure of                   
              correlated electron systems and the nature of the superconductor-              
              insulator transition in the cuprate superconductors.                           
                                                                                             
              In the first area, studies will be performed on the influence of               
              oxygen-hole copper-hole pairing on the d-wave superconductivity in             
              the cuprates.  As temperature is lowered below the transition                  
              temperature there is the possibility of a second phase transition              
              signaling the onset of copper-oxygen pairing.  Also to be studied              
              is the nature of the electron pairing in potassium fulleride and               
              the possibility of a special, Berry phase, electron-phonon                     
              interaction in the fullerenes.                                                 
                                                                                             
              In the second area, studies will be performed on the possibility               
              that the superconductor-insulator transition which occurs with zinc            
              doping in the cuprates represents a simultaneous localization of               
              Cooper pairs and partial de-pairing induced by disorder and/or                 
              magnetic fluctuations.  In a related but separate study, the                   
              effects of incipient boson localization on the quantum tunneling of            
              vortices when the system is close to a field-induced                           
              superconductor-insulator transition will be investigated.                      
              %%%                                                                            
              Theoretical research will be conducted on fundamental problems in              
              condensed matter physics which can have a major impact on                      
              understanding the behavior of the high temperature superconductors.            
              The research will primarily focus on the copper-oxide based                    
              superconductors.  Work will be done on the nature of the transition            
              as the material goes from a superconducting state to an insulating             
              state.
