Title       : U.S-Malaysia-Japan Cooperative Research on Understanding how Tree Biodiversity
               is maintained in the Lambir National Park, Sarawak,East Malaysia in the
               Northwest Borneo Hotspot
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1993      
File        : a9302328

Award Number: 9302328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25178              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter S. Ashton pashton@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James V. LaFrankie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1577,5927,9179,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal requests supplemental funds to                                   
              permit Drs. Peter S. Ashton and James V.                                       
              LaFrankie, Arnold Arboretum, Harvard                                           
              University, to complete with Mr. Hua-Seng Lee,                                 
              Department of Forestry, Sarawak, Malaysia, the                                 
              training of U.S. and Malaysian personnel                                       
              essential to the success of their NSF-supported                                
              research on tropical biodiversity.  The                                        
              research itself deals with understanding how                                   
              tree biodiversity is maintained in balance in                                  
              the Lambir National Park, Sarawak, East                                        
              Malaysia, in the Northwest Borneo hotspot, an                                  
              area that may be the most species rich forest                                  
              in the Old World.  A special 50 hectare plot                                   
              has been reserved in which the role of soil                                    
              heterogeneity in maintaining species diversity                                 
              can be studied.  A possible deterrent to the                                   
              full utilization of this resource is the fact                                  
              that there are less than 10 botanists in the                                   
              United States, 5 in Malaysia, and only two in                                  
              Sarawak who are fluent in the flora of Borneo.                                 
              The educational objectives of the project seek                                 
              to widen the regional forest expertise of the                                  
              resident researchers and technical staff, and                                  
              thereby foster regional collaboration among a                                  
              new generation of forest scientists.                                           
                                                                                             
              Dr. Ashton is a senior researcher with an                                      
              excellent international reputation gained                                      
              through some three decades of research on                                      
              Bornean forests.  Dr. LaFrankie is a young U.S.                                
              scientist who has been engaged in postdoctoral                                 
              research in Borneo.  Mr. Lee is Assistant                                      
              Director of Research and Reforestation,                                        
              Sarawak, Malaysia.  Primary research support is                                
              provided through NSF Grant No. BSR-9107247,                                    
              with matching funds from Japanese sources,                                     
              notably, the Monbusho Fund and the Marubeni                                    
              Corporation.  This project is relevant to the                                  
              objectives of the Science in Developing                                        
              Countries Program which seeks to contribute to                                 
              the infrastructure of developing countries and                                 
              to increase the level of cooperation between                                   
              U.S. scientists and engineers and their                                        
              counterparts in developing countries through                                   
              the exchange of scientific information, ideas,                                 
              skills, and techniques and through                                             
              collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
