Title       : Workshop on Phosphorus Cycling in Terrestrial and Aquatic Ecosystems: A Global
               Perspective; Budapest, Hungary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1993      
File        : a9302324

Award Number: 9302324
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward T. Elliott   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kate Lajtha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C.  Vernon Cole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1577,5916,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal requests request support for U.S. scientists to             
              participate in a SCOPE sponsored workshop on Phosphorus Cycling in             
              Terrestrial and Aquatic Systems.   The goal of the workshop is to              
              collect and integrate data, concepts and models on phosphorus                  
              cycles in a global context.  In addition, a symposium will be held             
              during the workshop with the aim to present integrative ecosystem              
              analyses on phosphorus inputs, transformations, transfers and                  
              losses in Hungary.  The Hungarian analysis will focus on three                 
              systems:  (1) The Balaton Lake basin, an inland closed watershed,              
              (2) The Danube, as an example of a major river system with                     
              pollutant phosphate inputs from intensive agriculture, major                   
              cities, and industries, that accumulate in its course through                  
              several countries with widely differing environmental protection               
              standards, and (3) Hungarian agriculture, which has been plagued by            
              inefficiencies of nutrient use and resultant off-site                          
              contaminations.                                                                
              The global analysis is based on the results of 4 previous                      
              workshops, held in Europe, South America, Southeast Asia and                   
              Africa, and aims at the integration of knowledge across boundaries             
              of ecosystems and regions while exploring the links between                    
              phosphorus and other element cycles.                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              Both the global and Hungarian perspectives will be provided by                 
              recognized experts from several disciplines through presentations              
              and working groups with the following mandates:  (1)  To synthesize            
              chapters on the major cycles and transfers of phosphorus based on              
              prepared manuscripts and extensive discussion and review sessions              
              for the production of a book to be published by John Wiley in the              
              SCOPE series; (2) to develop concepts and models applicable across             
              ecosystems and test them against the Hungarian case studies; and               
              (3) to facilitate discussions and cooperation between Hungarian,               
              U.S., and other invited experts with the aim to foster future                  
              cooperation and provide guidelines for environmental planning.
