Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Molecular Interactions of Filensin
               in Cultured Lens Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1993      
File        : a9302017

Award Number: 9302017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susann G. Remington   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ross G. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign                                        
              centers of proven excellence.  The program's                                   
              awards provide opportunities for joint                                         
              research, and the use of unique or                                             
              complementary facilities, expertise and                                        
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Susann G.                                   
              Remington of the University of Minnesota-Twin                                  
              Cities to work with Dr. Spyros D. Georgatos at                                 
              the European Molecular Biology Laboratory                                      
              (EMBL) in Heidelberg, Germany.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Dr. Remington has characterized a full length                                  
              chicken lens cDNA encoding filensin, a lens-                                   
              specific, membrane-associated, cytoskeletal                                    
              protein.  The deduced amino acid sequence of                                   
              filensin contains a 280 residue domain with                                    
              sequence similarity to the rod domain of                                       
              intermediate filament proteins.  She will                                      
              examine the molecular interactions of filensin                                 
              and its potential contribution to lens cell                                    
              organization by transfecting cultured chicken                                  
              lens cells with constructs that express                                        
              truncated forms of filensin, corresponding to                                  
              domains or conserved sequence motifs.                                          
              Truncated portions of filensin are expected to                                 
              competitively inhibit protein-protein                                          
              interactions of the analogous regions of                                       
              endogenous chicken filensin, resulting in                                      
              dominant negative phenotypes(s).  Dr. Remington                                
              will monitor the morphology of the transfected                                 
              cells and the distribution of filensin, other                                  
              cytoskeletal proteins, and integral membrane                                   
              proteins in the transfected cultures.  She will                                
              also assess the biochemical state of wild type                                 
              filensin under the experimental conditions.
