Title       : Acquisition of a 500 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Structural Analysis of Biological
               Macromolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1995    
File        : a9512501

Award Number: 9512501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda K. Nicholson lkn2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              We propose to establish a Biomolecular NMR Center in  Cornell's Biotechnology
              Building  through acquisition of a state-of-the-art 600 MHz high  resolution
              multinuclear NMR spectrometer, to be dedicated  for research and training in
              structural biology. The  interdisciplinary biophysics program at Cornell is
              highly  committed to studies of macromolecular structure. This group  has
              established internationally recognized facilities and  faculty for X-ray
              crystallography, theoretical/computational  studies of acromolecular structure
              and dynamics, and  biochemical and molecular genetic studies of protein 
              function. The proposed 600 MHz NMR spectrometer will  complement existing
              resources by        providing  capabilities for solution studies of structure
              and dynamics.  A single 500 MHz NMR spectrometer which is not equipped with 
              the latest technological advances (e.g. fourth radio  frequency channel, XYZ
              pulsed field gradient amplifiers and  probes, 10 mm triple resonance probe and
              enhanced room  temperature shims) is housed in Cornell's Chemistry NMR 
              Facility. This machine is routinely booked to full capacity  with an extensive
              user base composed of both "small  molecule" and  "macromolecule" users. Past
              progress in  solution NMR studies of proteins at Cornell has occurred  largely
              through utilization of outside resources either in  the laboratories of
              collaborators or at public facilities.  Over the past decade, triple- and
              quadruple-resonance  multidimensional NMR spectroscopy has become a critical 
              component of modern structural biology. In order to keep  pace in this
              accelerating field of  research, and to prepare  our undergraduate and graduate
              students for careers in one  of the fastest growing areas of science, this
              technology  must be brought to Cornell.    The Director of the Biomolecular NMR
              Center will be  Professor Linda Nicholson who joined the Cornell faculty  last
              fall. Professor Nicholson brings up-to-date expertise  in the application of
              multi-dimensional NMR to dynamical and  stru ctural studies of proteins, as
              evidenced by her recent  work on the HIV-l protease performed at the NIH. She
              brings  knowledge of the latest double-, triple- and quadruple-  resonance
              techniques for application to biological  macromolecules. This expertise is
              highly complemented at  Cornell by the long-established programs of Harold
              Scheraga  and Robert Oswald  that extensively utilize multi-dimensional NMR for
               structural studies of proteins. progress in these research  groups has been
              made only Day to day direction of the  facility will be provided by a staff
              scientists who will  assist and train users, provide technical support and 
              facilitate collaborative interactions. External review of  the NMR facility
              will be provided by the visiting committee  described in section 5d. Allocation
              of resources will be  decided by a committee that consists of the director, the
               staff scientist, one major user and one other user.  Scheduling of
              spectrometer time will be the responsibility  of the staff scientist. Cost
              sharing for this project will  be provided by funds from the College of Arts
              and Sciences  and from the Program in Molecular Structure.    Nicholson, Oswald
              and Scheraga comprise the "critical mass"  of major users that will launch the
              first structural and  dynamics studies in the proposed Biomolecular NMR Center.
               Several additional faculty members, including Begley,  Jelinski, Rodriguez,
              and Feigenson, have a demonstrated  expertise in solution NMR spectroscopy, and
              will comprise a  strong core of additional users. Research activities 
              encompass investigation of two ubiquitous biophysical  switching mechanisms
              (protein  phosphorylation and GTP  binding, Nicholson and Oswald), protein
              folding and protein-  protein interactions (Scheraga), the basic forces that
              hold  proteins together (observing the effects of pressure on  protein
              flexibility, Ealick), basic forces governing lipid  behavior (Feigenson), the
              role of structure and dynamics in  mechanisms of enzyme catalysis (Begley), and
              the bi ophysical  basis of regulation of gene transcription (Lis and Tye), the 
              biophysical basis of high-performance biopolymers  (Jelinski), and interactions
              between bioactive natural  products and DNA (Rodriguez). Methodologies include
              gradient-  enhanced multidimensional experiments to obtain sequential 
              assignments, distance restraints and dihedral angle  restraints for structure
              determination and relaxation  parameters for protein dynamics. Studies of
              larger and less  soluble systems will also be possible with the requested 
              instrumentation. In addition to scientific research, the NMR  facility will
              provided educational opportunities through  formal courses and training
              sessions, through graduate and  post-graduate research projects and through
              independent  studies and field trips for undergraduate students.
