Title       : Improved Processing Technolgy for the Recovery of Boron Minerals from Saturated
               Salt Solutions, U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9512813

Award Number: 9512813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23670              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan D. Miller jdmiller@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M R. Yalamanchili  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description:   This project supports a cooperative project by a US scientist,
              Dr. Jan Miller, from the Department of Metallurgical Engineering at the
              University of Utah, Salt Lake City, and Dr. G. Onal from the Mining Engineering
              Department, Istanbul Technical University, Turkey.  The research aims at
              improving the understanding of the floating chemistry of boron minerals, to
              make more efficient use of boron resources, and to minimize environmental
              impact of the process operations.  Specifically, recent studies at the U. of
              Utah have identified the importance of surface charge and collector colloid
              adsorption phenomena in the selective flotation of soluble salts, and the
              significance of these findings in the flotation of boron minerals will be
              examined.  Based on this flotation chemistry information, a process strategy
              will be developed for the more effective recovery of these boron minerals by
              flotation technology.  Plant samples obtained from boron processing plants in
              the U.S. and Turkey will be used to examine the viability of flotation
              technology for boron recovery.  Scope:  This project allows cooperation of two
              well known scientists, whose capabilities complement each other, to do
              important scientific work; they will be joined by a young American scientist at
              the U. of Utah and another at I.T.U. in Istanbul.  The results of the project
              are expected to contribute towards the development of a flotation separation
              strategy for more effective recovery of boron minerals from saturated
              solutions.  The U.S. is the largest producer of boron compounds while Turkey
              has the largest boron reserves in the world.  Both countries will benefit from
              this collaboration.  This project meets a number of important objectives of the
              Division of International Programs.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
