Title       : An Oocyte Expression/Patch Clamp Analysis System for the Study of Membrane
               Channel Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1995  
File        : a9512977

Award Number: 9512977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39291              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald A. Berkowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Danny J. Schnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce P. Wasserman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond S. Roginski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Several research groups at Rutgers/UMDNJ have focused on the  molecular
              characterization of newly-identified membrane proteins  (channels, receptors,
              transporters) in animal and plant systems. Use of  molecular genetic approaches
              has led to the cloning of putative cDNAs  encoding polypeptide components of
              these membrane proteins. Rapid  advancement of the research programs
              characterizing these cDNAs will,  in the near future, depend on the capability
              to characterize the  transport functions facilitated by the translation
              products of the  cDNAs. One state-of-the-art technology which can be employed
              to  facilitate this characterization is oocyte expression/patch clamp 
              analysis. This involves the microinjection of cRNA transcribed from  these
              cDNAs into frog (Xenopus laevis) oocytes, leading to translation  and
              functional expression of the transport proteins in oocyte  membranes.
              Monitoring of ion currents across the plasmalemma of oocytes  expressing these
              proteins by use of patch/voltage clamp equipment can  then be employed to study
              the specific transport functions of these  gene products. This proposal seeks
              funds to set up the first oocyte  expression/patch clamp analysis system at
              Rutgers.        The research programs described in this proposal will all make 
              use of this equipment to gain insights into the structure/function 
              relationships of the target membrane proteins. The specific research 
              objectives which will be perused by investigators using the proposed  equipment
              are as follows. 1 ) lon channel genes heretofore not known to  be present in
              plants will be characterized. Specifically, cDNAs  encoding a   subunit of
              plant K+ channels, a ligandgated type 11 (30-40  kD polypeptide) K+ channel
              native to an intracellular plant membrane,  and a K+ channel which has a unique
              pore sequence (unknown previously  in plant or animal membranes) and is a
              likely candidate for the Na+  uptake pathway in plants will be studied. 2)
              Polypeptide components of  the enzyme complex involved in plant ce ll wall
              callose (cellulose)  biosynthesis will be characterized. The cDNAs encoding
              these  polypeptides share sequence homology with members of the MIP (major 
              intrinsic protein) or aquaporin gene family. 3) A cDNA encoding a novel  member
              of the family of glutamate (Glu) family of excitatory amino acid  receptors
              will be characterized. Glu receptors (GluRs) mediate rapid  excitatory
              neurotransmission in the mammalian central nervous system.  GluRs are a type of
              cation channel known as ionotropic receptors. The  cloned cDNA encodes a unique
              splice variant that is a truncated  receptor form of a GluR. 4. Nuclear-encoded
              proteins are imported into  plant cell chloroplasts via specific channels
              spanning the double  membrane delimiting the organelle. A complex of six
              chloroplast  envelope membrane proteins have been identified as components of
              the  chloroplast protein import machinery. A cDNA encoding one of these 
              proteins, IAP75, has been cloned. Sequence analysis of IAP75 indicates  that it
              has secondary structure similarity to channel proteins such as  bacterial outer
              membrane porins. The porinlike nature of IAP75 will be  characterized.
