Title       : Computer Infrastructure for Mathematical Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1995 
File        : a9512533

Award Number: 9512533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven P. Kerckhoff spk@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George Papanicolaou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Mathematics at Stanford University plans to purchase computer
              equipment which will be dedicated to the support of research in the
              mathematical sciences. It also proposes to hire a part-time systems
              administrator to help maintain and to use effectively this equipment.  The
              computer system in the Mathematics Department at Stanford University is
              currently adequate only for communication and manuscript preparation.  It is
              completely inadequate for any serious mathematical computation or visualization
              projects.  There are several members of the department who have computationally
              or graphically intensive projects which cannot be performed in the current
              computer environment.  To correct this situation we are proposing to purchase
              appropriate equipment.    The inclusion of this equipment into the system and
              the increase of mathematical activity that they would generate would
              necessitate support personnel.  The department currently employs a very
              part-time systems administrator to help with communications problems.  This
              would be insufficient support for the  expanded computer environment.  The PIs
              will obtain an additional 25% time systems administration position to
              supplement the current arrangement.  This position would be responsible for
              integrating the new equipment and software into the existing system and then
              would provide support for its maintenance and use.  This would include helping
              people with their programming needs for research projects.  The equipment will
              be used for several research projects in mathematics, including in particular: 
              Evolution Equations in Geometry, Ben Andrews and Brian White. Computational
              Aspects of Number Theory, Daniel Bump. Hyperbolic Geometry and Geometric
              Topology, Steven Kerckhoff. A Wavelet-based Seismic Analysis and Simulation
              Environment, George Papanicolaou.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
