Title       : Construction of a Filtered Seawater System at the Baruch Field Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1996   
File        : a9512338

Award Number: 9512338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72000              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. John Vernberg   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Bushek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis M. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will support an upgrade of the existing  seawater system by
              constructing a filtration system which  will constitute a major advancement in
              the ability of  resident and visiting investigators to conduct important new 
              research at the Baruch Marine Field Laboratory (BMFL).  With  the
              reconstruction of facilities destroyed by Hurricane Hugo  in 1989 now complete,
              the availability of laboratory space  and supporting equipment has resulted in
              increases in user  traffic and a strong spirit of a new beginning.  A diverse 
              program of research which ranges from landscape level  ecology to cellular
              biology is supported at the BMFL and new  faculty associates have identified
              new directions and  approaches to studying the structural and functional
              aspects  of estuarine systems.  Reconstruction of facilities included  a
              seawater delivery system, however, funds were not  sufficient to include any
              filtration.  Current research is  limited by high sediment and plankton loads
              in the existing,  unfiltered system.  Many studies conducted at the facility 
              require unfiltered raw water and the careful design of the  current system,
              partially funded by NSF, has provided  uninterrupted service for the past two
              years.  An equal or  greater number of studies could be carried out at the 
              facility if high quality filtered seawater were also  available.  The enhanced
              opportunities for graduate student  and visiting researchers would undoubtedly
              increase use of  the BMFL facility in the years ahead.  This project will 
              allow the purchase installation operation and maintenance of  a large volume,
              seawater filtration system at the new Baruch  Marine Field Laboratory.
