Title       : Acquisition of a Molecular Imager System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9512963

Award Number: 9512963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63125              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee H. Pratt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Kochert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard S. Hussey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Roger Boerma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell L. Malmberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Significant advances in digital imaging technology  provide capabilities
              not otherwise available. The overall  objective of this proposal is to obtain a
              16-bit/pixel  digital imager that will permit investigators in the Plant 
              Sciences Building at The University of Georgia to profit  from this technology.
              A single instrument that will provide  images of media labelled with both
              radioisotopic and  non-radioisotopic probes is requested. Supporting items 
              include a microcomputer essential for operation of the  imager, one high energy
              phosphor screen cassette for each  major user, one low-energy phosphor screen
              cassette to be  shared among all users, four chemiluminescence screen 
              cassettes to be shared among all users, a grey-scale laser  printer for routine
              and inexpensive output, and  site-licensed image-analysis software. All will be
               integrated into an existing computer network that will not  only permit data
              to be moved readily from the imager to each  user s laboratory, but will also
              provide direct access to a  publication quality color printer and to a CD
              recorder for  archiving data.      The imaging system (1) will permit us to
              obtain  quantitative information with greatly enhanced sensitivity  and
              accuracy, and (2) will dramatically decrease exposure  times, permitting
              experiments to progress at a much more  rapid pace. Current usage of film for
              imaging media in the  Plant Sciences Building exceeds 4,700/year, indicating
              that  a digital imager will receive extensive and efficient use.  The
              instrument will be used primarily with DNA, RNA and  protein blots, labelled
              with 32p, 1251, 35S, 14C, or with  enzymes that yield chemiluminescence given
              appropriate  substrates. Research programs that will benefit from the 
              equipment range from mission-oriented (e.g., H. Roger  Boerma) to fundamental
              (e.g., Kelly Dawe). These programs  include the regulation of virulence genes
              in a plant  pathogen (Timothy Denny), intercellular movement of plant  viruses
              and intracellular movement of viral glycop roteins  (C. Michael Deom),
              characterization of root-knot nematode  secretions (Richard Hussey and Celeste
              Ray), genetic  improvement of pest resistance and stress tolerance in  soybean
              (H. Roger Boerma), use of molecular markers in plant  breeding and evolution
              (Gary Kochert), characterization of  two pathways of polyamine synthesis in
              plants (Russell  Malmberg), the genetics and cell biology of the maize  meiotic
              centromere and kinetochore (Kelly Dawe), and a  comparative evaluation of the
              phytochrome gene family and  its expression in tomato and soghum (Lee Pratt and
               Marie-Michele Cordonnier-Pratt).
