Title       : Exploratory Research: An Archaeological Survey of Plio-Pleistocene Deposits in
               the Southern Republic of Georgia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1999       
File        : a9512684

Award Number: 9512684
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38285              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Reid Ferring ferring@cas.unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ferring    With National Science Foundation support Dr. C. Reid Ferring and  his
              colleagues will conduct geological and archaeological  research in the Diliska
              Gorge region of the Republic of Georgia.  Past work by this team has
              demonstrated the presence of lake and  river sediments which extend along the
              gorge over a distance of  ca. 15 km. Preliminary evidence indicates that these
              deposits  date to the early part of the Pleistocene and well preserved  remains
              have been discovered in them. Dr. Ferring and colleagues  will undertake a
              detailed geological survey of the area and  collect geological samples which
              will permit age determination.  They shall analyze faunal materials and search
              for archaeological  remains. If successful, this project will lay the
              groundwork for  a longer term collaborative Georgia-U.S. research endeavor.   
              Scientists know that the roots of the human lineage can be traced  back to
              Africa and that the earliest stages of human development  took place there.
              They are interested in how and when the first  hominids appear outside this
              region because of the insight this  information will provide into developing
              abilities to cope with  the environment. Recently early hominid remains were
              discovered  at the site of Dmanisi which is located in Georgia. Their age is 
              significantly greater that one would have expected and interest  in this
              region, which may lie on the original route out of  Africa, has increased. Dr.
              Ferring's search for early  archaeological sites and the stratigraphic and
              chronological  framework he will establish, will increase understanding of
              early  hominid prehistory and behavioral development. It will also  further
              collaboration between U.S. and Georgian scientists.
