Title       : Laser Tweezers and Scissors for the Analysis of Cells and Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1996     
File        : a9512950

Award Number: 9512950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101334             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Sanger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean M. Sanger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Weisel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This proposal requests funds for the purchase of equipment  necessary to
              establish a multi-user Laser Tweezers and Laser  Scissors  center. The
              development of optical trapping by laser light  using single-  beam gradient
              force traps (popularly referred to as optical  tweezers) has provided a
              powerful tool for  micromanipulating cells and  polymers both in vivo and in
              vltro. The instrumentation can  be used  to elucidate qualitative and
              quantitative properties of  organelles or  intracellular bacteria inside living
              cells as well as  particles or  bacteria attached to the surfaces of living
              cells.  Experiments are also  proposed for the use of the Laser Tweezers to
              measure the  force development  of beads coated with motor molecules in
              cell-free systems.  The power  of the Laser Scissors can be used to make
              precise surgical  cuts  inside living cells as well as in isolated polymer
              systems.  Experiments  are also proposed to use the Laser Scissors to cut parts
              of  cells and  axons that can then be isolated with the Cell Selector 
              microsyringe so  that they can be analyzed for different types of mRNA. The 
              Laser  Tweezers and Laser Scissors will be mounted on a requested  Nikon
              inverted  microscope. This laser center will be administered by  experienced
              investigators and will be available for  investigators and  their students at
              the University of Pennsylvania. The  instrumentation will be unique on the
              campus and will permit  problems of a  fundamental nature to be addressed that
              would otherwise not  be possible.                ~ - I
