Title       : Acquisition of MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometer for the Characterization of
               Biopolymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1996 
File        : a9512226

Award Number: 9512226
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Vallee   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hagan A. Bayley  (Principal Investigator former)
              John D. Leszyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Med Sch Worceste
	      55 Lake Avenue North
	      Worcester, MA  016550002    508/856-0011

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Worcester Foundation is an independent nonprofit  research institute devoted
              to basic  research in the biological sciences. Much of the research  conducted
              in the 22 laboratories  at the Foundation deals with the functioning of
              proteins in  cells. To provide the high quality sequence information  required
              for the research programs at the Foundation, a  protein chemistry core facility
              was established in 1989. The  core facility is used  extensively by faculty
              members for protein microsequencing  projects, using two state-of-  the-art
              peptide/protein sequencers. The project described in  this proposal involves
              the  acquisition of a matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization  (MALDI) mass
              spectrometer  with a time of flight (TOF) detector to be used as shared 
              equipment in the protein  chemistry core facility. Applications of mass
              spectrometry  (MS) for protein analysis are  developing rapidly and the mass
              spectrometer must now be  considered an integral  component of the modern
              protein chemistry lab.    The Worcester Foundation core facility does not
              currently  have a mass spectrometer. The  acquisition of a MALDI-TOF mass
              spectrometer will complement  the existing  microsequencing capabilities and
              add important  new capabilities to the protein chemistry  core facility.
              MALDI-MS is particularly useful for projects  involving biological samples 
              because of its soft ionization technique (polypeptides are  not fragmented),
              the ability to  resolve complex mixtures, sensitivity in the femtomolar  range
              and enhanced tolerance to  sample impurities. The MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer
              that has  been selected is the  LASERMAT 2000 manufactured by Finnigan MAT
              Corp.  The  considerations affecting the selection of this particular 
              instrument are its sensitivity, resolution, high throughput,  computer
              capabilities and ease of operation. These  characteristics are most desirable
              for an instrument with  multiple users that will be extensively used to analyze
               small quantities of protein obtained from biologic al  samples.    Ten
              investigators have described research projects that can  benefit immediately
              from the         incorporation of MALDI-  MS into their research programs. The
              number of users is  expected to increase as results are communicated within the
               Foundation community and as new applications are developed.  The projects
              described here cover a wide range of subjects,  including the development of
              advanced materials, studies of  protein damage and post-translational
              modification, the  identification of regulatory proteins in cells and chemical 
              adducts formation resulting from environmental  proestrogens. Many of the
              projects combine mass spectrometry  and peptide sequencing to identify modified
              peptides and  provide information regarding the modification itself. 
              Understanding the      distribution of a protein between  modified and
              unmodified forms is a critical element in  elucidating signal transduction
              pathways and understanding  the regulation of protein activities and functions
              in cells.  The femtomolar sensitivity of the instrument permits  analysis of
              very small quantities of cellular protein.    The instrument will also be used
              routinely to screen samples  prior to sequencing. MALDI-         MS can readily
              establish  the presence of contaminants in protein and peptide samples.  In
              addition, proteolytic digests of newly isolated proteins  can be mass mapped
              and compared to protein sequences in the  existing databases, possibly leading
              to much earlier  identification of the protein and reduced  sequencing 
              requirements. The instrument will also be used as an  analytical tool to
              evaluate the integrity of recombinant  proteins with a much greater resolution
              than the commonly  employed electrophoretic systems. Plans are to develop
              MALDI-  MS as a primary sequencing tool, as well, using new  degradation
              chemistries.    Dr. John Leszyk, the director of the protein chemistry core, 
              will be responsible for         instrument supervision and  the training of new
              instrument users. It is an ticipated that  the instrument will be used by at
              least half of the  laboratories at the institution and that users will include 
              approximately 8 principal investigators, 26 postdoctoral  associates, 8
              graduate students and 4  professional research  assistants.
