Title       : Acquisition of a Multi-processor Computing Facility for Nonlinear Mathematical
               Field Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1995    
File        : a9512483

Award Number: 9512483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lyle N. Long lnl@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Juan M. Lopez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pablo Laguna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip J. Morris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Simon J. Tavener  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas N. Arnold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A team of faculty, staff and students in the College of Science and the College
              of  Engineering at the Pennsylvania State University propose to acquire a
              multi-processor computer  facility to enable the solution of mathematical field
              equations.  The faculty are drawn from the  Department of Mathematics,
              Astronomy and Astrophysics, Aerospace Engineering, and Mechanical  Engineering.
               The goals of the program are:  to develop numerical simulations on parallel
              computer  architectures of unsteady, three-dimensional, non-linear phenomena in
              science and engineering; to  compare and share numerical methods applied to
              similar mathematical problems; and to integrate  numerical solutions on
              parallel computers into the gradua te curriculum.  These goals will be achieved
               by (1) the establishment of a multi-processor computer facility accessible to
              a team of faculty,  staff, and students, (2) the conduct of research on
              mathematical problems with common themes and  challenges, (3) the development
              of model problems and solutions for use in graduate coursework and, (  4) the
              dissemination of the results of the research and instructional activities
              through the World  Wide Web.  Research will be conducted in the areas of : 
              black hole collisions; unsteady flow and  acoustics; electromagnetics;
              magneto-thermocapillary convection; and geophysical fluid flows.  Different
              numerical methods will be used to solve problems in these areas including: 
              adaptive  finite-elements; high-order finite-differences; and spectral
              techniques.  Though the research topics  cover many different phenomena, they
              all have common mathematical and computational challenges.  They all involve
              the solution of three-dimensional, unsteady, non-linear, partial differential
              equations.  They are all problems that involve a wide range of length and time
              scales.  Also, they all require the  analysis of large time-dependent solution
              data sets.  Finally, numerical approaches that run  efficiently on multiple
              processors and take maximum advantage of the hardware architecture are of 
              vital importance to all the simulations.  The facility proposed here has not
              only advanced  architecture but also development tools for debugging,
              profiling, and tuning the programs.  The  computer also allows all three forms
              of parallel processing:  shared memory; message-passing (MPI and  PVM); and
              data parallel (Fortran 90 and High Performance Fortran).  The activities in
              this proposal  have the support of  and cooperation with both Silicon Graphics
              Inc. and IBM.  To promote additional  cooperation and dissemination the
              research team will establish a regular workshop/seminar series.  This activity
              will have the goals, to share knowledge on techniques of parallel computation,
              to keep  abreast of new  developments in software and algorithms and, to keep
              facility users informed in detail  of the activities of the other team members.
               In addition to the common threads in the research  activities, the proposed
              research will have extensive links to our graduate education activities.  Penn
              State is establishing a Center for High Performance Computation.  This is
              partially supported by  a grant from the National Science Foundation under its
              Combined Research-Curriculum Development (CRCD) Program.  The Center will
              combine our research activities and our graduate education program,  including
              a minor in High Performance Computation.  Five new graduate and undergraduate
              courses in  applied parallel processing are already being offered.  Access by
              students to the proposed research  facility, as well as exposure to the
              research activities will provide an invaluable enhancement to the 
              instructional program                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
