Title       : Development of a High Throughput Genetic Analysis Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1995    
File        : a9512424

Award Number: 9512424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence B. Schook schoo009@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Technologies derived from the genome projects for humans and other  model
              systems offer an extremely effective and economical approach for  studying many
              important biological questions as well as mechanisms of  animal and plant
              pathogenesis. Furthermore, the availability of the  necessary equipment and
              training in modern technologies is clearly an  important role of the University
              of Minnesota in serving its Land Grant  Mission. Recent and future faculty
              recruitment on the University of  Minnesota, St. Paul Campus has necessitated
              the development of a core  High Throughput Genetic Analysis Laboratory. In
              addition, university  strategic planning including the Colleges of Agriculture,
              Biological  Sciences, Medicine, and Veterinary Medicine lead to the recognition
               that the University of Minnesota now has the opportunity to establish  an
              internationally recognized center focusing on emerging DNA  technologies on the
              St. Paul Campus. Most importantly, as illustrated  by the individual project
              descriptions, is the already present critical  mass of researchers who have
              existing needs for high throughput DNA  sequencing and genotyping capabilities.
                 Such technologies will permit the utilization of DNA sequencing of  nuclear
              and mitochondrial DNA genes to address questions concerning  speciation
              patterns, phylogenetic relationships among plants, bacteria,  protozoan, birds
              and mammals. Technologies developed by the laboratory  will provide insights
              into strategies for monitoring environmental  changes, the identification of
              emerging plant and animal pathogens, and  direct genotypic selection for
              specific physiological characteristics.  The intellectual environment
              associated with such technologies will  foster new partnerships both between
              colleges as well as with the  private sector. Finally, this infrastructure will
              serve to enhance  undergraduate, graduate and professional student recruitment
              while  providing new training opportunities for current undergraduate and 
              graduates.    Critical for this  strategic venture is the presence of
              appropriate  faculty who will stimulate new interdisciplinary research programs
              and  who will bring new skills associated with these emerging technologies.  At
              present on the St. Paul Campus, the Food Animal Biotechnology Center 
              encompasses several different research programs that have as their goal  to
              develop new molecular technologies associated with animal production  through
              the identification and modulation of genes affecting growth,  development,
              reproductive performance, efficiency of feed conversion,  lactation and disease
              resistance. The goal of the Plant Molecular  Genetics Institute on the St. Paul
              Campus is to span the molecular,  cellular, and whole plant levels and to
              complement the University's  plant breeding programs. Finally, faculty in the
              College of Biological  Sciences play a leadership role in genetics and
              developmental biology  at the University of Minnesota. In order to provide for
              efficient and  effective utilization of this multiinvestigator laboratory,
              technical  support will also be provided as part of the institutional match.   
              To complement these existing programs, the College of Veterinary  Medicine is
              committed to hiring new faculty who will bring new skills  associated with
              these emerging technologies that require extensive  instrumentation. These
              individuals, who will have an already  established track record, will serve to
              stimulate future applications  and further intercollegiate interactions.
              Several of the participants  of this proposal will serve on theses search
              committees. In addition,  to stimulating faculty recruitment, this core
              laboratory will also  provide trained support staff, within and outside the
              university, to  permit contemporary usage of the equipment throughout the
              region.
