Title       : Values and Ecological Risk Assessment: Two Policy Paradigms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1998    
File        : a9512133

Award Number: 9512133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90010              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristin Shrader-Frechette Kristin.Shrader-Frechette.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Earl D. McCoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ingrid Bartsch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research project is undertaken by an experienced team:  a philosopher who
              specializes in environmental risk assessment and the ethics of scientific
              research and a biologist who specializes in habitat evaluation and ecological
              restoration.  The project has four objectives:  to examine and clarify the
              ethical dimensions of two dominant paradigms of ecological risk assessment; to
              discover major ethical assumptions built into the paradigms, so as to clarify
              the normative dimensions of these procedures; to assess the ethical
              consequences, for ecological research and environmental management, of
              alternative stances on questions about the normative foundations of these
              paradigms; and to evaluate the ethical adequacy of important applications of
              these assessments. The research plan involves careful reading and analysis of
              ecological risk assessments that incorporate the animal-toxicity and the
              ecological health approaches to identify and clarify their value assumptions
              and ethical implications.  The investigators will consider such questions as
              whether ecological risk assessment should include ethical goals or advocacy,
              economic measures of welfare, public preferences, or standards of ethical
              rationality.  Related questions include, whether the burden of proof should lie
              on ecologists or risk imposers and which assessment paradigm is likely to lead
              to greater good.  Through presentations and publications, the project teams
              expects to participate in on-going debates about the ethical aspects of
              ecological research and its environmental applications and about the
              contributions that ecologists can make to ethical debates about environmental
              issues.  The project will result in articles and presentations, and a book
              length monograph.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
