Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Policing in Transition: Relations Between the
               Royal Ulster Constabulary and Nationalist Communities in Northern Ireland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1995    
File        : a9512675

Award Number: 9512675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Musheno michael.musheno@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 1092,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9512675  Musheno  This project examines how examines how social diversity and
              community conflict affect the relationships between communities and the police
              in an especially difficult context where the police have undertaken reforms
              designed to gain acceptance for their authority from communities that have
              historically regarded them as illegitimate.  The context is Northern Ireland. 
              The project focuses on the globalization of policing strategies originating in
              the United States and now being adopted by the Northern Ireland police and by
              other police organizations worldwide.  It seeks to determine how and with what
              success the Northern Ireland police have sought the support of the Nationalist
              communities, who have most distrusted them, historically.  It uses data
              gathered from historical documents, police publications, and interviews with
              police officers and Nationalist community members.  It will be supplemented by
              intensive field work in a Nationalist community to illuminate how the history
              of conflict in Northern Ireland has affected police-community relations.  The
              study's findings should be relevant to understanding police-community pelations
              and to the establishment of more effective and accepted political authority in
              Northern Ireland.  %%%%  This project examines how examines how social
              diversity and community conflict affect the relationships between communities
              and the police in an especially difficult context where the police have
              undertaken reforms designed to gain acceptance for their authority from
              communities that have historically regarded them as illegitimate.  The context
              is Northern Ireland.  The project focuses on the globalization of policing
              strategies originating in the United States and now being adopted by the
              Northern Ireland police and by other police organizations worldwide. It uses
              data gathered from historical documents, police publications, and interviews
              with police officers and Nationalist community members and intensive field work
              in a Nationalist community to i lluminate how the history of conflict in
              Northern Ireland has affected police-community relations.  The study's findings
              should be relevant to understanding police-community relations and to the
              establishment of more effective and accepted political authority in Northern
              Ireland.
