Title       : A Confocal Fluorescence Microscope for the Study of the Cytoskeleton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1996   
File        : a9512962

Award Number: 9512962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Asai dasai@bilbo.bio.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This is a group proposal to purchase a scanning laser confocal  fluorescence
              microscope. The microscope will be the centerpiece of a  new Shared Facility
              for Fluorescence Microscopy which will serve as the  focus of the
              investigators' research projects and as the key element in  a new laboratory
              course for undergraduates.    Each of the six investigators studies aspects of
              the cytoskeleton in a  developing system, focussing on the elucidation of
              cytoarchitectural  remodeling and the organization of motile organelles. The
              goal of all  of the projects is to utilize high resolution fluorescence
              microscopy  to determine how the cytoskeletal components organize and
              re-organize  during development. Because of the complexity, thickness, and
              optical  opacity of the experimental systems used by the investigators (plant 
              cells, sea urchin eggs and embryos, Drosophila embryos, leech nervous  system
              ciliated protozoans), conventional immunofluorescence is often  of insufficient
              quality for the studies. The problem is solved by the  application of confocal
              fluorescence microscopy; this is clearly  demonstrated in the preliminary
              confocal microscopy work by the  investigators. Unfortunately, the existing
              instruments, located in  other departments and which might be used for these
              studies, are  heavily oversubscribed and costly. Thus, although the
              investigators are  asking fascinating questions in excellent model systems and
              with highly  specific tools, they are severely limited by a lack of equipment.
              The  group of investigators is of the ideal size to share a microscope. And 
              the microscope will prove to be a natural stimulus for the continued  close
              interactions among these research groups.    A second important feature of the
              proposal is that the confocal  microscope will be utilized in the education and
              training of many  students. Currently, among the six laboratories, there are 18
              graduate  students and 17 undergraduate students; these 35 students include 14 
              women, 4 African Americans, and 4 Asian Ameri cans. The projects  described
              here will be performed by these students, and they will  therefore be able to
              work directly with state-of-the-art equipment. A  second exciting way the
              equipment will be utilized is as the  centerpiece in a new undergraduate
              laboratory course, taught by the six  investigators. The course will enable
              undergraduates to design,  implement, and discuss mini-projects focussed on the
              cytoskeleton in  developing systems using conventional and confocal
              immunofluorescence  microscopy.
