Title       : Computational Approach to the Developmental Biology of Dictyostelium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9512809

Award Number: 9512809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $566352             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert Levine hlevine@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Statement of Objectives  The  objective  of  this research is to develop  a 
              computational  model  for  the morphogenesis which occurs in the development 
              of  Dictyostelium  discoideum.  The  life  cycle  of  this  microbial 
              eukaryote  progresses  from  that  of  a  solitary  amoeba  to  a 
              differentiated  multicellular  organism,  under  the  control  of  interlinked
              genetic and physico-chemical processes. The work will  focus   on  extending 
              successful  models  of  early  aggregation  (encompassing chemotaxis and
              nonlinear cAMP waves) to  the  mound  structure   and   subsequent  tip 
              elongation;  also,   we   will  incorporate recent data regarding the role of
              genetic networks in  the  signal  transduction process into a more 
              sophisticated  and  hence  more predictive cAMP wave model. Experiments will be
               used  to   motivate   modeling   choices  and  subsequently   to   test 
              predictions,  leading  after  several  iterative  cycles   to   a  simulation 
              capability currently unavailable  for  this  (or  any  other) developmental
              biology system.    Methods to be Employed  Simulations  will  be  based  on the
              recently  introduced  hybrid  scheme where the individual amoebae are treated
              as automata which  interact  with  the  physical world of chemical  signals, 
              stress  fields, etc., treated as a continuum. This methodology allows the 
              modeler  great flexibility in representing the manner in which  a 
              Dictyostelium  cell  obtains  information  from  the  surrounding  world,
              reacts (via moving, emission of chemicals, modification of  its  internal 
              state  variables, etc) to  that  data.  Supporting  experiments will be
              performed by confocal fluorescence microscopy  using  cells  which  express
              green fluorescent  protein  under  a  variety  of  distinct promoters. This
              setup allows us to  measure  mound morphology dynamics as well as track
              individual cells (from  specific  differentiated cell lines if  needed  )  in 
              the  three  dimensional multicellular body.    Significance  of  the  Propose d
              Activity to  the  Advancement  of  Knowledge or Education  Computational
              methods are beginning to play an important role  in  biology.   As  the 
              experimental  data  begin  to  indicate   the  complexity  of  genetic
              interactions and how these exert  control  over  the  developmental program,
              one will increasingly  need  to  rely on computational procedures to get from
              single cell behavior  to  multicellular morphogenesis. This research  suggests 
              a  case  study of the? possible role of computation for the development of 
              Dictyostelium. If successful, it will not only speed the rate  of  progresq  in
               understanding Dictyostelium development,  but  will  also  serve  as  a  guide
               for longer term  efforts  to  bring  a  predictive  simulational  capability 
              to  the  entire  field   of  developmental biology.
