Title       : Acquisition of Transient Kinetic Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1995      
File        : a9512166

Award Number: 9512166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138440             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael I. Schimerlik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9161,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Funds are requested to purchase transient kinetic equipment to be  employed in
              research projects from eleven different laboratories at  C)region State
              University. The users represent four departments:  Biochemistry and Biophysics,
              Agricultural Chemistry, the College of  Pharmacy and the Department of Food
              Science and Technology. The  equipment will allow the users to pursue new
              approaches to their  respective research problems in the areas of protein
              folding,  protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions, DNA and protein 
              structure, protein- and receptorligand interactions, kinetic studies of 
              enzymes, the coupling of receptors to ion channels and the relationship 
              between mitochondrial integrity, oxidative stress and Ca2+ overload.    The
              availability of this equipment should serve to attract other  researchers at
              Oregon State University interested in mechanistic  studies and will therefore
              serve as an important resource for faculty,  postdoctorals, graduate students
              and undergraduates pursuing these  research areas. Since the equipment is novel
              to Oregon, it may also  attract users from other institutions within the state.
              One major  feature of the instrumentation is the ease of data collection and 
              analysis. This should facilitate user training and increase the  enthusiasm of
              users in applying kinetic, mechanistic approaches in  their research.    The
              principal investigator is Dr. Michael Schimerlik. The PI received  his Ph.D. in
              enzyme kinetics with Professor W.W. Cleland at Wisconsin  and training in
              transient kinetics while a postdoctoral at The  California Institute of
              Technology with Professor M.A. Raftery where he  conducted stopped-flow studies
              of ligand interactions with the  nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. Since coming
              to Oregon State, the PI  has published manuscripts concerning transient kinetic
              studies in the  areas of protein-protein interactions and enzyme mechanisms and
              is  capable of analysis of kinetic mechanisms by fitting data to  analytically
              derived rate equations or, i n more complicated instances,  using computer
              simulations to examine mechanistic models. Several other  investigators (Drs.
              Penner, van Holde, Ho, Anderson and Hsu) also  possess expertise in transient
              kinetic theory.    Transient kinetic equipment existing at Oregon State is
              about fifteen  years old, and no longer supported by the manufacturer. No
              facilities  are available for quench flow experiments for use in combination
              with  state of the art facilities at the institution in mass spectrometry or 
              NMR for studies of protein folding. No facilities are available for  rapid
              acquisition of circular dichroism spectra to examine structural  changes that
              occur in protein folding, ligand binding, DNA and protein  structural
              transitions, or macromolecular assembly or dissociation  reactions. The
              abilities to acquire fluorescence or absorbance spectra  as a function of time,
              or to measure time-dependent changes in  fluorescence polarization are also
              lacking. These techniques provide  additional sensitivity and enhance the
              analysis of complicated  mechanisms. Most importantly, the software for data
              acquisition and  analysis is far superior to that currently available.    In
              summary, the proposed kinetic equipment will add important new  capabilities in
              transient kinetics not currently available at Oregon  State University. In
              addition it will provide greatly enhanced  capabilities over that of our
              currently available, outdated equipment  both in the type of data acquired and
              in its analysis. This will not  only expand the research horizons of
              laboratories doing kinetic studies  but, also because of its
              "user-friendliness", serve to attract  postdoctorals, graduate students and
              undergraduates so that these  individuals will receive training in transient
              kinetic methods.
