Title       : NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program: Theoretical and Numerical Investigations of
               Relaxation in Metastable Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1996   
File        : a9512679

Award Number: 9512679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18401              (Estimated)
Investigator: Per Arne Rikvold rikvold@csit.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This award supports the collaboration of Professor Per Arne Rikvold of the
              Physics Department, Center for Materials Research and Technology, and
              Supercomputer Computations Institute at Florida State University with Professor
              Hiroyuki Tomita of the Department of Fundamental Sciences in the Faculty of
              Integrated Human Studies at Kyoto University. Project funding will enable Dr.
              Rikvold to spend 3.5 months at Kyoto University to study nonequilibrium
              statistical-mechanics aspects of metastable phases of matter and their decay.
              Metastable phases are ubiquitous in nature and include such familiar examples
              as the diamond phase of carbon, supercooled water, and permanent magnets. Drs.
              Rikvold and Tomita have both previously studied this common but as-yet
              ill-understood state of matter, using analytical and numerical methods.   By
              bringing together researchers from the U.S. and Japan working on the
              nonequilibrium statistical mechanics of metastability, the proposed research
              visit will enhance the research in this area in both countries. The U.S.
              scientist will have the opportunity to become familiar with the work performed
              at Kyoto University and other Japanese institutions, while informing Japanese
              researchers of recent results of U.S. research. Therefore, this proposal
              fulfills the objectives of the Program in its exchange and transfer of
              scientific knowledge through international collaboration.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
