Title       : Acquisition of a New-Generation, Variable Pressure, Digital Scanning Electron
               Microscope for Multi-Disciplinary Studies in Biological Sciences and
               Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1996   
File        : a9512908

Award Number: 9512908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85661              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry T. Horner hth@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn G. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Braun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jay-lin Jane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    This proposal requests a new-generation, variable-vacuum  (pressure)
              scanning electron  microscope (SEM), for the central Bessey Microscopy Facility
              (BMF) at  Iowa State University, with a digital image enhancement system for 
              observing details more clearly with simple operation using automated 
              functions, and capable of providing high resolution (@ 3.5nm at 30 kV).  This
              instrument can be retrofitted with a cryopreservation system and a  x-ray
              energy dispersive detector already in use in the BMF. Certain  modern-day SEMs
              are able to provide both high-resolution, bright images  at high vacuum over a
              range of kVs and magnifications, and at low  vacuums and kVs to reduce specimen
              radiation damage and charging, but  also with good resolution. Need for a high
              performance, high resolution  SEM has become a basic requirement in biological
              sciences, and in other  diverse areas of scientific research. In addition,
              interest of using  SEM at a kV below SkV is also recognized in such
              applications as  studying intracellular ultrastructure, detection and
              identification of  5-10 nm colloidal gold markers for immunocytochemical
              labeling with a  backscattered detector, and particularly viewing beam
              sensitive and/or  unstable specimens such as food products and other delicate
              biological  samples which cannot withstand high accelerating voltages and beam 
              currents. These latter specimens can be preserved by using quick  freezing
              capabilities such as with a cryopreservation unit and a  propane jet freezer
              already available in the BMF. It is also important  to observe with increased
              resolution surface structures and fracture  faces of specimens and, at the same
              time, to provide x-ray elemental  analysis of localized substances within these
              surfaces. Compositional  information and corresponding surface ultrastructure
              can also be  determined and analyzed with a backscattered electron detector.
              Six  specific research projects have been identified on the Iowa State 
              University campus which would directly benefit  from a new-generation, 
              high-resolution, and variable-vacuum SEM with the above capabilities.  There
              are a number of other projects that would also benefit from this 
              new-generation SEM by a wide variety of other users of the BMF.
