Title       : Scanning Laser Force Microscope with Nanometer Resolution for Dynamic Imaging of
               Single Biomolecules Under Physiological Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9512699

Award Number: 9512699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359154             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christoph F. Schmidt cfs@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              0510400   Physically Disadvantaged                
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9162,9181,9183,9184,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The ideal biological microscmpe should have enough resolution to image 
              biological macromolecules on a nanometer scale, should image in  physiological,
              watery conditions, and should have sufficient temporal  resolution to follow
              crucial dynamic processes on the scale of  macromolecules, macromolecular
              assemblies and cells. An important  unsolved problem in biology that highlights
              the potential usefulness of  such an instrument is the micromechanical function
              of the ubiquitous  motor proteins. Motor proteins are the driving force behind
              processes  such as muscle contraction, cell locomotion, ciliar and flagellar 
              beating, mitosis, meiosis, intracellular transport, DNA replication and 
              transcription and protein synthesis.      The goal of the proposed feasibility
              study is to develop a microscope  with molecular resolution, based on scanning
              a nanofabricated silicon  tip over a protein sample using a single beam laser
              optical trap  (optical tweezers). The trapping laser will double as 
              displacement/force sensor, recording the interaction force between tip  and
              sample. The displacement signal will be fed into a feed-back loop  keeping the
              tip at a constant distance from the sample, thus imaging  its contours.      As
              proof-of-concept, cytoskeletal protein polymers will be imaged to  demonstrate
              spatial resolution. The motor proteins kinesin and ncd will  be imaged on
              microtubules, with the goal of resolving the movement of  the individual heads
              of the motors and their tracking on the  microtubule surface. Single headed
              truncated motors will be imaged in  comparison, with the goal of understanding
              the cooperativity of the two  heads of native kinesin and ncd, and to test if a
              single head can  produce movement at all.      The project will be an
              interdisciplinary collaboration between i) a  nanofabrication laboratory,
              providing expertise to develop a process to  manufacture exactly defined
              silicon tips with nm features and a  controlled surface chemistry, ii) a
              physics/biophysics laboratory  providing  expertise in instrument building,
              microscopy and laser  technology, and iii) a molecular biology laboratory
              providing the  expertise in protein biochemistry and developing procedures to
              produce  well characterized cytoskeletal and motor proteins and modified 
              proteins using an E.coli expression system.      If successful, the proposed
              instrument would constitute a major  advance in microstructure determination,
              uniquely matched to the  requirements of biological research. It would make it
              possible to  dynamically image the fundamental functional units of biology, 
              proteins, DNA, RNA, "at work". The instrument would have a broad range  of
              applications, especially in the life sciences, and a multitude of  fundamental
              questions appear solvable, by "looking and seeing how  things work".
