Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Automated DNA Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9512344

Award Number: 9512344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Meeks-Wagner wagner@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George F. Sprague  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Monte Westerfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We propose to establish a DNA analysis facility with the purchase of  several
              key instruments for the automated analysis of DNA molecules.  The
              instrumentation requested is commercially available and represents  the core of
              many genome and DNA sequencing centers at other major  research universities.
              This type of facility is essential for research  projects that require
              experiments to be done on a genome-wide scale.  There are currently three such
              research programs at the University of  Oregon; all of these absolutely require
              the establishment of the  proposed DNA analysis facility if they are to achieve
              their stated  goals. In addition, the acquisition of the requested
              instrumentation is  likely to have significant ancillary benefits. Many other
              users of the  instruments will be able to complete their projects more
              efficiently  and economically by incorporating the automated methods into their
               research programs. The establishment of the DNA analysis facility  should also
              greatly aid our recruitment of new faculty with research  interests in
              developmental genetics, molecular neuroscience and  molecular evolution. These
              are all areas in which we plan to hire new  faculty in the near future.   
              Specifically, funds are requested for: 1) an Integrated Separation  Systems
              AutoGen 740 that can prepare up to 200 DNA samples of viral  DNA, bacterial
              plasmid DNA, yeast artificial chromosomal (YAC) DNA or  genomic DNA in a 24
              hour period; 2) a Biomek 2000 robotic workstation  and sideloader for robotic
              manipulations of clones and nucleic acids;  and 3) an ABI 377 DNA sequencer and
              the necessary accessories to  perform high throughput automated DNA sequence
              and microsatellite  analysis. In addition, several small equipment items
              (including  Macintosh PowerPC 8100, two GeneAmp 9600 thermocyclers, and two 
              microfuges) are requested to equip the DNA analysis facility.    Presently,
              there is no facility in the State of Oregon that can provide  the research
              support of the proposed DNA analysis facility. Fundin g  this proposal will
              allow the faculty to fully develop recently  initiated projects that utilize
              emerging intellectual and technical  advances in the genetic analysis of
              complex (quantitative) characters,  and that take advantage of map-based
              cloning strategies to isolate and  characterize genes of major effect. These
              projects all aim to elucidate  the genetic and molecular basis of fundamental
              biological processes,  and encompass a broad spectrum of biology, from
              evolution and  population genetics, to developmental genetics, to behavioral
              genetics.  For example, the plant genetics project that will supported by these
               instruments will identify genes within the plant genome that control  the
              evolution of different strategies of plant reproduction within a  single
              species in which individuals have been geographically isolated  for many
              generations. The dog project uses the same experimental logic  being applied in
              the plant project, but in this case, the plan is to  take advantage of the
              striking morphological and behavioral differences  between dog breeds to gain
              insight into the genetic and molecular basis  for these differences. The
              zebrafish research efforts are concentrated  on identifying genes important for
              embryonic development of the  organism, including genes required for the proper
              development and  functioning of the nervous system. An important approach which
              is being  pursued by these investigators is to identify new mutations that
              effect  developmental processes in question. The ability to place these new 
              mutations onto a high quality genetic map will facilitate the cloning  of the
              genes and eventual molecular understanding of how these genes  function.    It
              should be noted that many of the projects described in this proposal  are
              collaborative in nature. This reflects the efforts of our faculty  to combine
              our individual expertise in order to advance our fields of  interest more
              rapidly. Establishing the DNA analysis facility with the  acquisition of the
              requested instrumentati on will represent a major  advance in these
              collaborative efforts, and will provide the  infrastructure necessary for the
              success of our research programs.
