Title       : Acquisition of High-Speed Multi-Parameter Flow Cytometry Sorter and Analyzer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1995    
File        : a9512500

Award Number: 9512500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Weigert   (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert Bendelac  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Acquisition of DNA Analysis Instrumentation for Molecular Studies         Our
              goal is to establish a common core facility for DNA sequence  analysis. We
              propose to purchase:  an Automated DNA Sequencer; a molecular biology CATALYST
              Labstation; an  Oligo Synthesizer; a PhosphorImager workstation; a Fluorimager;
              a  Computer System; a Biomek II robot; a Thermocycler: an Automated Film 
              Developer: a Vacuum Centrifuge: a Photodocumentation Station; and two  Ultra
              Cold Freezers (-80 and -30).          The participating faculty address a wide
              range of research  related to biodiversity and biotechnology. Their efforts
              share a common  theme of DNA sequence analysis and fall into two major areas:
              1)  Molecular genetic approaches to study gene expression, RNA processing,  and
              molecular phylogeny, and 2) Molecular approaches in the study of  Population
              Genetics, Ecology, and Evolution. In the area of Molecular  genetic approaches
              to study gene expression. RNA processing. and  molecular phylogeny, faculty
              research and research training include:  Whalen's molecular genetic analyses of
              interactions between bacterial  pathogens and plants; Marquez-Magana's
              investigations of the molecular  mechanisms that regulate flagellin gene
              expression in Bacillus  subtilis; and Davis's functional significance and
              regulation of spliced  leader RNA trans-splicing in metazoa, the evolution of
              parasitism in  flatworms, and the molecular phylogeny of flatworms and early
              metazoa.  The focus of Ramirez' s research is to clone the RECI gene and
              further  characterize the RPD3 (a.k.a. REC3) genes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
              which are implicated in the repair of damaged DNA and in mitotic 
              recombination. Goldman focuses on a structural unit of the eukaryotic 
              chromosome, the chromatin domain or loop, and its potential role as a 
              functional unit in the regulation of gene expression in mammalian X- 
              chromosome inactivation and genomic imprinting. Perara investigates  molecular
              approaches to the problem of protein transport across  cell ular membranes,
              with the primary focus on a systematic comparison  of the molecular mechanisms
              of secretory protein transport across the  endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane
              and the bacterial periplasmic  membrane. In the area of Molecular approaches in
              the study of  Population Genetics. Ecology and Evolution, faculty research and 
              research training include: Parker/Cullings' studies of plant community  and
              evolutionary ecology, dynamics of plant recruitment, life history  evolution
              and community turnover rates; Smith/Bayliss' investigations  of evolutionary
              ecology and conservation biology with research focus on  the role of transition
              zones between rain forest and savannah in  speciation and their role as related
              to conservation of rain forest  species; Arp's studies of physiological
              adaptation to environment,  sulfide tolerance and detoxification in mudflat
              invertebrates, ecology  and physiology of hydrothermal vent organisms;
              Randall's investigations  of evolution of communication and social organization
              in desert  rodents; and Routman' s use of modem molecular genetics to examine 
              population structure, biogeography and intraspecific phylogeny, and the 
              genetic architecture of complex phenotypes. Larson's research is in  population
              biology of nearshore teleost fishes, including their  behavior, feeding
              ecology, life histories, and population structure.  Desjardin focuses on
              taxonomy and phylogeny of fleshy fungi, primarily  Agaricales, using
              traditional and modern aspects of systematics,  including cladistic and
              morphometric analysis, utilizing morphological,  ecological, physiological,
              genetic and molecular data. Hollibaugh  addresses physiological ecology of
              bacterial communities in geochemical  cycles and foodwebs. Orrego employs the
              techniques of molecular  genetics for the study of genetic variation in natural
              populations as  displayed by sequences obtained via long distance PCR methods. 
                          Our proposed instrumentation will increase the amount and 
              efficiency of our research an d training efforts and enable us to train  a
              greater number of students. The requested equipment will provide the  highest
              resolution available for the analysis of DNA/RNA using PCR  amplification, DNA
              sequencing, Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis  (DGGE), Single Strand
              Conformation Polymorphisms (SSCP), and a variety  of other DNA/RNA detection
              and analytical methods. With the increased  throughput capacity for large
              numbers of samples that can be processed  rapidly and efficiently with longer
              sequence reading (>700 bp), we will  be able to do new high resolution analysis
              on much greater numbers of  samples more rapidly than in the past. For example,
              the ABI 377  Sequencer provides new longer gel formats that allow one to read
              700  bases/run and 36 lanes/run that can be completed in 8 hour (or  overnight)
              runs and 300-500 bp runs in 2.25 hours, allowing 3 runs in  an eight hour
              period. Several faculty (Davis, Hollibaugh, and Parker)  will collectively
              sequence in excess of 10,000 samples/year which  represents one run of 36
              samples each day for a year. While this alone  clearly justifies our need, the
              acquisition of the proposed  instrumentation would also allow us the capacity
              to triple this number.  We will also use the equipment for faculty enhancement
              short courses;  since 1991 we have presented 10 such courses-to over 240
              faculty from  35 states.
