Title       : Acquisition of 10 Broadband Seismographs for Enhancement of TERRAscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1995    
File        : a9512201

Award Number: 9512201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hiroo Kanamori hiroo@gps.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Egill Hauksson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Clayton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald V. Helmberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9157,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9512201  Kanamori    This grant provides partial support (48%) for the costs of 
              acquisition and installation of state-of-the-art digital  seismographic
              stations in southern California.  Each station  consists of a broadband
              Streickeisen (STS-2) seismometer, a force  balanced accelerometer, and a 6
              channel 24 bit Quanterra Inc.  data logger.  Five new stations are planned. 
              This  instrumentation can measure seismic waves from small and large 
              earthquakes as well as from teleseisms and regional earthquakes  accurately and
              completely.  The new proposed instrumentation  complements the existing network
              of broadband seismographic  stations, called TERRAscope.  Currently, TERRAscope
              consists of  17 stations.  The new instrumentation will significantly increase 
              the spatial resolution of TERRAscope by reducing current station  spacing of
              150 km by tens of kilometers within the central part  of the network. 
              Currently, most existing earthquake data for  Southern California are of
              limited dynamic range or are measured  over very narrow frequency bands and
              thus their usefulness for  general research is limited.  Furthermore,
              pre-TERRAscope  instrumentation was not calibrated with sufficient accuracy to 
              provide quantitative amplitude data.  The location of these  instruments in
              southern California provides the additional  benefit of being able to record
              large California earthquakes on  scale and study their source physics in
              unprecedented detail.  The type of research and research training to be
              conducted will  be fundamental seismological studies of earth structure and 
              earthquake physics, as well as training of Ph.D. candidates and  postdoctoral
              fellows in observational and theoretical seismology.  Examples of the projects
              that will be carried out using the new  data are: 1) determination of the
              structure of the core mantle  boundary; 2) imaging of the Pacific-North America
              plate boundary  in southern California; 3) studies of earthquake source physics
               of both teleseisms around the world and regional  earthquakes in  the Western
              US, 4) new theoretical and computational methods for  modeling the seismic data
              will be developed.  This project will  benefit from existing and other proposed
              projects at Caltech  related to the earthquake monitoring effort. The Pacific
              Bell  foundation (CalREN) is providing digital data transmission at no  cost. 
              Other projects are providing software support and data  processing facilities.
              The Data Center of the Southern California  Earthquake Center located at
              Caltech and the IRIS DMS will  distribute the data to the seismological
              research community via  INTERNET.    ***
