Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for an Oklahoma Statewide Shared NMR Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1995    
File        : a9512269

Award Number: 9512269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $735000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren T. Ford wtford@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9157,9162,9184,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Support is requested for the purchase of a 600 MHz NMR spectrometer to  be
              housed in the Department of Chemistry at Oklahoma State University,  for an
              upgrade of an on-site 400 MHz instrument, and for data stations  to link
              students and researchers at institutions all over the State of  Oklahoma to the
              NMR Facility. The key to statewide use of the facility  is communication via
              the Oklahoma ONENET, a 45 Mb/sec Ethernet system  that links Oklahoma State
              University (Stillwater), the Oklahoma Health  Sciences Center (Oklahoma City),
              and the University of Oklahoma  (Norman). The data stations at the research
              universities will be used  for remote control of the 600 MHz spectrometer,
              off-line data analysis  of multidimensional spectra from the 600 MHz
              instrument, and off-site  instruction of research associates and graduate
              students in modern NMR  spectroscopy. The Oklahoma ONENET has 1 Mb/sec service
              to link the NMR  facility to data stations at 6 regional universities for the
              education  of undergraduate science majors in modern NMR spectroscopy and for 
              analysis of spectra from the 400 MHz instrument. A state-of-the-art 300  MHz
              NMR spectrometer dedicated to the study of solid state materials  and installed
              at OSU in 1993 will also become part of the statewide NMR  Facility.    The
              centerpiece of the proposed Facility is a 600 MHz NMR spectrometer  to be used
              by researchers at the Oklahoma Health Sciences Center  (OHSC), University of
              Oklahoma (OU), and Oklahoma State University  (OSU) for the study of
              glycopeptides, derivatives of ubiquinone bound  to proteins, structures of
              paramagnetic proteins, microstructures of  synthetic polymers, components of
              primary plant cell walls, and organic  natural products from marine sources.
              For this research, high  spectrometer frequency is needed to disperse spectral
              signals that  overlap at lower frequencies. The proposed 3-channel 600 MHz 
              spectrometer will be equipped with pulsed field gradient (PFG) and  waveform
              generation capabilities required for state-of -the-art NMR  experiments, and
              with probes ranging from a microprobe for study of  submicromole amounts of
              natural materials to a 10 mm probe with an  enhanced shim set for study of
              proteins of limited solubility.    The 400 MHz NMR spectrometer at OSU, which
              was installed in 1988, will  be upgraded to a 3-channel unit and have many of
              the same capabilities  as the 600 MHz unit: pulsed field gradients, waveform
              generation,  direct and indirect probes. It will be used for experiments that
              do not  require the 600 MHz spectrometer and for preliminary experiments on 
              certain samples that may later require the 600 MHz spectrometer.    Policies of
              the Facility will be established by a statewide committee  of users and
              administered by an OSU Faculty Director. Daily operation  of the Facility will
              be the respmnsibility of the Facility Manager, a  full time Ph.D.
              spectroscopist with responsibilities to assist and  train users in the design,
              execution, and interpretation of  experiments. An electronics technician
              dedicated full time to the  Facility will maintain the equipment.     Linkage
              of the Facility spectrometers at OSU to the research centers  at OU and OHSC
              and to the regional universities in Oklahoma via the  Oklahoma ONENET will
              provide both rapid communication between the NMR  facility and off-site users
              and the mechanism for instruction of  students at all levels by the Facility
              Manager and OSU faculty in  modern NMR spectroscopy. OSU is a leader in
              providing instruction via  telecommunication. Thus the project will both
              markedly enhance research  capabilities for determination of structures of
              natural and synthetic  macromolecules at three research universities, and
              expand education in  modern NMR spectroscopy to more than 85% of the
              undergraduate students  majoring in chemistry and biochemistry in Oklahoma.   
              The office of the Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education envisions  the
              proposed Olclahoma Statewide Shared NMR Facility evolving into a  distributive
              facility with major NMR inst ruments at various sites in  Oklahoma all
              connected by Internet to scientists throughout the state.
