Title       : Improvements at Las Cruces Biological Station to Enhance Tropical Training and
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1996   
File        : a9512631

Award Number: 9512631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350680             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Hartshorn ghartsho@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald E. Stone  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  The Organization for Tropical Studies, Inc. (OTS) has three  biological
              field stations in Costa Rica that are used by a  broad spectrum of the
              international scientific community; La  Selva (wet lowland rainforest) is
              developed and well along  the way to achieving its training and research
              potential;  Palo Verde (seasonally dry lowland forest) is a diamond is  the
              rough with primitive facilities that have been stressed  beyond capabilities to
              service the demand -- so upgrading  activities are underway here; and Las
              Cruces (we mid-  elevation premontane rainforest) did lie somewhere between 
              the above two stations in terms of infrastructure, but  suffered a disastrous
              loss of buildings, equipment and  supplies when fire struck on the evening of
              November 23,  1994.    This loss has come at a particularly critical time in
              the  development of the Las Cruces station as it struggles to  accommodate the
              demand by courses and researchers,  particularly those interested in highly
              diverse mid-  elevation ecosystems that are most heavily preferred and  used by
              human populations.  The recent surge in activity by  conversation biologists,
              foresters, and agroecologists has  added a sustainable development dimension to
              the traditional  by systematists and ecologists.  Because of the importance  of
              this station on the regional, national, and international  scene, plans are
              underway to streamline and rebuild the  station.    This project will support
              activities to: 1) remodel an  existing house to replace some of the capacity
              that was lost  for accommodating groups of students and researchers; 2) 
              refurbish the general-purpose laboratory that survived the  fire; 3) construct
              a number of spatially separated buildings  to replace the balance of what was
              lost in the fire (viz.  long-term researcher housing, research laboratory, and
              a  general services building that will house the kitchen,  dining room, office,
              supply room and laundry); and 4)  replace the lost equipment and supplies.   
              Like the rise of the phoe nix from the ashes, Las Cruces has  taken this
              calamity as a challenge and is making the most of  a sad situation to develop a
              sound and frugal plan for its  resurrection.  OTS is seizing on this
              opportunity to tailor  the new facilities to the user's needs.
