Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for Studies of Protein Structure and Function at the
               University of Nevada, Reno
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1995     
File        : a9512482

Award Number: 9512482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Schooley schooley@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Welch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this proposal is to make a major improvement  in the quality and
              capability of instrumentation available  on campus for research and training in
              protein chemistry and  physics. The five items requested build on a base of 
              existing equipment and faculty acquired and supported by the  University over
              the last several years. As programs in the  natural sciences have developed in
              Nevada, there has been an  increasing amount of research and teaching involving
               proteins and peptides, including molecular recognition and  protein/peptide
              interactions. This has put a heavy demand on  existing equipment used for
              protein analysis and accentuated  the need for protein technologies not yet
              available in  the State of Nevada. The proposed instruments will enhance  our
              capabilities in this area in three aspects:  (1) the  analysis of protein
              structure and macromolecular and protein-  ligand interactions (protein
              sequencer, MALDI-TOF mass  spectrometer, life time fluorescence spectroscopy),
              (2) the  visualization and interpretation of experimental data,  modeling of
              biopolymer conformation and receptor-ligand  interactions, hypothesis building,
              and engineering of  proteins (high capacity graphics workstation), and (3) the 
              chemical synthesis of peptides (peptide synthesizer).    The equipment
              requested will serve students and faculty in  the University of Nevada's
              growing undergraduate, graduate,  and postdoctoral training programs. The
              University has a  large undergraduate Biochemistry program; each Biochemistry 
              major is required to complete a year-long laboratory-based  thesis project.
              There are multi-departmental graduate  programs in Biochemistry, Cellular and
              Molecular Biology,  Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, and 
              allied fields which share faculty and resources. The  physical and/or chemical
              principles behind the requested  equipment are already taught in didactic
              courses for  graduate and undergraduate students. Availability of such 
              equipment on campus is an enormous b enefit in the training  of the next
              generation of researchers and technicians.    The equipment will be shared with
              members of five  departments and three interdisciplinary   graduate programs.
              The requested equipment would have an  immediate impact on (A) 35 faculty in
              Biochemistry, Cell and  Molecular Biology and allied areas, (B) 20 postdoctoral
               fellows, (C) 56 graduate students in Biochemistry and Cell  and Molecular
              Biology and (D) 113 undergraduate biochemistry  majors. The greatest initial
              use will come from the 30  members of the major users' laboratories;  previous 
              experience on this campus with existing equipment has shown  that the demand
              will grow exponentially. Equipment such as  the MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer and
              peptide synthesizer will  quickly acquire users from students of at least ten
              other  faculty members.    Full funding of this proposal would permit a major
              increase  in both the quality and the quantity of training offered to 
              undergraduates, pre-doctoral and post-doctoral trainees. It  would permit
              exposure to technologies (time-resolved  fluorescence, peptide synthesis) not
              presently available on  campus and greatly enhance the availability of other 
              technologies (molecular modeling, peptide sequencing)  already present but
              being conducted on overloaded or  obsolete equipment.
