Title       : Acquisition of Computer Equipment for Development of Algorithms for Scientific
               Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1998      
File        : a9512142

Award Number: 9512142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Kinderlehrer davidk@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ling Ma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roy A. Nicolaides  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shlomo Ta'asan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Noel J. Walkington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This equipment will be used to support research and graduate and undergraduate
              education in the mathematical sciences.  The Department of Mathematics at
              Carnegie Mellon has a strong program in numerical analysis which attracts some
              of the most talented graduate students in our Ph.D. program.  This equipment
              will be used by the principal investigators, visitors, postdoctoral fellows,
              and their graduate students to enhance ongoing research programs in
              computational material science and multilevel computational techniques.  The
              CMU program in material science has application in computing the properties of
              materials that exhibit complex fine scale phenomena.  These  problems appear in
              the study of metallurgy, magnetism, optimal design, etc. where fine scale
              (microscopic) variations are frequently observed.  Recent mathematical advances
              suggest that these oscillations are governed by energy considerations, and can
              often be characterized by a macroscopic (slowly varying) quantity, the Young
              measure.  Such characterizations provide a basis for the efficient numerical
              modeling and  approximation of these materials and their properties.  The
              development, analysis, and testing of algorithms for the solution of such
              problems is considered in this proposal.  The research program on efficient
              algorithms - especially multilevel algorithms- is aimed at making optimal
              design calculations in acoustics, electromagnetism, shape optimization, and
              nondestructive testing computationally feasible.  Efficient solution of such
              problems requires multiple solutions for the underlying problem in order to
              isolate an optimal solution:  the problems we consider would be impractical
              without powerful computation algorithms of the kind under investigation. 
              Multilevel computational techniques are very effective solution methods in a
              variety of different fields of science and engineering.  The authors have been
              involved in developing these methods for a variety of problems with great
              success.  The proposed research deals with new developments of these techniques
              for boundary related optimization problems governed by non-elliptic systems,
              and for the efficient discretization and multilevel time marching techniques
              for hyperbolic evolution problems.  Applications of these techniques include
              problems arising in electromag netism, design of microwave devices, acoustic
              noise reduction, non-destructive testing, and the control of  fluid flows.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
