Title       : Facility Request: Center for Limnology - Trout Lake Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1997      
File        : a9512606

Award Number: 9512606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy K. Kratz tkkratz@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Frost  (Principal Investigator former)
              John J. Magnuson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Kitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Carpenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The Center for Limnology's Trout Lake Station provides  access to a region
              with one of  the densest concentrations of lakes in the world.  Aquatic 
              systems in this region range  from temporary ponds to large lakes and represent
              a broad  diversity of hydrologic, edaphic,  and trophic conditions.  Most of
              these systems lie within  protected watersheds with low  population densities. 
              The diversity of these resources has  led to an extensive history of aquatic 
              research at the station.  Early work began with the  pioneering comparative
              investigations of  Birge and Juday and was expanded upon by the whole-system 
              experiments conducted by Hasler.  Current programs at Trout Lake include
              several multi  investigator, ecosystem-level investigations  well as numerous
              smaller-scale projects involving population  and community ecology, hydrology, 
              fisheries biology, and basic limnology.  Research activities  at the station
              have undergone a major  improvements in both the physical plant and the
              research  capabilities of the station.  This support  will continue
              improvements in basic research capabilities.  Specifically, support will be
              provided  for instrument systems (a dissolved inorganic carbon,  dissolved
              organic carbon analysis system;  a dissolved oxygen, multi-parameter water
              monitor; and a  hydroacoustic, fish sensing system)  which will contribute
              substantially to the basic research  capacity of the station.  These
              improvements  will help meet  the primary goal of maintaining the Trout  Lake
              Station as a national and inter-  national center for aquatic research.
