Title       : Acquisition of a Confocal Scanning Laser Microscopic Work Station with off-line
               Analytical Capacity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1997   
File        : a9512611

Award Number: 9512611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170059             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred J. Roisen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Madi Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nigel G. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven R. Ellis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Jumblatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Recent technical advances have transformed the optical microscope from  an
              information gathering tool into an interactive analytical instrument  capable
              of detecting, manipulating, quantifying and sorting  subcellular, cellular and
              tissue specific properties. This application  requests funds for the purchase
              of an Ultima 312TM Premium Laser  Confocal Microscopic workstation
              (manufactured by Meridian Instruments,  Inc.) with enhanced interactive
              software for data acquisition, storage,  and off-line data acquisition. This
              confocal system was selected  because its unique and comprehensive confocal
              abilities with multiple  laser lines and applications software will accommodate
              the diverse  needs of the researchers at the University of Louisville. To
              maximize  user time, the system includes components that permit remote
              (off-line)  data analysis and 3-D reconstruction while the microscope is in
              use.  Among the tasks to be performed are:      to obtain highly-purified
              primary embryonic cell populations;    to study Ca2+ metabolism and
              intracellular pH after electrical and    chemical stimulation;    to examine
              co-localization of tRNA biosynthetic enzymes;    to perform high resolution in
              situ hybridization studies;     to determine the distribution of membranous
              components (i.e.     receptors, complex carbohydrates) and their relationships
              to     cytoskeletal organelles during a variety of dynamic cellular    
              phenomenon including phagocytosis and neuritogenesis; and     to obtain 3-D
              reconstructions for cytoarchitectural and developmental     morphometric
              comparisons.    The 16 research paradigms of the 32 faculty members in this
              application  are not inclusive of all projects that would utilize the Ultima,
              but  are intended to demonstrate the breadth of our needs. The instrument  will
              be housed in the Core Analytical Microscopy Laboratory (CAML)  which has served
              as the sole microscopy laboratory for all campuses of  the University for the
              past four years. Being the first confocal  microscopy system  in the CAML, it
              would enhance significantly our  optical microscopic capabilities, thereby
              providing for cuttingedge  technology for research and the training of CAML
              users, graduate  students and postdoctoral fellows. The research and outreach
              mission of  our "Developmental and Molecular Neurobiology Program" funded by an
              NSF  KY/EPSCoR contract will be greatly facilitated by this instrumentation. 
              Furthermore, recent faculty recruitment in the biological sciences has  been
              hampered by the lack of a confocal microscope. Therefore, in  addition to
              facilitating research and training of investigators and  students at U of L,
              the acquisition of the Ultima  should assist future  faculty recruitment in
              several departments and thus facilitate the  strategic plan of the University
              to become a research institution. The  genuine widespread need for this
              equipment is mirrored by the fact that  more than 50% of the funds needed to
              purchase the confocal scanning  laser microscopic workstation have been raised
              from the office of the  University Vice President for Research, Dean of the
              Medical School, and  10 different departments in several schools as well as
              individual  users.
