Title       : Communications Infrastructure for Collaborative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1995    
File        : a9512317

Award Number: 9512317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22265              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Petri   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne P. Carter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael G. Plummer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,1327,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With partial support from the National Science Foundation, the Asia Pacific
              Center for Economics and Business at Brandeis University will purchase
              equipment and software required to link its faculty and graduate student
              computers directly to Internet and to each other in a local area network. The
              LAN is essential to allow faculty members to share software, data and
              conferencing capabilities as they participate in research and communicate with
              distant colleagues. The LAN will also allow graduate students to work as
              research assistants and to undertake research papers and theses on the own
              based on these shared data sets.  Together with The East West Center in Hawaii
              and Keio University in japan, Brandeis is playing a lead role in developing an
              electronic research network connecting newly created Asia-Pacific Economic
              Cooperation Study Centers (APEC) in all eighteen participating countries. The
              focus of the research collaboration is to study the impact of economic
              integration and of potential SPEC policies designed to accelerate integration
              of various sectors and APEC countries. The three research teams plan to share
              data, ideas and models, and to join their findings in different fields through
              a family of computable general equilibrium models. The project will emphasize
              three issues critical to understanding economic integration: the likely effects
              of reducing tariff and non-tariff barriers; the effect of economic integration
              on labor; the relation between regional integration and direct foreign
              investment on a number of economic factors. The instrumentation provide will
              further research in all these areas and also assist in student education.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
