Title       : Acquisition of Mass Spectrometers for the Cornell Laboratory for Natural
               Abundance Isotope Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1995     
File        : a9512240

Award Number: 9512240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Howarth   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lars O. Hedin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Todd E. Dawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Brenna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The development of stable isotope mass spectrometry has  revolutionized  the
              ability to pose and answer questions of  how interactions between biological
              and geological  processes define the Earth's environment. At this interface 
              between biology and geology lies the rapidly evolving  discipline of
              biogeochemistry. Stable isotope mass  spectrometry allows biogeochemists to ask
              questions - at  scales ranging from microbial to global processes - that are 
              critical to understanding how the Earth's ecosystems  function, and how the
              biosphere is linked to human  activities. A particular value of analyzing the
              natural  abundance of stable isotopes is that they integrate  information in
              space and time, and they allow an analysis of  the net result of  complex
              interaction of processes. Also,  these approaches free researchers from the
              "Heizenberg  uncertainty" principle as it applies to biogeochemistry; we 
              sample the end result of processes without affecting them,  whereas most other
              approaches to studying the  biogeochemistry of ecosystems result in alterations
              in  functioning due to sampling. A brief look at leading  scientific journals
              shows that stable isotope techniques  increasingly contribute to our most
              important advances  within biogeochemistry. In fact, studies employing stable 
              isotope data are now a norm,         rather than an  exception, in prestigious
              journals such as Nature or  Science.    Despite this growing importance, there
              are a relatively  limited number of state-of-the-art mass spectrometry 
              facilities available for biogeochemical research within the  U.S. and
              internationally.  Formal training programs for the  next generation of
              biogeochemists are even more limited. In  this proposal we seek funds to
              establish a mass spectrometry  facility at Cornell University, "The Cornell
              Laboratory for  Natural-Abundance Isotope Analysis." This facility will 
              provide a state-of-the-art laboratory for isotope analysis  and methods
              development, and will serve as a center for  interaction betwe en different
              faculty and students at  Cornell that currently work at the conceptual
              interface  between geology and biology. With funds from other sources,  we plan
              to develop a formal training program in isotope  techniques for students and
              visiting scientists. This  program will provide on-site expertise and training 
              fellowships for graduate and post-graduate researchers as  well as
              opportunities for visitors to obtain the skills to  run instrumentation and
              develop isotope         techniques  for their research. The program will also
              provide a forum  for exchanging ideas,         fostering interdisciplinary 
              research, and enhancing training in isotope instrumentation.  We        
              believe that this balance between  instrumentation, research and training will
              make this  facility uniquely important for biogeochemical research,  nationally
              as well as internationally.    The facility will feature three major
              instruments and  appropriate laboratory facilities for         preparation  and
              analysis of samples by a wide range of isotope  applications. Two Finnigan MAT
              stable isotope ratio mass  spectrometers (IRMS) will provide isotopic ratio
              analysis of  C, N, O, S and H, with capabilities to analyze liquid, 
              particulate, and gaseous samples, and will have the  appropriate interfaces for
              compound-specific mass  spectrometry. One IRMS (delta S, Finnigan Mat) will be
              used  to process and analyze the very large number of samples (> l  0,000/year)
              generated by the 14 core faculty and their  graduate and post-graduate
              associates, and off-campus  scientists who are currently using isotope
              techniques in  their research. The second IRMS (model 252, Finnigan Mat)  will
              be used for high precision (+ 0.005 parts per thousand)  analyses (compound
              specific, as well as high precision gas  ratio determination), for training,
              and for methods  development. One Hewlett Packard inductively coupled plasma 
              mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) will provide rapid and efficient  analyses of
              concentrations of up to 40 or more elements ,  allowing trace-element analyses
              at part-per-trillion levels.  Such information can "fingerprint" the movement
              and mixing  of different elements from different sources through complex  flow
              paths within ecosystems, as well as provide detailed  information on chemical
              environments and transformations.  This ability to coincidentally measure
              isotope ratios  together with concentrations of elements provides a powerful 
              capability to follow the biogeochemical         movements  and cycling of
              elements and water within and between the  Earth's natural         ecosystems.
              This facility will  enhance research for a spectrum of Cornell faculty and lab 
              groups that use natural abundance stable isotope approaches  to study the
              interface between biology and geology.  Currently, these groups have to send
              their samples to  outside labs, with relatively long turn-around times and 
              with little opportunity for methods development or student  training.
