Title       : Japan STA Program: Internet to Support the Creation of a U.S.-Japan Science Data
               Information Exchange System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1997   
File        : a9512735

Award Number: 9512735
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert V. Hamilton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0522400   Information Systems                     
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9512735  Hamilton    This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology
              Agency  of Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Robert Hamilton  at the
              Communications Research Laboratory (CRL), Koganei,  Japan.  Mr. Hamilton will
              work with Dr. Kenichi Okamoto,  director of the Global Environment Division, on
              a research  project entitled, "Internet Techniques to Support the  Creation of
              a U.S.-Japan Science Data Information Exchange  System."    The project will
              study the data generated by Japanese  spaceborne remote sensors and devise
              methods to best  disseminate data via the internet to scientists in the  United
              States and throughout the world.  The research at CRL  will provide a special
              opportunity to learn about these  remote sensing technologies in order to best
              configure  remote sensing science data sets for internet transmittal.  Research
              will be specifically directed toward the data  collected by various advanced
              remote sensing technologies  being developed at CRL as well as the construction
              of remote  sensing data sets for international access and use.    The proposed
              research is of theoretical and practical  interest to the information systems
              community and the  benefits to be obtained from collaborative research will be 
              valuable to both participants.  The Communications Research  Laboratory is an
              outstanding research facility, and the  research will likely yield positive
              results for the United  States and Japan as well as the international
              scientific  community as a whole.  As such, the research satisfies the 
              objectives of the program in its emphasis on the exchange  and transfer of
              scientific knowledge through international  collaboration.  ***
