Title       : Dissertation Research: Frontiers of 19th Century Culture Contact
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1995       
File        : a9512742

Award Number: 9512742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9677               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Schuyler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Schuyler/Church    Under the direction of Dr. Robert Schuyler, Ms. Minette
              Church  will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will  excavate two
              abandoned farmsteads located in southeastern  Colorado which were occupied in
              the 19th century. She will also  examine the documentation associated with
              them. The occupants of  each farm are known: one was Anglo-American, the other
              Hispanic.  Archaeological investigation will entail four weeks of excavation 
              at each site as well as examination of the artifacts that prior  survey crews
              have systematically collected from the surface. The  two homesteads will be
              mapped in detail with special attention  paid to placement, orientation,
              spatial layout and construction  of buildings and outbuildings and location of
              debris. To help  determine land use, flotation samples and pollen cores will be
               collected. The results of the excavation of the homesteads, when  combined
              with collections of oral histories, journals and other  primary documentary
              sources will supply key information on the  material culture and life at the
              household level.    This research has two underlying goals. The first is to
              examine  the role of ethnicity in adaptation. Groups from different  cultural
              backgrounds moved to this rural region of Colorado to  farm and herd livestock.
              Anthropologists and historians have  speculated on similarities and differences
              in adaptation which  occurred and related these both to different forms of
              social  organization and distance travelled from point of origin. Some  have
              argued that the single set of environmental conditions led  to cultural
              convergence while others have postulated that  distinct subcultures were
              maintained. MS Church will attempt to  determine which view is correct. The
              second goal is a  methodological one. Because written documentation exists for
              both  sites, a good deal of a priori control is possible. Ms. Church  wishes to
              examine the material remains which she collects and  determine the extent to
              which they reflect ethnicit y. The  methodology she develops and conclusions
              she draws will be uqeful  in a number of archaeological situations.     This
              work is important for several reasons. It will increase our  understanding of a
              dynamic period in American history. It will  shed new light on cultural
              adaptation and will assist in the  training of a promising young scientist.
