Title       : A Multi-User Phosphorimaging System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9512957

Award Number: 9512957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Palumbo   (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Dyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Juneann W. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald C. Kennedy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Ferretti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma HSC
	      P O BOX 26901
	      Oklahoma City, OK  731260901    405/271-4000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                           This multi-user group application
              proposes to acquire the  necessary instrumentation to allow accurate
              quantitation of DNA, RNA,  and protein at the University of Oklahoma Health
              Science Center Campus.  This instrumentation will include one phosphorimagel
              and accessories  with an attendant computer for image processing and data
              analysis, and  a rewriteable optical disk drive for archiving data. Currently,
              we have  state-of-the-art facilities that support cell biology, genetics and 
              most other aspects of molecular biological research. However, a rapid  means
              for quantitative and qualitative analyses of DNA, RNA, and  protein are not
              currently available on the Oklahoma City Health Science  Center Campus.
              Instead, we must rely on autoradiographs, densometric  scans of
              autoradiographs, or gel slices with scintillation counting for  quantitation.
              In addition to providing a quantitative analysis of  nucleic acids and
              proteins, a phosphorimager will allow investigators  to reduce the amount of
              radioactive nuclides in their experiments  because of the increased sensitivity
              of the instrument.                Research projects in the Departments ol
              Mlcrohlology an  lmmunology, Pathology, Pediatrics, Opthamology, and Anatomical
              Sciences  that will immediately benefit from this facility include: i) three 
              projects that examine virus transcription, translation, and replication 
              (Palumbo, Kennedy, and Lloyd), ii) four projects that examine  transcriptional
              and translational regulation of procaryotic gene  expression (Dyer, Ferretti,
              Stull, Gilmore), iii) two projects that  examine receptor expression (Palumbo,
              Dyer), iv) a project that will  determine physical and genetic map of
              Streptococcus pyogeMes isolates  (Ferretti), v) four projects that will examine
              cytokine and chemokine  levels and mRNA levels (Murphy, Grammas, Pereira,
              Cunningham), vi) a  project that will examine the polymorphism of MHC loci in
              minority  populations (Hildebrand), vii) a project to quanti tate levels of 
              radiolabelled protein incorporated into membranes (Tweten); viii) and  two
              projects that examine expression of cellular genes including  enzymes involved
              in arachidonate metabolism, metalloproteinases, and  smooth muscle actin
              (Palumbo, Howard, and Tomasek). Every project is  currently supported by
              national extramural funding (NIH, USDA, etc.) or  "local" funding from the
              Oklahoma Center for the Advancement of Science  and Technology (OCAST) or the
              Presbyterian Health Foundation.                Intertwined with, and an
              essential component of this scientific  enterprise, is significant training in
              basic molecular biology and  protein chemistry. This training includes the
              ongoing research  education of post-doctoral fellows and graduate students
              within the  Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the other
              Departments.  Further, several programs in the Department and the University
              support  research training for undergraduate students, minority high school 
              teachers and minority high school students. Thus, the phosphorimager  will
              significantly enhance the research and research training  environment within
              the Department of Microbiology and Immunology and  the Health Science Center
              Campus in general.                Although the phosphorimager will be housed in
              the Department of  Microbiology and Immunology, the facility will be available
              to all  investigators on the Oklahoma City campus, subject to investigators 
              purchasing their own phosphorimaging plates and user fees to help  defray costs
              tour a maintenance agreement. Thus, this instrument will  have significant
              impact outside the Department, enriching the research  and research training
              capability of the entire University of Oklahoma  Health Science Center campus.
              Consistent with this potential, we have  obtained significant institutional
              support for the acquisition of a  phosphorimager, as the Health Sciences Center
              has pledged 30% of the  funds needed to purchase the instrumentation.
