Title       : ARI: The Hawaii-2 Observatory: A Deep Ocean Geoscience Facility Re-using the
               Hawaii-2 Telephone Cable
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2001  
File        : a9512614

Award Number: 9512614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2233992            (Estimated)
Investigator: Rhett Butler rhett@iris.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inc Res Inst Seismology
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  20005    202/682-2220

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This ARI award provides funding to convert the AT&T Hawaii-2 undersea co-axial
              telephone cable, a retired cable that stretches from Hawaii to southern
              California, into a long-term geophysical observatory.  The Hawaii-2 Observatory
              (H2O) will be created by cutting the cable approximately mid-way between Hawaii
              and California and inserting a junction box with eight underwater-mateable
              connectors.  Power will be supplied to the junction box and any instruments
              attached to it from the AT&T Makaha cable station on the island of Oahu.  A
              landline from the cable station to the Univ. of Hawaii at Manoa will allow
              scientists to monitor data from the ocean bottom observatory in real-time and
              modify the software contained in the junction box and instruments.  The first
              instrument the PI's propose to deploy at the H2O is a seismometer because the
              proposed site of the junction box optimizes coverage of a strategic area for
              the IRIS Global Seismic Network (GSN), an international network of  seismic
              stations. Observations from GSN stations are constrained by the location of the
              stations, which are all on continents or islands. This biased distribution of
              seismic stations introduces spatial alias and substantial uncertainties into
              earth studies, particularly  tomographic studies of the Earth's structure and
              studies of earthquake source location, focal mechanism, and rupture process. 
              Ocean floor observatories are necessary to complete the network. Oceanographers
              have initiated an international effort to establish an Ocean Seismic Network as
              a subset of the GSN.  They have identified 20 areas of the ocean floor where
              seismic coverage is a high priority; H2O would offer coverage of one of these
              areas.  In addition to advances in seismic studies, H2O could be used to
              advance studies of geomagetism, tsunamis, polar motion, gravity and geodetic
              studies.  Geomagnetic data also are biased by the distribution of
              observatories, which are mainly located on continents in the northern
              hemisphere. A recent NRC task group re port has described the scientific
              rationale for a more balanced global geomagnetic network and proposed the
              addition of 8 seafloor sites, including one in the vicinity of H2O.  Tsunami
              studies are hampered by a lack of open-ocean data and would be greatly enhanced
              by deployment of a pressure sensor at the H2O site.  Real-time access to the
              data would improve the ability of existing tsunami warning systems to predict
              wave height. Ocean bottom pressure is also an indicator of large scale
              horizontal water motions, which affect the Earth's axis of rotation, vertical
              and horizontal deformation of the earth's crust, and fluctuations in surface
              gravity. The H2O site would allow real-time studies of these geophysical
              systems.
