Title       : Acquisition of Integrated Imaging and Image Analysis Equipment for the
               Archaeology, Cultural and Biological Anthropology Programs at Hunter College,
               CUNY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1995    
File        : a9512373

Award Number: 9512373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249469             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy G. Bromage tbromage@shiva.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Parry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francis P. Conant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. McGovern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick S. Szalay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With partial support from the National Science Foundation, the Anthropology
              Department of Hunter College, CUNY, will purchase an image analysis system
              including a Leica Steroscan 440 Scanning Electron Microscope, a Leica Q600 HR
              Image Analysis System, a Leica-Leitz DMRX/E Universal Microscope and a
              Leica-Wild Stereo Microscope. This equipment will permit evolutionary,
              ecological, functional and adaptational research on the biology and culture of
              living and fossil human populations, as well as the ecology and evolutionary
              biology of living and fossil nonhuman primates.  Many of the projects to be
              conducted look at the microscopic structure of bone and the morphological data
              thus collected will allow investigators to address a number of questions. These
              will provide insight into: facial development variation and the origins of
              anatomically modern humans; the effects of brain development and other factors
              on primate facial form; the adaptive morphology of African great apes; the
              microstructure of osteological landmarks and their correlation with mechanical
              function and biological role; collagen fiber orientation and the biomechanics
              of bone. Taken together these projects will increase understanding of how the
              form of bones relates to the functions they perform and will permit
              paleoanthropologists to reconstruct the morphology and behavior of extinct
              animals based on the analysis of fossil bones. A second major area of research
              falls within the scope of archaeology. Scientists will use this equipment to
              examine microscopic scratches on stone tools and determine the functions these
              implements served. They will also allow faunal analysts to determine the
              seasons during which prey animals were killed and to reconstruct the hunting
              strategies of prehistoric peoples.  The equipment will be widely used by
              graduate and undergraduate students for teaching and research purposes and by
              scientists from other institutions in the New York City area.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
