Title       : Planning Activities: Environmental Field Station and Marine Science Laboratory
               at Nacote Creek
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1995 
File        : a9512619

Award Number: 9512619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria C. Moyer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin Witmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew P. Landau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R Stockton Coll of NJ
	      PO Box 195
	      Pomona, NJ  08240    609/652-1776

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             % B^                 C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                     Õ%^    
              Õ%^         4 @                                                                
                                                                                             
                        '   (   )   *   +   ,   -   .   /   0   1   2   3   4   5            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            F
                 Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 Located on a
              wooded 1,600-acre campus in Galloway Township in the Pine Barrens, the Richard
              Stockton College of New Jersey (RSCNJ), formerly Stockton State College, is one
              of only two 4-year undergraduate institutions located in southern New Jersey. 
              The College is committed to the quality of its education and research programs
              in the environmental sciences which are enhanced by its strategic location and
              proximity to the Mullica River and the Atlantic Ocean.  In 1993, in direct
              support of Marine, Biological and Environmental Sciences, the College purchased
              approximately 7 acres of land on the Nacote Creek, which is part of the
              intercostal waterway system, to develop an Environmental and Marine Science
              Field Station.  The Nacote Creek site is within the nominated Mullica
              River-Great Bay Estuary National Research Reserve which is characterized by
              freshwater wetlands and saltmarsh natural habitats.  Aqueous natural habitats
              are also very common, ranging from high salinity open water bays and lagoon
              environments, to extensive tidal channel and pond development in variable
              salinity wetlands, and to fres hwater stream systems leading from the uplands. 
              Stockton has invested significantly in adapting existing buildings to teaching
              purposes.  An NSF-ARI is directed at increasing the research capabilities.  The
              next step is to construct a new facility with state of the art teaching and
              research capacity.  This project will assist in the developing a plan and
              architectural design for the new building.                                     
                             Oh     +'  0                                       $       H    
                l                             S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n            
                            (                                                   &            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       Located on
              a wooded 1,600-acre campus in Galloway Township in the Pine Barrens, the
              Richard Stockton College of New Jersey (RSCNJ), formerly Stockton State
              College, is one of only two 4-year undergraduate institutions located in
              southern New Jersey.  The                                      Tee Sullivan    
                                 Tee Sullivan                @       ^                       
                 @                                   @       ^                               
                                                                                 @           
                                             Microsoft Word 6.0                              
                                     1                                                       
                                             ;                                               
                                                                                             
                        e =       e                                                          
                                  j       j   j       j       j       j       j              
                                                                      #   1                  
                                                                                             
              Õ       u               T   T       +   #                       j              
                                                                        #               j    
                j                                                                       j    
                        j                                       ~               j       j    
                j       j                                                                    
                                                                      Located on a wooded
              1,600-acre campus in Galloway Township in the Pine Barrens, the Richard
              Stockton College of New Jersey (RSCNJ), formerly Stockton State College, is one
              of only two 4-year undergraduate institutions located in southern New Jersey. 
              The College is committed to the quality of its education and research programs
              in the environmental sciences which are enhanced by its strategic location and
              proximity to the Mullica River and the Atlantic Ocean.  In 1993, in direct
              support of Marine, Biological and Environmental Sciences, the College purchased
              approximately 7 acres of land on the Nacote Creek, which is part of the
              intercostal waterway system, to develop an Environmental and Marine Science
              Field Station.  The Nacote Creek site is within the nominated Mullica
              River-Great Bay Estuary National Research Reserve which is characterized by
              freshwater wetlands and saltmarsh natural habitats.  Aqueous natural habitats
              are also very common, ranging from high salinity open water bays and lagoon
              environments, to extensive tidal channel and pond development in variable
