Title       : Acquisition of Facilities for Structure Determination and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1995 
File        : a9512320

Award Number: 9512320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402128             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy M. Berg   (Principal Investigator current)
              George D. Rose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eaton E. Lattman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              L. Mario Amzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia Wolberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                            Acquisition of Facilities for Structure  Determination and
              Analysis             Due to parallel developments in molecular biology, 
              instrumentation, and computers, the field of structural  biology has been
              growing at an explosive rate over the past  5 years. This has been manifested
              both by a significant  increase in the productivity of existing researchers and
              a  tremendous growth in the number of the active research  groups.  Several
              units at The Johns Hopkins University have  been active participants in this
              growth. Building on a long-  standing history in X-ray crystallography, the
              Department of  Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry at The Johns Hopkins 
              University School of Medicine has grown from three faculty  members in 1990 to
              seven in 1995, all of whom are actively  involved in macromolecular structure
              determination and  analysis. In addition, united by the Institute for 
              Biophysical Research on Macromolecular Assemblies, founded  through a National
              Science Foundation Biological Research  Center grant in 1989, a much larger
              group of researchers  throughout the School of Medicine, the School of Hygiene
              and  Public Health, and on the Homewood Campus in the School of  Arts and
              Sciences  and the Engineering School, are pursuing research and  training young
              scientists in this area. With this large  number of active researchers, our
              needs for instrumentation  have continued to grow.  The powerful methods of
              gene  cloning, protein expression, and biomolecular synthesis have  greatly
              increased the number of important problems that can  be addressed at a detailed
              structural level. This explosion  has increased the demands on instrumentation
              infrastructure.  With over 20 currently active crystallographic projects and  a
              number of others in earlier stages of development, our  current facilities for
              data collection, data processing,  structure refinement, and structural
              analysis are no longer  adequate. In the same way, both the power of computer 
              modeling techniques and our faculty  representation in this  area have
              increased. Our ability to carry out both  computer modeling and
              crystallographic and NMR structural  calculations is increasingly limited by
              our present computer  facilities. Access to these facilities and their inherent
               speed have become rate limiting in our research efforts.             To
              address these issues, the acquisition of a new  high performance computer
              system and an additional X-ray  diffraction position sensitive detector are
              proposed. The  computer system, such as the Silicon Graphics Power  Challenge
              XL system, will provide a ten-fold (or greater)  increase in computation speed
              with parallel increases in  memory and data storage capabilities over our
              current  facility. Such an increase will remove current impediments  to
              structure refinement and will make accessible computer-  based approaches to
              important problems in macromolecular  folding, dynamics, and thermodynamics
              that are currently out  of reach. Examples include calculations of  side chain
              entropies at individual sites within structurally  characterized proteins,
              Monte Carlo calculations related to  protein folding and to the properties of
              unfolded peptides  and proteins, and molecular dynamics simulations of membrane
               proteins including ion channels. The detector system, such  as an R-Axis II
              imaging plate system, will increase the rate  at which structural problems of
              current interest can be  solved and will allow development of new projects that
              are  not being actively pursued due to limited detector time at  present. These
              projects include proteins and proteins  fragments involved in interactions with
              DNA, in mediating  cell-cell interactions, and in catalyzing important 
              metabolic processes. Both systems will significantly improve  the training
              environment for graduate students and  postdoctoral fellows in macromolecular
              structure  determination and analysis methods both as part of our  graduate
              training programs which include formal courses in X-  ray crystallography and
              in molecul ar modeling methods and as  part of research laboratory experience.
