Title       : Japan STA Program: Environmental Protection: Titaniumdioxide as a Photocatalyst
               for Waste Water Treatment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1995  
File        : a9512718

Award Number: 9512718
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11560              (Estimated)
Investigator: K.Satya N. Reddy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : OH Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, OH  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9512718  Reddy    This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency 
              of Japan Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Satya Reddy,  Department of Chemistry,
              the Ohio State University, at the  Chemical Synthesis Laboratory, National
              Institute of  Materials and Chemical Research (NIMCR), Tsukuba, Japan.  Dr.
              Reddy will work with Dr. Keiichi Tanaka, Director of the  Chemical Synthesis
              Laboratory at NIMCR on a research project  entitled, "Environmental Protection:
              Titaniumdioxide as a  Photocatalyst for Waste Water Treatment."    The main
              objective of the research is to develop a potential  catalyst which is able to
              concentrate the organic pollutants  from the environment and thereby mineralize
              them into  harmless chemicals.  Special attention will be paid to the  volatile
              organic halocarbons that are causing the depletion  of atmospheric ozone layer
              and are potential dangers to the  global ecosystem.  The research is also
              designed to explore  advanced techniques to remove aromatic hydrocarbon 
              pollutants from drinking water.    The proposed research is considerable
              interest in the United  States and Japan and the facilities at the Chemical 
              Synthesis Laboratory in Tsukuba will provide an excellent  location for
              research efforts.  The research will provide a  valuable learning experience
              for Dr. Reddy, and will likely  yield positive results for the United States
              and Japan as  well as the international community as a whole.  As such,  the
              research satisfies the objectives of the program in its  emphasis on the
              exchange and transfer of scientific  knowledge through international
              collaboration.  ***
