Title       : Hemodynamic Model of Skeletal Muscle Microcirculation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1998   
File        : a9512778

Award Number: 9512778
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geert W. Schmid-Schoenbein gwss@bioeng.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Skalak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yuan-Cheng B. Fung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin W. Zweifach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9512778  Schmid-Schoenbein      Skeletal muscle represents the largest organ in
              the body. Normal contraction of muscle fibers depends on an intact blood flow
              in this organ, especially in the smallest blood vessels known as the
              microcirculation. The blood flow in the skeletal muscle microcirculation can be
              adjusted according to the activity of the muscle fibers. Understanding of blood
              flow in this organ is an essential element in understanding muscle performance
              and its failure. The overall objective of the PI's research project is to
              develop an analysis of blood flow in skeletal muscle from a basic point of view
              at the cellular and molecular level using rigorous physical language. The PI's
              previous NSF project has served to obtain basic elements of the analysis,
              including the actual network microanatomy of the vast number of blood vessels
              in the microcirculation, the biophysical properties of the blood vessels
              (arteries, capillaries and veins) and the blood fluid, the display of nerves,
              lymphatics, and other cells in the muscle. This information was integrated into
              an analysis of blood flow in resting non-contracting skeletal muscle which is
              based on basic biomechanical principles and implemented in form of a numerical
              computation on a digital computer by means of highly efficient algorithms. The
              predictions of the analysis were compared with all suitable experimental
              results in the skeletal muscle literature. In addition, the PI has carried out
              additional experiments on blood flow in skeletal muscle to test the analysis in
              quantitative details. The analysis provides the first time a comprehensive
              picture of skeletal muscle blood flow with physical precision. While this
              approach serves to explain a large number of experimental observations in the
              past, it has also lead to several discoveries including the following:   1) The
              basis for the specialized relationship between pressure, which drives the blood
              in skeletal muscle and blood flow, was identified and its physical origin was
              identified.  2)  The identification of the mechanism that leads to cessation of
              muscle perfusion during pressure pulsations.  3) The identification of a
              previously undescribed mechanism for lymph flow in skeletal muscle. Recently,
              evidence has been obtained for a second valve system in the lymphatics of
              skeletal muscle, in addition to the well-known intralymphatic valve system.
              This observation provides the first time a comprehensive understanding of the
              mechanism by which lymphatics transport fluid and cells.  4) The identification
              of a new membrane function of the cells lining the blood vessels, i.e. the
              endothelial cells.  5) Analysis that served as the basis in leading to the
              discovery of a mechanism by which the small arteries in the microcirculation
              grow (research by the PI's former student Dr. T.C. Skalak at the University of
              Virginia, Charlottesville).  6) The discovery of a significant influence that
              circulating white blood cells have on the perfusion of skeletal muscle,
              especially when these white blood cells are activated. The PI has also
              identified a mechanism by which endothelial cells project small cytoplasmic
              extensions into the lumen of the microvessels in the activated state. These
              observations are important in regards to muscle fatigue.  The proposed research
              serves as a direct expansion of the current analysis. The future analysis is
              directed at the following:  1) Expansion of the current analysis to the case of
              contracting muscle. During contraction, the skeletal muscle fibers compress the
              blood vessels of the microcirculation and therefore strongly influence the
              blood flow to the organ. 2) Identification of the biomechanical mechanism by
              which relatively few circulating white blood cells exert a significant
              influence on the perfusion of muscle microcirculation.  3) To study the
              influence of cytoplasm extensions on endothelial cells lining blood vessels on
              perfusion of the muscle microcirculation.  The PI will continue to carry out
              the experiments on skeletal muscle in rats, so that all prev ious information
              serves as a basis for the future work without uncertainties regarding species
              differences.   ***
