Title       : Nuclear Gene Control of Chloroplast Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  1997    
File        : a9512719

Award Number: 9512719
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurens J. Mets l-mets@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Mets  9512719  The long term objective of this project is to identify and
              characterize mechanisms that coordinate the expression of nuclear and
              organellar genes during the biogenesis of eukaryotic organelles.  This project
              focuses on nuclear genes that determine the level of expression of a specific
              chloroplast gene:  the rbcL gene that encodes the large subunit of the enzyme
              ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO).  The study will
              exploit the unique genetic and molecular genetic properties of the unicellular
              green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.  We have developed a strong positive
              selection for RuBisCO-deficient mutants in C. reinhardtii and will generate a
              large collection of nuclear gene mutants that fail to produce RuBisCO, but
              produce normal amounts of other chloroplast gene products.  These mutants will
              be characterized genetically (by dominance and allelism tests) and
              mechanistically through molecular studies of rbcL expression.  Preliminary
              studies on one such mutant, 24DD, suggest that its rbcL mRNA is unstable does
              not support adequate large subunit synthesis.  Experiments are proposed to
              confirm and extend these results, to identify and characterize the cis-acting
              target in the rbcL mRNA that  distinguishes it from other chloroplast messages
              that are not destabilized in the mutant, and to initiate the cloning and
              characterization of the mutant gene and its wild type allele.  %%%  The RuBisCO
              enzyme, whose gene control is under study in this project, is known to be one
              of the most important elements that limits photosynthetic efficiency, water use
              efficiency and nitrogen use efficiency in plants.  Eventual success in
              correcting of these limitations will depend not only upon understanding its
              biochemical and metabolic properties but also upon understanding how it's
              biosynthesis is controlled by the plant.  This project will make a major
              contribution to that understanding.  ***
