Title       : Decisions to Limit the Use of Technologies at HMOs and Other Insurers: Process,
               Principles, and Guidelines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1996     
File        : a9512146

Award Number: 9512146
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman Daniels   (Principal Investigator current)
              James Sabin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              For health care reform to achieve increased access while constraining cost
              increases, we need a system for making decisions about the use of new
              technologies and other services that is widely perceived to be fair.  Reforming
              an institution requires a thorough knowledge of how it works, however. 
              Currently, decisions by HMOs and other insurers to limit the use of new
              technologies are controversial and mysterious; we know little about how they
              are or should be made.  This project undertakes the empirical and ethical
              analysis necessary to understand existing processes and improve them.  The
              three year interdisciplinary project is being carried out by a philosopher, a
              psychiatrist with clinical and managerial experience in an HMO, the Program
              Coordinator for an HMO committee involved in decisions about new technologies,
              and a medical anthropologist with expertise in using ethnographic methods in
              medical contexts.  With other support, the team is surveying an association of
              HMOs to determine the methods in use for making decisions about new
              technologies and conducting an in-depth study of decision-making by the
              Committee on Appropriate Technology at the Harvard Community Health Plan.  With
              interviews, participant observation, and analysis of documents and videotapes,
              this support will allow the study of `focal cases` that reveal how three major
              collaborating HMOs and the Oregon Health Resources Commission make decisions on
              the same new technologies.   In consultation with collaborating HMOs, the team
              will then develop guidelines for an improved and morally acceptable process. 
              It will disseminate the results through associations of HMOs and through
              appropriate journal publications, as well as a monograph.  Finally, using
              interviews, it will assess the impact of a publicly accountable procedure in
              HMOs on research and development attitudes of producers of medical
              technologies.   A morally acceptable, publicly accountable process for making
              decisions about new technologies in HMOs and other insurers can be generalized
              into a model for making other decisions limiting the use of beneficial
              services; the result may also be generalizable to other contexts of
              decision-making about the dissemination of technologies.  The project will
              interest health policy makers and implementers as well as scientists and
              engineers involved in research and development decisions.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
