Title       : Scanning Electron Microscope Upgrade to Field Emission with Xray Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1995   
File        : a9512967

Award Number: 9512967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21180              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stella M. Coakley coakleys@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred Soeldner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Oregon State University (OSU) asks assistance to upgrade a thermionic  scanning
              electron  microscope (SEM) to a field emission scanning electron microscope 
              (FESEM) with an integrated x-ray energy spectrometer (XES). This system  will
              replace a 1978 AmRay 1000A SEM acquired in used condition in 1981  and a Kevex
              7000 X-ray spectrometer purchased in 1982. OSU has taken  over 30,000
              micrographs and logged in excess of 6000 beam hours with  the now obsolete SEM
              system. In 1993-94, 165 campus researchers from 24  departments in nine
              colleges used the Electron Microscope Facility at  OSU; the facility is managed
              by the Department of Botany and Plant  Pathology and provides the only access
              on the OSU Campus to an  instrument of this type.    Diverse research programs
              at OSU would benefit from the FESEM/XES which  has improved resolution, broader
              versatility, and significant  improvement of capabilities over the thermionic
              SEM recently co-funded  by NSF (BIR-9420049). FESEM offers low voltage high
              resolution of  non-coated biological specimens at 4-5 nm versus > 150 nm for 
              thermionic SEM which always requires destructive specimen coating. High 
              voltage allows resolution c 1.5 nm versus 15 nm for a new thermionic  SEM and
              70 nm for the current system. FESEM/XES allows determination of  element
              compositions in soils and mineral cycles including the new  capability to
              identify nitrogen, boron, oxygen and fluorine and much  better resolution of
              sodium.    The biologists at OSU would be primary beneficiaries of this
              instrument  as they constitute 7075% of the SEM use; the remaining 25-30% will
              be  utilized by physical science, associated materials science and  engineering
              programs. Major biological users include Dr. Philip  Brownell's research on
              sensory neurobiology of arthropods which focuses  on cuticular sense organs and
              the correlation of fine structure with  sensory function. Dr. Elaine Ingham
              would utilize the FESEM/XES to  determine change in structure and mineral
              composition of soil under  conditi ons of global climate change. Dr. Terri
              Lomax's research centers  on understanding the regulation of plant growth and
              development at the  level of cellular responses to hormonal and environmental
              signals. Dr.  Robert Mason studies the reproductive biology and chemical
              ecology of  reptiles. Dr. Michael Nesson focuses on iron biomineralization and
              the  role of biologically synthesized magnetic minerals. Dr. Barbara  Taylor's
              program investigates intercellular communication between  muscles and their
              innervating nerves during adult development of fruit  flies. Most of these
              researchers have or have had significant NSF  funding for their programs.    In
              addition, this SEM/XES system would benefit other major user groups  in
              chemical engineering, geosciences and materials sciences.  Representative
              research programs are described for each of these areas.  It will also assist
              in attracting faculty and students to OSU,  contribute to undergraduate and
              graduate student training, and is  essential to many other of OSU's basic and
              applied research programs  in:    x biochemistry, botany, chemistry,
              entomology, geology, microbiology,       physics, plant pathology, and zoology;
               x air, water, and soil ecology, pollution, and resource development and      
              conservation;  x forest pathology, productivity, and development and
              performance of       wood products;  x foods and nutrition;  x engineering,
              advanced metallic, ceramic, glass, and polymeric       materials; development,
              failure analysis, and tribology.
