Title       : A Core Laboratory for Biological High-Performance Computation, Communication,
               and Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1995  
File        : a9512521

Award Number: 9512521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1146438            (Estimated)
Investigator: Wah Chiu wah@bcm.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Robert Beck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Florante A. Quiocho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      1200 Moursund Avenue
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/790-4846

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Recent advances in computing and networking technology have opened a  new
              frontier in biological research. Baylor College of Medicine (BCM)  has
              recognized this opportunity and its potential impact on  understanding
              fundamental biological processes and developing  biotechnological applications.
              The field of computational and  structural biology was designated as one of the
              highest priority areas  for development and expansion at BCM in the 1994 report
              of the  College's Strategic Planning Committee.    This proposal will create a
              new core laboratory for high performance  computation, communication and
              visualization applied specifically to  biological research. The proposed
              facility will include a parallel  array of 12 processors with advanced
              visualization capability, and a  high bandwidth network to four research and
              teaching clusters  throughout the College. The core laboratory will be
              administered by an  executive director and an executive committee of seven
              faculty and a  student representative. It will be staffed with a computing
              application  specialist and a system administrator.    Twenty-five faculty
              members at BCM are key participants in this  proposal, which covers four
              research areas. These include electron  image reconstruction of macromolecular
              assemblies, x-ray  crystallography, molecular biology informatics and
              computational  neurobiology. All of the investigators are leaders in their
              respective  scientific disciplines and use computationally intensive methods in
               their research efforts. Establishment of this proposed core laboratory  will
              provide highspeed network access to a high performance computing  and
              visualization resource that cannot be reasonably acquired by any  individual
              investigator. The impact of this proposed bio-computing core  laboratory at BCM
              will be enormous. This facility will:    x improve our ability to tackle
              problems of great importance in cell       biology, biochemistry, virology,   
              molecular genetics and neurobiology which rely heavily on       computa
              tionally intensive methods;  x facilitate the development of novel methods of
              analysis and simulation       using parallel and distributed    computation; 
              enhance our capability for visualization of large and       complex biological
              data;  x enable direct high-speed network linkage between the proposed high    
                performance computers and the    groups engaged in computationally intensive
              research at different       locations throughout the College;  x enrich student
              training in the use of computers for understanding       complex biophysical
              and structural    concepts;  x attract new faculty members and trainees at
              postdoctoral, predoctoral       and undergraduate levels to join    our
              recently established Ph.D. Program of Structural and       Computational
              Biology and Molecular    Biophysics (SCBMB).    The total cost of establishing
              the proposed core laboratory is $2.3  million, including equipment purchase,
              high-speed network connection,  room renovation, software installation,
              equipment maintenance and  personnel salary support for a period of three
              years. BCM will provide  34 % matching funds totaling $0.78 million. The total
              project cost that  NSF is asked to fund is $1.5 million.
