Title       : Development of Instrumentation for Institutional Process Design and Laboratory
               Testing in Economics and Political Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9512394

Award Number: 9512394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1995   
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $804974             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Plott cplott@hss.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Charles Plott will purchase
              equipment to expand and develop his experimental economics laboratory. This
              includes 35 pentium 90 16MB, 500MBHD computers, monitors, high speed modems,
              workstations, a network server and related equipment. He will also hire
              computer programming staff to develop software which will be distributed to
              other institutions which teach economics and engage in experimental economics
              research. In this relatively new branch of economics, researchers create
              experimental markets in controlled laboratory conditions and allow subjects to
              participate in them. Money is used as an incentive to evoke responses that
              accompany meaningful decisions. As Dr. Plott notes, `The logic that supports
              the use of experimental methods in economics and political science is the same
              logic that supports the use of experimental methods in any branch of science.
              The trick is to identify and understand how the study of very simple and
              special cases can help when the real goal is to understand something that is
              vastly more complex.`   This research, and the NSF grant which partially
              supports it, serves to accomplish several goals. First, it allows economists to
              evaluate the validity of widely held economic assumptions such as the laws of
              supply and demand. Secondly, it permits the application of experimental
              approaches to the solution of pressing present day problems. Dr. Plott and his
              group have, for example, conducted studies for the Department of Transportation
              and several other government agencies. They have provided guidance on issues
              such as the allocation of airport landing slots, regulation of the pollution
              permit market and the management of space station resources. Finally, this
              grant will allow the development of simulation and teaching software which can
              be used for both education and research.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
