Title       : Light Scattering in Complex Ternary Polymer Solutions US-Turkey Cooperative
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9512700

Award Number: 9512700
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30390              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Russo paul.russo@chem.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Description:  This project supports a collaboration by Dr. Paul S. Russo, of the
              Chemistry Department at Louisiana State University (LSU) and Dr. Zuhal
              Kucukyavuz  and Dr. Savas Kucukyavuz of the Chemistry Department at the Middle
              East Technical University (METU) in Ankara, Turkey.  In this collaboration they
              will study the phase stability and dynamics of ternary polymer solutions.  The
              specific classes to be investigated will be systems where rigid rodlike
              polymers and flexible polymers are mixed together in a common solvent.  Such
              systems represent precursors to molecular composites wherein a random coil
              polymer is strengthened by the fibrous, rodlike polymer.  Light scattering
              studies will be conducted on specially selected prototype systems, with special
              attention given to `fuzzy rods` made from polypeptides with long alkyl
              sidechains.  The long sidechains impart good stability to the fuzzy rods, which
              will be studied in tetrahydrofuran when they scatter strongly.  The random coil
              component will be polydimethysiloxanes, which scatters only weakly in
              tetrahydrofuran.  Polydimethylsiloxanes will be prepared and characterized at
              the METU in Ankara.  Light scattering measurements will be performed at LSU in
              Baton Rouge.  Scope :  The collaboration to be supported in this project is
              useful to the US and to Turkey because it allows the two scientists to use
              their complementary capabilities to enhance the effectiveness of their
              research.  Dr. Russo is currently supported by NSF's Division of Material
              Research for the primary research.  The funds provided by INT will be used for
              the incremental costs resulting from the collaboration.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
