Title       : An Automated DNA Sequencer for Analysis of Gene Structure and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1995   
File        : a9512877

Award Number: 9512877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94749              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Bornstein benhall@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin D. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This application requests partial support for the  development of an Automated
              DNA         Sequencing Facility.  Seven independent laboratories in the
              Departments of  Biochemistry, Botany, Genetics, and Zoology at the  University
              of Washington, for whom DNA sequencing represents  a major research focus
              (major users), and an additional  seven laboratories in these Departments with
              a significant  but less extensive need for DNA sequencing (minor users),  are
              participating in this proposal. The impetus for this  application derives from
              the realization by these  individuals that existing methods for manual
              sequencing of  DNA are slower, more work-intensive, and more expensive than 
              are automated methods that employ fluorescent compounds to  track DNA
              fragments. All 14 faculty members involved in this  application have concluded
              that the need to rely on manual  methods for DNA sequencing is having a
              distinctly negative  impact on the progress of their research.    The 14
              projects that comprise this application are all  funded by one or more research
               grants from the National Science Foundation, National  Institutes of Health,
              and other granting agencies. The major  projects involve: an analysis of genes
              required for cell  migrations during oogenesis in Drosophila (C. Berg); the 
              structure and function of the mammalian metaxin gene family  (P. Bornstein); a
              molecular analysis of marine plant systems  (R. Cattolico); large-scale
              sequencing of the MHC class II  region in birds (S. Edwards); comparative
              sequence analysis  of the two largest subunits of nuclear RNA polymerase II 
              from different taxa (B. Hall); regulatory analyses of muscle  creatine kinase
              genes (S. Hauschka); and hormonal regulation  of insect development (L.
              Riddiford). The minor projects  involve: characterization of the revolta gene
              of Arabidopsis  thaliana (L. Comai); identification of components of the 
              microtubule organizing center in S. cerevisiae (T. Davis);  genetic control of
              the yeast cell cycle (L. Hartwell);  regulation of       mesodermal patterning
              in Xenopus and  zebrafish (D. Kimelman); origin of polarity in Drosophila 
              development (H. Ruohola-Baker); heterochromatic genes and  position effects in
              Drosophila (B. akimoto); and evolution  of a regulatory protein and its target
              gene in yeast  (E.Young).    We request the purchase of a model 377 ABI Prism
              Automated  DNA Sequencer with  associated computer software, and a GeneAmp PCR
              System 9600.  These instruments will be housed in space provided by the 
              Department of Biochemistry. The facility will be run on a  fee-for-service
              basis (cost center). It is anticipated that  80-90% of the capacity of the
              facility will be utilized by  the participating laboratories and that the
              remaining  capacity will be made available to investigators at the  University
              of Washington on a first-come, first-served  basis.
