Title       : An Event Related Brain Potential Analysis of Affect and Attitudes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9512459

Award Number: 9512459
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Cacioppo   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary G. Berntson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Self-report and behavioral measures of attitudes and persuasion processes have
              relied on the bivalent action disposition aroused by the attitude stimulus
              despite the potential for response distortion.  When peripheral somatovisceral
              measures have been used to investigate communication and attitudes,
              investigators have traditionally sought to identify responses that were
              inherently linked to specific affective states.  The multiple determinants of
              somatovisceral responses and the tenuous links between inherent physiological
              responses and specific affective states have placed strong limits on the
              usefulness of prior physiological assessments of  attitudes.  Rather than
              relying on response dispositions or peripheral physiological responses, the
              proposed research exploits a more robust relationship between the late positive
              component of the event-related brain potential (ERP) and categorization
              processes to study attitude phenomena. In this approach, a subject's attitude
              serves as the criterion along which stimuli are categorized while ERPs are
              recorded.  In research to date, a late positive potential (LPP) in the ERP has
              been found to vary as a function of the discrepancy between subjects' attitude
              toward a target stimulus and their attitude toward the stimuli that preceded
              the target stimuls.  Thus, the more negative (positive) the attitude stimulus
              embedded within a short sequence of very positive (negative) stimuli, the
              larger a late positive potential (LPP) amplitude over the centroparietal scalp
              region (Cacioppo, Crites, Berntson, & Coles, 1993; Cacioppo, Crites, Gardner, &
              Berntson, 1994); this relationship was found even when overt or verbal
              responses did not accurately reflect a subject's attitude (Cacioppo et al.,
              1993; Crites, Cacioppo, Gardner, & Berntson, 1995), and this relationship
              generalizes across gender, seasons of the year, head sizes, simple phobia
              status, and experimental (semantic, pictorial) stimuli (Cacioppo et al., 1993,
              1994; Crites et al., 1995; Gardner, Cacioppo, Crites , & Berntson, 1995). These
              results suggest that the LPP amplitude in this paradigm reflects attitude
              categorization (in contrast to response selection or execution) processes. 
              Finally, the results of five different studies indicate that the LPP amplitude
              is larger over the right than left hemisphere when a subject's attitude serves
              as the criterion along which stimuli are categorized; when subjects perform a
              semantic rather than an evaluative categorization task, in contrast, the LPP
              amplitude is not lateralized (Cacioppo, Crites, Gardner, & Berntson, under
              review; Crites, 1994).  The primary goal of the proposed research is to use
              ERPs to test hypotheses regarding affective organization and processing from
              Cacioppo and Berntson's (1994) model of evaluative space and to contrast these
              predictions with those made by the circumplex model of affective organization. 
               Self-report and behavioral measures of attitudes and persuasion processes have
              relied on bipolar measures (e.g., "agree" to "disagree").  These measures are
              not only susceptible to response distortions (e.g., lying) but they also fail
              to differentiate individuals who feel neutrally about a stimulus or decision
              from those who feel ambivalent or conflicted.  For instance, individuals who
              feel neither positive nor negative about abusing drugs or alcohol cannot be
              differentiated from those who feel both strongly positive and strongly negative
              about drugs or alcohol (e.g., a remorseful addict).  The reasons for the onset
              or continuation of drug or alcohol abuse, however, differ dramatically between
              these groups of individuals.   In the current research, we continue work on
              developing a brain-based measure of attitudes and underlying motivational bases
              that (1) does not require that individuals be willing to report accurately how
              they feel   about persons, objects, or issues; and (2) differentiates not only
              between the positive and negative motivations underlying attitudes and
              decisions but also the force (intensity) of each motivational su bstrate.  In
              this approach, a subject's attitude serves as the criterion along which stimuli
              are categorized while event related brain potentials (ERPs) are recorded. In
              research to date, a late positive potential (LPP) in the ERP has been found to
              vary as a function of the discrepancy between subjects' attitude toward a
              target stimulus and their attitude toward the stimuli that preceded the target
              stimuls.  Thus, the more negative (positive) the   attitude stimulus embedded
              within a short sequence of very positive (negative) stimuli, the larger a late
              positive potential (LPP) amplitude over the centroparietal scalp region; this
              relationship is observed even   when overt or verbal responses do not
              accurately reflect a subject's attitude. The primary goal of the research to be
              conducted over the next two-year period is to use ERPs to contrast competing
              theoretical models of affective organization and processing to better
              understand the psychological and cerebral mechanisms underlying productive and
              counterproductive decisions and behaviors.
