Title       : Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1995 
File        : a9512049

Award Number: 9512049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165230             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Haney mass@chemdept.chem.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     This proposal is for the acquisition of a high performance  liquid
              chromatography, ionsprayTM mass spectrometry system, the API-100  produced by
              Perkin-Elmer Sciex. This instrumentation will complement  the existing
              equipment in the Mass Spectrometry Facility and will  significantly enhance the
              mass spectral capabilities at the University  and throughout the region by
              providing access to modern research  instrumentation for the academic and
              industrial research community. For  example, the existing equipment in the Mass
              Spectrometry Facility  cannot currently address the needs of investigators
              looking at small  polar molecules, neither can the existing equipment detect
              high  molecular weight species, features the proposed equipment will address. 
              This proposal contains brief research plans from ten investigators from  a
              variety of departments including Civil Engineering, Chemistry,  Botany,
              Chemical Engineering, Microbiology, Biochemistry, Food Science,  Textile
              Chemistry and Wood and Paper Science. Acquisition of this  instrumentation will
              substantially impact a large number of programs in  biotechnology, engineering
              and environmental research.                  The API-100 will offer improved
              sensitivity, accurate and  extended molecular mass detection limits, structural
              characterizations,  identification of post translational modification of
              peptides, the  ability to perform on-line separations, and the possibility of 
              exploring higher order structures and nonconvalent interactions  currently not
              accessible. One of the most significant advances in mass  spectrometric
              analyses has been the development of the electrospray  ionization and
              pneumatically assisted electrospray ionization  (ionsprayTM) sources. The
              ionspray source design permits effective  coupling of the analytical techniques
              of high performance liquid  chromatography and mass spectrometry. The
              desorption ionization  process, which occurs at atmospheric pressure, generates
              ions from  thermally unstable and nonvolatile species.  Even more important, is
              the  fact that the desorption process can deposit multiple charges on the 
              molecule, effectively extending the mass range of a standard quadruple  mass
              spectrometer. While highly sensitive and accurate molecular weight 
              determinations of large biomolecules are important, structural  information
              necessary for identification can also be obtained through  collision induced
              dissociation's in the ionspray interface. When  combined with appropriate
              enzymatic digestion's and liquid  chromatography, primary structure information
              can be obtained. This  combination of techniques provide important information
              in the  characterization of proteins, oligonucleotides and other biomolecules. 
                              This technique is not limited to the analysis of biomolecules. 
              Small, polar molecules such as phospholipids, polar metabolic products,  and
              environmental contanimants can be identified using the combination  of liquid
              chromatography mass spectrometry. Previous liquid  chromatography mass
              spectrometry interfaces such as flow-faqt atom  bombardment (flow-FAB) are
              ineffective for the analysis of small  molecules. For these applications
              chromatography is critical for  separation of the complex mixtures while the
              mass spectrometry provides  the molecular mass and structural characterization
              needed for  identification without interferences from matrices.                
               The administrative and scientific infrastructure is already in  place to
              assure maximum benefit to the researchers who will utilize  this equipment. A
              Mass Spectrometry User Committee exists and is  responsible for establishing
              policy, operational guidelines and fee  structure for the Facility. Operation
              and maintenance of the equipment  will be the responsibility of the Mass
              Spectrometry Facility Staff  which includes a Director, postdoctoral fellow,
              laboratory supervisor  and undergraduate students working on their senior
              research. This  administrative structure guarantees open and impartial access
              to all  Facility equ ipment, not only by NC State researchers but by researches
               at other system schools including N.C. A&T and UNC-Chapel Hill. The  proposed
              equipment will be incorporated into the existing Mass  Spectrometry Facility
              which was established more than a decade ago and  has maintained a reputation
              for excellence within the University and  throughout the local scientific
              community. Currently fifty percent of  the staff are women. The experience of
              the staff in both chromatography  and mass spectrometry assures the immediate
              and successful utilization.  A clear and urgent need, plus the advantages of
              improvements in  sensitivity, flexibility, and accuracy indicates that
              acquisition of  the API-I 00 is justified.
