Title       : Acquisition of Biophysics Instrumentation for Core Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9512577

Award Number: 9512577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $442420             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald T. Raines RAINES@biochem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Markley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Regina M. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura L. Kiessling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Thomas Record  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Funds are requested for 50% of the cost of creating the University of 
              Wisconsin-Madison Facility  for Biophysics Instrumentation. This campus
              facility would be part of a  $30 million expansion of the Department of
              Biochemistry. The facility  would house six major instruments for the study of
              the complexation,  conformation, and structure of biological and other
              macromolecules.  These instruments are a MicroCal isothermal titration
              calorimeter,  Calorimetry Sciences differential scanning calorimeter, Beckman 
              analytical ultracentrifuge, Aviv circular dichroism spectrometer,  Nicolet
              Fourier transform infrared spectrometer, and Pharmacia surface  plasmon
              resonance detector. In addition, an Instrumentation Specialist  would be hired
              to provide technical assistance to students, staff, and  faculty on the
              installation, use, and maintenance of the requested  instruments.    The six
              principal users of the requested instrumentation are faculty  members who use
              biophysical methods to study biopolymers and their  interactions. These faculty
              reside in four divisions of the university-  -Biochemistry, Chemistry, Chemical
              Engineering, and Pharmacy. They have  active collaborations, routinely share
              equipment and ideas, and  participate in common training and degree programs.
              Together, they  would manage the operations of the proposed core facility. The
              major  users of the requested instruments would be the approximately 100 
              students and staff being trained in the laboratories of the primary  users. In
              addition, the requested instruments would greatly enhance the  research and
              training efforts of ten secondary users. The laboratories  of all primary and
              secondary users are within two city blocks of the  proposed facility. Further,
              it is envisioned that the usage and hence  the impact of the facility would
              soon broaden well beyond the research  groups of the primary and secondary
              users.    The need for the requested instrumentation is extreme. Physical 
              approaches to the analysis of biological systems depend  heavily on 
              instrumentation. Researchers at the University of Wisconsin-Madison now  have
              the ability to produce biomolecules on a large scale, and to  perform limited
              physical analyses on these molecules. Yet, no  isothermal titration
              calorimeters, no differential scanning  calorimeters, no analytical
              ultracentrifuges, and no surface plasmon  resonance detectors exist on any
              campus of the University of Wisconsin.  The Madison campus has two antiquated
              circular dichroism spectrometers  and only three Fourier transform infrared
              spectrometers, each of which  is inaccessible to the primary and secondary
              users. This proposal is  intended to address this crippling lack of modern
              biophysical  instrumentation.
