Title       : Acquisition of a Fermentation Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1995     
File        : a9512129

Award Number: 9512129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred Sherman fsrm@bphvax.biophysics.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. S. Butler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan E. Senior  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terry Platt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric M. Phizicky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George McLendon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 We are requesting funds for the acquisition of equipment and for  renovation
              of a fermentor to expand and upgrade the Fermentation  Facility at the
              University of Rochester. Although the Fermentation  Facility has been in
              operation for over 25 years, some of the equipment  has deteriorated, making it
              difficult and inefficient to prepare large  quantities of yeast and E. coli.
              The requested new equipment and the  renovation will rectify this deficiency at
              the University of Rochester.       The following items are requested for the
              Fermentation Facility: (i)  a BioFlo IV 20 liter fermentor (New Brunswick
              Scientific Co., Inc.);  (ii) the renovation of a 130 liter fermentor that is
              currently in need  of repair; (iii) a Model Z41 continuous flow centrifuge (New
              Brunswick  Scientific Co., Inc.); (iv) a Model 58750 sterilizer (VWR
              Scientific);  and (v) a Labconco Laboratory Washer (VWR Scientific).       The
              BioFlo IV 20 liter fermentor will partially replace and  supplement three 16
              liter fermentors, purchased in 1983, that are in  constant need of repair and
              are inefficient to operate. The 130 liter  fermentor, purchased in 1976 (Model
              1401, Fermentation Design), will be  renotated by the New Brunswick Scientific
              Co. The continuous flow  centrifuge is required for collection of cells. The
              autoclave will  replace a older model, purchased in 1969, that barely
              functions. The  Laboratory Washer will be used for general purposes, including
              washing  of glassware used for the preparation of precultures.       The total
              cost of the equipment for the Fermentation Facility is  $152,667; we are
              requesting $100,000 from NSF, and the University of  Rochester will be provide
              remaining $52,667.       The Fermentation Facility will be used by at least
              five members of  the faculty from the University of Rochester, Drs. F. Sherman,
              E.  Phizicky, T. Platt, A. E. Senior (Department of Biochemistry), and J.  S.
              Butler (Department of Microbiology & Immunology); and by Dr. G.  Mclendon,
              (Department of Chemistry, Universi ty of Rochester, and  Department of
              Chemistry, Princeton University). In addition, the  Fermentation Facility will
              be available to others at the University of  Rochester.       The Fermentation
              Facility is housed on the sixth floor of the  Medical School (room 6-5721). The
              Fermentation Facility will be under  the responsibility of Dr. F. Sherman and
              will be managed by Ms. Linda  Comfort, who is Laboratory technician working in
              Dr. Sherman's group.  Each research group will be responsible for operating the
              equipment for  their own preparations; however, if necessary, the different
              groups can  consult with technicians having expertise in the use of the
              equipment.       The Fermentation Facility will be primarily used to prepare
              large  quantities of normal and mutant forms of yeast and Escherichia coli 
              strains for a wide range of studies carried out at the University of 
              Rochester. The following investigators require the Fermentation  Facility to
              carry out the following studies: F. Sherman, amino-terminal  acetylation and
              post-translational processing of proteins from yeast;  G. Mclendon and F.
              Sherman, X-ray structures and physical studies of  mutant forms of cytochrome c
              of yeast; E. Phizicky, characterization of  components of the tRNA splicing
              reaction of yeast; T. Platt,  identification and characterization of proteins
              involved in 3'-end  formation of yeast mRNA; J. S. Butler, identification and 
              characterization of proteins involved in cleavage and polyadenylation  of yeast
              mRNA; and A. E. Senior, structure-function relationships of  the FlFo-ATP
              synthase from E. coli.       All of these studies are funded by either NIH or
              NSF grants, and all  are parts of projects involving graduate and post-doctoral
              students. In  addition, the Fermentation Facility will provide training for 
              undergraduate students, who are hired to operate the fermentors.
