Title       : Acquisition of a Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1995       
File        : a9512602

Award Number: 9512602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137550             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Ptashne   (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest G. Peralta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jack L. Strominger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Maniatis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              As a consortium of five faculty members and their research groups in  the
              Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University,  we propose
              the acquisition of a Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR)  Spectrometer. This
              instrument can detect the binding of biomolecules in  solution to a
              surface-immobilized ligand. The SPR instrument is  extraordinarily sensitive
              because it uses a laser at a precise angle to  excite the surface plasmons at
              the glass-gold interface of the SPR chip  (upon which the measurements are
              made). The change of angle of the  reflected minimum of intensity as a function
              of time is correlated with  binding of the biomolecule(s) in solution with the
              immobilized ligand.  Using this machine, it is possible to measure association
              and  dissociation rates of binding thereby providing both kinetic and 
              thermodynamic data from the same measurements. With the recent addition  of
              variable temperature capability entropic and enthalpic contributions  to
              binding energy can be separated.    We plan to follow several lines of research
              with the new instrument,  pertaining to: (a) the mechanism of transcription;
              (b) the mechanism of  the immune response; (c) signal transduction pathways;
              and (d)  drug/target inhibitory effects.    In parallel with the experiments
              mentioned above, we will develop new  SPR technologies; in particular we plan
              to design new SPR chips as  follows:    We propose a new paradigm for surface
              immobilization of biomolecules:  the use of mixed, self-assembled monolayers
              (SAMs) of thiols, a small  percentage of which have been derivatized to target
              particular classes  of biomolecules. We have already demonstrated the efficacy
              of this  strategy for a chip which selectively immobilizes histidine-tagged 
              proteins through binding to Ni(II). Use of the technique resulted in an 
              enhanced sensitivity of at least an order of magnitude. In addition to  further
              development of this chip, we plan to contruct a similar chip  for binding
              biomolecules to immobilized DNA. Lastly, we  propose the  development of a chip
              to display an array of small drugs to potential  putative target molecules.
