Title       : Racially and Ethnically Diverse Data Archive
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9512010

Award Number: 9512010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264820             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Colby a colby@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erin Phelps  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janet Malley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Radcliffe College
	      10 Garden Street
	      Cambridge, MA  021383630    617/495-8000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The overall objectives of this project are to build and make available for
              secondary analysis a collection of social and behavioral science data sets with
              racially and ethnically diverse samples, to publicize the availability of those
              data sets, and to encourage the multi-disciplinary use of the data for new
              studies of psychosocial, cultural, economic and behavioral factors in relation
              to adaptive and maladaptive development and individual productivity.  This new
              collection will be added to the current holdings of the Henry A. Murray
              Research Center of Radcliffe College, an archive with over 200 data sets.  A
              distinguished project advisory committee will help Murray Center staff identify
              and evaluate studies for the archive.  The Murray Center is the only data
              archive in the country that offers a comprehensive collection of longitudinal
              studies, the only archive that makes available original records, and the only
              archive that enables longitudinal follow-up of an existing sample. The data
              sets will be thoroughly cleaned, organized and documented for ease of use by
              new investigators.  The availability of the data sets will be widely
              publicized, and several programs will enusre that the data are used well for
              high quality new research.  The data are available without charge to
              researchers at all levels. As a result of its  multidisciplinary focus and it's
              potential contributions to the research of many investigators, this project
              will yield substantial theoretical advances in the social and behavioral
              sciences as well as providing data that will inform social policies.      The
              kind of data necessary for significant progress in the social and behavioral
              sciences is becoming ever more difficult and expensive to gather.  For example,
              no longer content with simple laboratory investigations, the field of
              psychology is increasingly turning to multi-faceted longitudinal investigations
              conducting in real world settings with diverse subject populations.  Yet the
              resources for conducting this research conti nue to dwindle.  The present
              project addresses this conundrum by building and making available for secondary
              analysis a collection of social and behavioral science data sets with racially
              and ethnically diverse samples.  Moreover, the availability of the data sets
              will be widely publicized, and several programs will ensure that the data are
              used well for high quality new research.  The data are available without charge
              to researchers at all levels. As a result of its multidisciplinary focus and
              it's potential contributions to the research of many investigators, this
              project will yield substantial theoretical advances in the social and
              behavioral sciences as well as providing data that will inform social policies.
               In particular, this project is  highly relevant to the Human Capital research
              agenda, with data pertinent to questions of how education,  disadvantage,
              families, and the workplace contribute to the realization of people's potential
              to be productive citizens.
