Title       : The Sevilleta Field Station: Enhancements to Station Computation, Information,
               and Transportation Capabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1995    
File        : a9512658

Award Number: 9512658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123120             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Parmenter parmentr@sevilleta.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Brunt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Sevilleta Field Station serves a large number of  research scientists and
              students who study the extensive and  ecologically diverse region of central
              New Mexico.  The  region incorporates transition zones among numerous biomes, 
              including Great Plains Grassland, Chihuahuan Desert,  Colorado Plateau
              Shrub-Steppe, Interior Chaparral, Mogollon  Pi on-Juniper Woodland, and Montane
              Forests.  Current  scientific research in the region focuses on biotic 
              responses to climate change at various spatial and temporal  time scales
              (seasonal, annual, and long-term), biodiversity  issues, and ecosystem
              restoration following natural and  anthropogenic disturbance.  Funding for
              research activities  on the Sevilleta has exceeded $15.6 million, and continues
               to increase.  From 1990 to 1995, there were 357 scientists  and students
              working on 109 research projects in the region  served by the Sevilleta Field
              Station.  The Sevilleta  Station provided logistical support to a large
              proportion of  these projects.    This project addresses improvements in three
              areas of  station operations requiring enhancements to meet growing  demands by
              field research scientists.  Computation - the  addition of graphical/GIS and
              ARC/INFO workstations and  computer server, with terminals for station
              residences;  Information - installation of a Differential GPS Community  Base
              Station for field GPS work, the addition of a  computerized Ariel Library
              Reference Station for literature  searches/inter-library loan computer
              transmissions, and the  acquisition of station library reference materials; 
              Transportation - the addition several vehicles for use in  field studies
              covering large areas of central New Mexico.  With these enhancements, the
              station's capabilities will  finally match the logistical demands for field
              support by  the Sevilleta's scientific community.
