Title       : Acquisition of an Advanced Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Ecosystems
               Studies at Florida International University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1998    
File        : a9512385

Award Number: 9512385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171845             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudolf Jaffe jaffer@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Fry  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9157,9189,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    As human populations continue to grow and expand, an  increasingly
              sophisticated scientific response is needed to identify  and protect natural
              resources. This need is seldom more evident than  in the south Florida region
              where the growing urban Miami area  encroaches on the adjoining Everglades
              wilderness. As ecological  scientists, we are challenged to accurately
              understand the natural  watershed-scale pattern of the Everglades flora, fauna
              and  biogeochemistry, and how this pattern arises from the interaction of 
              rainfall, soil, nutrients, fire, preceding history, and increasingly,  human
              impacts. One way to study these linkages is to use natural  stable isotope
              tracers that circulate through this large regional  ecosystem. Here we request
              funds for an advanced isotope ratio mass  spectrometer (IRMS) system to be used
              by ecosystems researchers at  Florida International University (FIU) to
              investigate landscape level  changes in the Miami-Everglades region.       
              Isotope technology has been increasingly adopted by modern  ecosystems research
              groups to follow the sources and fates of organic  matter as it is produced by
              plants, consumed by animals and microbes,  and remineralized back to inorganic
              constituents. The isotopes record  diverse kinds of ecosystem information that
              range from details of  photosynthesis to predator-prey interactions to
              emissions of trace  gases such as CO2 and N20. This information often provides
              important  checks for models based on more conventional estimates of ecosystem 
              standing stocks and fluxes. The proposed instrumentation supports  traditional
              measurements of C, N and S isotopes in plants, soils and  animals, as well as
              newer innovative applications involving isotopic  analyses of specific
              indicator compounds eluted from gas  chromatographs. Six case studies
              illustrate the breadth of research to  be supported with this instrumentation:
              1. Shrimp recruitment; 2.  Population analyses of freshwater fish; 3. Ecology
              of carnivorous  Everglades bladderworts;  4. Carbon and nitrogen uptake in
              seagrasses;  5. Nutrient loading and N fixation in the Everglades; and 6.
              Organic  matter fluxes in the Orinoco River and Florida Bay.        The
              instrumentation will, along with an older PRISM mass  spectrometer, form a new
              Isotope Facility at FIU that will be headed  by Dr. Brian Fry. Dr. Fry has
              recently moved to FIU from MBLWoods Hole  where for 9 years he led a similar
              laboratory that published more than  70 papers based on stable isotope results.
              The FIU facility will be  used for research and research training by
              environmentally-oriented  faculty and students at FIU, with yearly workshops
              providing a broad  introduction to the use of stable isotopes as research
              tools. Because  FIU has a student body that is 61% Hispanic or African-American
              and  57% female, this facility will contribute to training minorities and 
              women, groups currently underrepresented in the sciences.
