Title       : Computerized Acoustic Analysis Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1995      
File        : a9512064

Award Number: 9512064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20104              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicola Bessell bessell@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott Myers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This grant supports the purchase of two speech analysis  stations, each
              consisting of a Macintosh PowerPC running Soundscope  software. A single laser
              printer and tape backup system serve both  stations. This equipment will be
              used by the Principal  Investigators and several auxiliary users, primarily
              graduate  students, for the acoustic analysis of speech data, experiments in 
              speech perception and statistical evaluation of findings.       The objectives
              of purchasing this equipment are to support a  specific research strategy in
              linguistics, phonology in  particular, and to provide speech analysis
              facilities for faculty  and graduate students in the Linguistics Department. We
              aim to  encourage detailed acoustic and statistical investigation of  language
              data in the service of developing, testing and extending  quantitative models
              of phonological behavior. Two central  questions in phonology are i) what
              constitutes phonology as  opposed to phonetics and ii) how do the two domains
              interact.  Recently, considerable advances in modeling have been made  through
              well-designed experimental and instrumental analysis of  processes that are
              hypothesized to be phonological in some  languages but have a phonetic
              counterpart in others. Comparison  of findings has led to a notion of
              phonological 'target' as  opposed to phonetic interpolation, each with a
              specific phonetic  profile. Such work provides a starting point for
              differentiating  phonetic from phonological processes. We hope to contribute 
              towards this developing metric by modeling varying data.       The projects to
              be undertaken are designed to investigate  the interaction between phonetics
              and phonology by comparing  findings from a broad base of data from diverse
              languages (Bantu,  Salish, Russian, English, Japanese). The phonological
              processes  under investigation include tonal behavior, the realization of 
              laryngeal features and the phonetic basis of sound change and  loan word
              phonology.
