Title       : Equipment for Chemical Analysis to Serve Interdisciplinary Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1998  
File        : a9512370

Award Number: 9512370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $412785             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dulasiri D. Amarasiriwardena daNS@hampshire.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan H. Goodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampshire College
	      West Street
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/549-4600

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9141,9157,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              An interdisciplinary group of chemistry, biology and geology  faculty at
              Hampshire College will use recent advances in  analytical and separation
              chemistry to study a varied yet  unified group of problems, centering on the
              chemical  analysis of natural and anthropogenic materials. Because of  its
              unique interdisciplinary structure and strong history of  involving students in
              research, Hampshire College's School  of Natural Science is in a strong
              position to take advantage  of new technologies for interdisciplinary research
              as well  as for research training.    For example, in order to track the path
              of trace elements  such as zinc into teeth and understand nutritional stress, a
               biological anthropologist, geologist and chemist will  collaborate in chemical
              analysis of the degree to which  nutrient elements in dietary sources predict
              the  concentrations of these elements in teeth. A chemist, an  ecologist and a
              geologist will follow the different species  of aluminum in a local pond. The
              interdisciplinary focus of  research and research training at Hampshire College
              argue  strongly for a widely accessible, flexible chemical analysis 
              laboratory.    Funds are requested for purchase and update of the equipment 
              listed below that will enable analysis of heavy metals,  light metals, and
              organic compounds:    1) An Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer
              (ICP-MS).  Along with an existing AA, an ICP-MS will provide increased 
              sensitivity and multi-element capabilities in the  quantitative analysis of
              trace metal concentrations in  diverse biological and environmental materials. 
              2) A High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) system,  to replace an old
              system, for  quantitative analysis of  biological and environmental systems for
              organic compounds  and for the separation of biological compounds of interest 
              to physiologists and ecologists.  3) A Fourier Transform Infrared
              Spectrophotometer (FTIR), to  replace older units, along with  instrumentation
              already  available (NMR, GC-MS) will enable  qualitative, and in some  cases
              quantitative, structural information for chemical  species isolated by HPLC. 
              4) A Flow-Injection Analyzer (FIA) will allow on-line  analysis of
              water-soluble compounds such as nutrients,  rapidly analyzing for multiple
              nutrients in numerous  samples.  5) A Gas Chromatograph/Isotope Ratio Mass
              Spectrometer  (GC/IR-MS) will aid in separation, isolation and  identification
              of organic compounds; the IR capability will  enable stable-isotope studies on
              animals in vivo.  6) Auxiliary equipment for sample preparation and data 
              manipulation include a microwave  digester and other sample preparation
              equipment and  computers to control experiments and for data analysis.   
              Chemical analysis is an interdisciplinary meeting ground,  central to both
              faculty and student research in biology and  the environment. The following
              project areas form one  coherent focus of research in interdisciplinary
              chemical  applications: 1) development of analytical techniques for 
              characterization of metal species (applied to problems in  aqueous
              environmental problems), 2) remineralization of  nutrients from the benthos of
              Waquoit Bay, a Land Margin  Ecosystem Research site, 3) volcanic geochemistry
              (magma  mixing in the origin of granitic rocks), 4) plant-insect  chemical
              ecology (studies of plant chemicals produced as  deterrents to insect feeding),
              5) analysis of nutrient  elements in teeth in  relation to known diet and 6)
              nutritional biochemistry of  proteins in ruminants.    The new instruments will
              support faculty and undergraduate  research and research training in a variety
              of settings.  Students' research training will be enhanced through use of 
              instrumentation in advanced courses, research-type projects  in courses, and
              senior theses. Increased collaborative  faculty research (involving students as
              well) will improve  faculty productivity.
