Title       : Acquisition of a Low Vacuum Scanning Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9512512

Award Number: 9512512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75100              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Lentz dlentz@nybg.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Funds are being requested for the acquisition of a low vacuum scanning  electron
              microscope (SEM) with a digital image storage and output  capability. The model
              proposed for purchase, a JEOL JSM-5410LV, can  achieve a resolution of 4 nm in
              the high vacuum mode and 5.5 nm in the  low vacuum mode. Accelerating voltages
              range from 0.5 to 30 kV and  magnifications can be as high as 200,000X or as
              low as 15X. Specimen  chamber pressures vary from 270 Pa (2 Torr) to 7 X 10-4
              Pa (5 X 10-6  Torr) in the low and high vacuum modes, respectively. A SEM with
              these  specifications has many advantages for botanical research, but the main 
              asset is that plant tissues can be observed directly without the need  for
              chemical fixation, dehydration or metal coating in the low vacuum  mode. This
              will not only represent a savings in preparation time, but  also will provide
              more accurate representations of delicate specimens  to be observed and in some
              cases will obviate the need to alter or  actually destroy specimens that are
              unique in character, e.g.,  paleobotanical material. Furthermore, digital
              images of specimens can  be stored electronically and added as TIFF files to
              databased botanical  specimen records. The high vacuum mode also can be used to
              provide high  resolution imaging comparable to currently-marketed, conventional
              SEM's  that employ a tungsten electron source.    The SEM is an indispensable
              instrument for systematic and morphologic  plant research. The New York
              Botanical Garden (NYBG) requests funds to  purchase a new SEM to replace the
              currently used 10-year-old  instrument, which is nearing the end of its useful
              life. The SEM is  used at the NYBG to investigate pollen grains, spores and
              various plant  tissues such as epidermises, vascular elements and floral
              components.  Such investigations provide micromorphological data that are
              essential  to the research of the Garden's staff and graduate students. The 
              instrument also will be used for the identification of varying plant  samples
              as a key compo nent of paleoethnobotanical investigations and  for the purpose
              of supplying essential information to the public and  certain government
              agencies. The proposal includes detailed  descriptions of research activities
              and identification services  performed at the NYBG using the SEM.    Results
              from Prior NSF Support:  D. L. Lentz has not received an NSF grant within the
              last five years.
