Title       : Archaeology of the Georgia Woodland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9512651

Award Number: 9512651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34345              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl T. Steinen ksteinen@westga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : State Univ of West Georgia
	      
	      Carrollton, GA  30118    404/834-1311

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9229,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Karl Steinen will conduct one
              season of fieldwork in southwestern Georgia. He will carry out a survey in the
              10 kilometer area immediately surrounding the prehistoric site of Kolomoki. 
              This large impressive site contains multiple raised earthen mounds associated
              with a crescent shaped village area. Some of the mounds served burial purposes
              while others likely provided bases for wooden structures. Although Kolomoki
              exhibits some of the traits characteristic of highly developed prehistoric
              `Mississippian` societies, it lacks others such a fortifications and the
              elaborate status markers known from Mississippian centers. Dr. Steinen wishes
              to examine this anomaly and in this first stage of the research will attempt to
              relate Kolomoki to the broader surrounding region. He wishes to know if the
              site served as focal point for a larger regional system or whether it
              functioned independently and in isolation. To accomplish this he will conduct a
              systematic surface survey to locate ceramics, lithics and other cultural
              remains. In some areas he will undertake shovel testing to locate buried
              materials. In promising areas limited test excavations will be carried out.
              Ceramics will be stylistically dated to time period to determine whether
              synchroniety with Kolomoki exists.   Before the arrival of the Spanish, complex
              societies had developed in many parts of the US Southeast. These societies
              integrated large numbers of individuals into hierarchically organized political
              systems which were able to mobilize enough labor to construct large and
              impressive burial and religious mounds. Trade networks transported shells,
              implements of exotic stone and other materials over long distances and the
              burial of such objects with limited numbers of individuals indicates the
              emergence of social elites. Archaeologists with to know how such societies
              developed and were maintained. Dr. Steinen believes that study of regional
              failures can be just as informative as successes and his research is based on
              this premise. He proposes that  local ecological characteristics provide the
              proximate cause and therefore he wishes to situate Kolomoke in a regional
              environmental context.  This research is important for several reasons. It will
              provide data of interest to many archaeologists and shed new light on a poorly
              understood aspect of American prehistory. It will increase our understanding of
              how complex societies develop and it will assist in increasing the educational
              capabilities of an undergraduate teaching institution.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        
