Title       : An Ultraviolet Laser For a Multi-User Confocal Microscope Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1997     
File        : a9512985

Award Number: 9512985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48965              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Luther   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph P. Kao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin F. Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Jonathan Lederer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The central goal of this project is the development of advanced  time-resolved
              FTIR instrumentation which will allow for the first time  the investigation of
              a wide variety of biological systems at the  sub-nanosecond to millisecond
              range. The proposed instrument will  incorporate novel features which will
              address the major short-comings  of current time-resolved FTIR instruments. The
              project will be  supported by the newly formed Center for Photonics Research at
              Boston  University and Bruker Instruments, Inc., a leader in time-resolved FTIR
               instrumentation    In recent years it has been demonstrated that Fourier
              transform  infrared (FTIR) difference spectroscopy can provide detailed 
              information about dynamic changes in the protonation state, local  environment
              and orientation of specific amino acid residues in  proteins. This ability is
              enhanced by the recent development of  powerful new methods for band
              assignments by the introduction of  site-directed isotope labels (SDIL) into
              proteins. However, the current  generation of FTIR instruments have fallen
              short of their promise for  probing rapid conformational changes in
              biomolecular systems. Existing  limitations are related to the lack of
              sufficiently powerful broad-band  infrared sources, the relatively slow
              cycle-time or irreversible  response of most biological systems upon
              activation, the prevalence of  biological systems activated by mechanisms other
              than light, and the  need to simultaneously monitor changes in the infrared and
              UV-visible  absorption of a sample.    We propose to develop a unique step-scan
              FTIR system with the ability  to record simultaneous sub-nanosecond to
              millisecond infrared and  W-visible absorption changes in biomolecular systems.
              The instrument  will be based on recent breakthroughs in technology for
              ultra-high  intensity broad-band continuous (CW) and pulsed IR sources, rapid 
              sub-nanosecond transient recorders and infrared detectors and step-scan 
              interferometers. The development of a novel synchronized sampl e step 
              translator (SSST) will make it possible to shorten dramatically  measurement
              times and open the door to the investigation of dynamic  processes in a wide
              variety of biomolecular systems under physiological  conditions, including
              systems not activated by light, systems with very  slow cycle times and systems
              with irreversible processes. By combining  this proposed FTIR instrumentation
              with the recently developed method  of SDIL and site-directed non-native amino
              acid replacement (SNAAR),  breakthroughs are expected in the fields of protein
              folding, enzyme  mechanism, ion transport and signal reception. Transfer of the
               developed technology for future commercial use will be facilitated by  the
              close interaction during the project with Bruker Instruments and  through the
              Center for Photonics Research             This request is for funds to purchase
              a Molecular Dynamics  PhosphorImager for use in research and teaching in
              molecular biology.  This instrument will be critical for research applications
              of at least  eight faculty as well as in training undergraduate and graduate 
              students in molecular biology.      Autoradiography using storage  phosphor
              technology offers several advantages over traditional  detection methods.
              Quantitation of amounts of radioactive protein or  DNA on gels or filters has
              traditionally been done using X-ray film and  densitometry or using
              scintillation counters. Storage phosphors are up  to 100 times more sensitive
              than X-ray film, enabling measurements well  below levels of detection for
              film. Also, screens are quantitatively  accurate over five orders of magnitude
              as compared to X-ray film which  has a linear range over only two orders of
              magnitude. The new  technology is also environmentally advantageous because it
              eliminates  the heavy metal waste disposal problems associated with film 
              processing, and when it replaces scintillation counting it reduces  mixed
              organic and radiochemical waste disposal problems. This  technology will enable
              new experimental appro aches, improve  quantitation, enhance productivity, and
              it will afford our students  state of the art training.           Significant
              advances in digital imaging technology provide  capabilities not otherwise
              available. The overall objective of this  proposal is to obtain a 16-bit/pixel
              digital imager that will permit  investigators in the Plant Sciences Building
              at The University of  Georgia to profit from this technology. A single
              instrument that will  provide images of media labelled with both radioisotopic
              and  non-radioisotopic probes is requested. Supporting items include a 
              microcomputer essential for operation of the imager, one high energy  phosphor
              screen cassette for each major user, one low-energy phosphor  screen cassette
              to be shared among all users, four chemiluminescence  screen cassettes to be
              shared among all users, a grey-scale laser  printer for routine and inexpensive
              output, and site-licensed  image-analysis software. All will be integrated into
              an existing  computer network that will not only permit data to be moved
              readily  from the imager to each user s laboratory, but will also provide
              direct  access to a publication quality color printer and to a CD recorder for 
              archiving data.      The imaging system (1) will permit us to obtain
              quantitative  information with greatly enhanced sensitivity and accuracy, and
              (2)  will dramatically decrease exposure times, permitting experiments to 
              progress at a much more rapid pace. Current usage of film for imaging  media in
              the Plant Sciences Building exceeds 4,700/year, indicating  that a digital
              imager will receive extensive and efficient use. The  instrument will be used
              primarily with DNA, RNA and protein blots,  labelled with 32p, 1251, 35S, 14C,
              or with enzymes that yield  chemiluminescence given appropriate substrates.
              Research programs that  will benefit from the equipment range from
              mission-oriented (e.g., H.  Roger Boerma) to fundamental (e.g., Kelly Dawe).
              These programs include  the regulation of virulence genes in a plan t pathogen
              (Timothy Denny),  intercellular movement of plant viruses and intracellular
              movement of  viral glycoproteins (C. Michael Deom), characterization of
              root-knot  nematode secretions (Richard Hussey and Celeste Ray), genetic 
              improvement of pest resistance and stress tolerance in soybean (H.  Roger
              Boerma), use of molecular markers in plant breeding and evolution  (Gary
              Kochert), characterization of two pathways of polyamine synthesis  in plants
              (Russell Malmberg), the genetics and cell biology of the  maize meiotic
              centromere and kinetochore (Kelly Dawe), and a  comparative evaluation of the
              phytochrome gene family and its  expression in tomato and soghum (Lee Pratt and
              Marie-Michele  Cordonnier-Pratt).      In transmission electron microscopy of
              biological structures, there  are two phenomena that often prevent imaging at
              the molecular level:  radiation damage and contamination. These problems can be
              reduced by  two approaches: protecting the specimen and/or improving the 
              microscope.      In the first approach, significant progress has been achieved.
               Firstly, a special apparatus has been developed for rapid  cryoimmobilization
              of a living cell during light microscopic  observation for further imaging as
              this cell's cryo-whole-mount.  Cellular architecture is retained at the
              molecular level and therefore  can be referred directly to the behavior of the
              living cell (Malecki  1992, Proc. EMSA 50: 566-567. Secondly, the deep negative
              staining /  embedding procedure has been developed. A thick and uniform layer
              of  embedment supports and protects the three-dimensional structure within  the
              whole-mount. This electron-dense preparation is only transparent  for electrons
              with high energies attainable at high accelerating  voltages (Ris&Malecki 1993,
              J. Struct. Biol. 111:148-157).      In this project, as the second approach,
              the aim is to improve the  microscope for work
