Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for Nucleic Acid and Protein Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1995    
File        : a9512341

Award Number: 9512341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard V. Kesseli rick.kesseli@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rachel C. Skvirsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9169,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Three items that would become components of our expanding  molecular
              biology/biotechnology and environmental biology  programs are solicited. These
              items are an automated DNA  sequencer, a DNA synthesizer and a filmless
              autoradiography  system. These tools for the synthesis of DNA and the  analysis
              and quantitation of nucleic acids and proteins will  extend research
              capabilities in numerous areas. A core of 12  research laboratories would
              directly benefit from the  acquisition of this equipment. This core includes
              members  from both the molecular biology/ biotechnology and the  environmental
              biology programs in the department. A major  Departmental priority has been to
              forge collaborations among  these diverse research interests. It has become
              clear that  the key to integrating these programs is molecular analysis.    The
              molecular biologists routinely require nucleic acid  sequence data for
              characterizing genes and verifying  constructs. In addition these researchers
              must precisely  quantify mRNA and protein levels to investigate gene 
              regulation, and must synthesize oligonucleotides to  manipulate specific DNA
              sequences. We also have an expanding  environmental biology program that has
              strengths in  conservation and population biology. The investigators of  this
              program are relying increasingly on the power and  resolution offered by
              molecular techniques. The problem  encountered by population biologists is that
              the large  sample sizes and extensive array of markers often required  for
              these studies have restricted the wide scale use of  laborious and expensive
              molecular techniques.    The proposed equipment would be used jointly by both
              the  molecular biology/ biotechnology and the environmental  biology segments
              of our department. The equipment would  serve as a focal point to foster
              collaborative and  integrative research efforts. These projects range from 
              basic research on gene regulation to studies of population  dynamics and
              conservation genetics. The efficiency of these  projects would  be increased
              and all would be expanded and  strengthened by the acquisition. The
              instrumentation would  also have a significant impact on our environmental
              biology,  biotechnology and molecular biology research training  capabilities.
