Title       : Equipment for Environmental Research in Geography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  1996  
File        : a9512484

Award Number: 9512484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26076              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol P. Harden charden@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sally P. Horn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth H. Orvis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With partial support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Carol Harden and
              her colleagues will purchase three sets of equipment: a Bartington MS2 magnetic
              susceptibility system with IBM compatible software; a Trimble Navigation
              Pathfinder Pro XL geographic position system; a Thermolyne F6020C muffle
              furnace with automatic temperature control. All three instruments will aid the
              researchers in their geographically- related projects which examine the
              interaction between human behavior and environmental change.   One focus of the
              Geography Department at the University of Tennessee is the reconstruction of
              environment through the use of lake cores. The pollen and other materials which
              these contain permit researchers to reconstruct vegetation and aspects of
              geomorphology at consecutive points in time and thus gain insight into change.
              It is also possible, in some cases to determine the cause of this change and
              integrate human behavior into the system. Magnetic susceptibility measurements
              assist in the chronological correlation of different cores and thus serve,
              indirectly, as a dating technique. Through controlled combustion of core
              sediment it is possible to determine the amount of organic material present.
              Finally a geographical positioning system will allow the researchers to
              position cores and other geographic features accurately in space.  Dr. Harden
              and her colleagues are currently pursuing a number of research projects.
              Several involve an ongoing effort to reconstruct Late Quaternary climate
              patterns in the neotropics and to identify human impacts on vegetation. The
              work to date has yielded new insights on the role of fire in high-altitude
              contexts and on the timing and extent of human disturbance in lowland
              rainforest environments.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
