Title       : Photonic Band Gap Materials and Devices, U.S.-Turkey Collaborative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9512812

Award Number: 9512812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18776              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Tuttle gtuttle@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kai Ming Ho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 5940,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This project supports collaboration between Drs. Gary Tuttle and
              Kai-Ming Ho of the  Department of Electrical Engineering at Iowa State
              University, in Ames, IA, and Dr. Ekmel Ozbay of the Department of Physics at
              Bilkent University, in Ankara, Turkey.  The research will involve experimental
              and theoretical research in the area of photonic band gap materials.  Using a
              new layer-by-layer photonic band gap structure, invented and demonstrated by
              the Iowa State group, as a basis, the scientists propose to work on four
              different issues of photonic crystals: THz crystals, defects, novel materials,
              and fabrication at infrared wave scales.  The collaboration of the two research
              groups in the U.S. and Turkey should lead to the development of new
              experimental, and theoretical tools which will be used to understand the
              characteristics of these new materials.  Such understanding will help to design
              and build photonic crystals which may be used for a variety of applications in
              millimeter-wave, infrared, and visible wavelengths such as millimeter-wave
              antennas, and thresholdless semiconductor lasers.  Scope:  This project will
              extend the collaboration between a senior scientist (Ho), a junior scientist
              (Tuttle), both from the U.S., with a junior Turkish scientist (Ozbay) after the
              latter has joined one of Turkey's most respected universities, Bilkent
              University.  Dr. Ozbay has recently spent two and half years as a post-doctoral
              research fellow at Iowa State, where he, Tuttle, and Ho, have published four
              papers and submitted two more for publications in U.S. journals, in the area of
              condensed matter physics.  The two sides intend to initiate the collaboration
              between Iowa State and Bilkent.  At Iowa State, where Dr. Ho is the leader of
              the theoretical group, they have high performance computational facilities
              including massively parallel computing machines, appropriate computational
              programs, as well as excellent facilities for photonic band gap related
              fabrication.  At Bilkent there is a newly completed microfabrication facility
              with a class 100 clean room, and various fabrication and testing equipment. 
              The team at Bilkent will use that facility to fabricate photonic crystals at
              micron and submicron dimensions which require a true clean room environment,
              and will also use network analyzer to test the properties of crystals at
              microwave frequencies. The project meets the objectives of the Division of
              International Programs in linking US scientists with foreign scientists where
              the talents and capabilities are complementary, and by involving young
              scientists in international cooperation.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
