Title       : Acquisition of a Multi-Media Computing Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1995     
File        : a9512455

Award Number: 9512455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162083             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca J. Emigh emigh@bigstar.sscnet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Berk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ivan Szelenyi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Mason  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. Treiman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Emanuel A. Schegloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, the Sociology Department at UCLA will
              create an integrated, shared computing environment based on the Macintosh
              platform which allows for state-of-the-art computing in several research areas.
              The laboratory will consist of high-end Macintosh computers configured and
              networked for the following purposes: general use microcomputers with numeric
              co-processing capabilities; X-windows terminals; multimedia devices capable of
              audio and video recording and playback; multimedia devices usable for the
              analyses of documents, both textual and pictorial.   This system will
              facilitate research in textual analyses, conversation and interaction analysis
              and statistical computing - all areas in which faculty members specialize.
              Historical sociologists rely heavily on texts and search and analyze them based
              on particular works and phrases - a very time consuming process. With the new
              system, it will be possible to scan such materials into the computer and
              conduct quick and efficient searches. This will facilitate current work such as
              the study of peasant economics and the relationship between agricultural
              production practices and a range of social variables. Interaction analyses
              focus on the relationship between individuals and this will be facilitated by
              two laboratories with visual and sound equipment. Issues such as the
              relationship between doctors and patients can be studied and feedback is
              directly useful in physician training. Because, in good part, of lack of
              appropriate instrumentation, powerful new techniques developed by statisticians
              are rarely used in the social sciences and the equipment provided will make
              many of these available not only to senior researchers, but to graduate and
              undergraduate students as well.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
