Title       : Acquisition of 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1995     
File        : a9512331

Award Number: 9512331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221905             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Vander Velde   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal outlines the need at the University of Kansas  for a new 400 MHz 
              NMR spectrometer. This instrument will fill the dual role of  augmenting an
              existing  500 MHz instrument, which is running at capacity, and  superseding
              the older of two  existing 300 MHz instruments (11 years old and increasingly 
              unreliable). The  instrument would be housed in the university-wide NMR 
              Laboratory under the  supervision of two experienced NMR spectroscopists, who
              will  maintain it, train users,  and perform many of the more complex
              experiments.  Approximately 100 graduate  students, postdocs, and
              undergraduates will use the  instrument for chemical and  biochemical research
              annually.    The instrument requested is a Bruker DRX-400 with a UNIX  (Silicon
              Graphics  Indy) based data system and the capability to perform all of  the
              major liquids NMR  experiments. These include inverse (HMQC, HMBC) and spin- 
              lock (ROESY,  HOHAHA) experiments which can currently only be performed on  the
              500 and are  much in demand. The lack of a versatile alternative  instrument
              currently constitutes a  serious bottleneck for this large and diverse NMR user
               group. The 400 MHz  instrument is highly suitable for molecules up to the 
              complexity of small peptides,  which includes most of the samples generated by
              the major  user group of ten faculty  whose research programs are described
              herein. The NMR Lab  staff, in consultation  with users, will allocate time on
              the two high field  instruments in order to ensure high  quality results,
              optimum efficiency, and equitable access.  In addition to more  throughput and
              fewer delays in data acquisition, increased  hands-on involvement by  graduate
              students and postdocs in more complex experiments  will be a positive result 
              of the new instrument in the NMR Lab--making these  individuals more proficient
              at  practical NMR spectroscopy. The instrument will also be used  in various
              graduate and  undergraduate courses, including hands-on use in the junior 
              level physical chemistry  lab oratory.    Besides producing students versed in
              using a modern  instrument, the proposed  instrument will aid in recruiting and
              retaining faculty and  graduate students. NMR is  essential to many areas of
              chemical and biochemical research  and access to it is a key  component of the
              research environment for individuals  working in these areas. The  proposed
              instrument is especially important for adequate  support of young 
              investigators who have recently joined the faculty or who  will be hired in the
              near  future.
