Title       : Development of the Nanomanipulator: A Real-Time Scanning Probe Microscope
               Interface for Nanometer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1995  
File        : a9512431

Award Number: 9512431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Superfine rsuper@physics.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leandra Vicci  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sean Washburn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell M. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick P. Brooks, Jr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9157,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9512431  Superfine    Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) has given scientists and 
              engineers the ability to map a wide range of physical  properties of surfaces,
              such as topography, friction,  conductance, with lateral resolution measured in
              nanometers.  However, instruments are needed which allow us to change the 
              sample with the same ease that we now characterize it. The  nanomanipulator
              project will develop an intuitively natural  user interface for scanning probe
              microscopy and manipulation.  The interface addresses the two aspects most
              important when  using SPM: representing the data and controlling the SPM tip. 
              For the former, the project will develop a virtual-reality  interface which
              presents data from the SPM with a stereoscopic  three-dimensional rendering
              presented on a monitor. For the  latter, the interface uses a manual force
              feedback input device  which allows the user to control the position of the SPM
              tip on  the nanometer scale through the lateral motion of a hand-held  stylus,
              and simultaneously feel the tip/sample force through  the force feedback
              feature. This enables a user to place the  nanometer-sized microscopic tip on a
              specific feature, and to  sense its changing topography while the feature is
              being  modified. In this way, the finest features of an electronic  device or
              the dissection of a chromosome can be efficiently  tailored.  %%%  The
              nanomanipulator project will develop a unique instrument  for the manipulation
              and modification of materials on the  nanometer length scale, which will be
              used in a wide range of  experiments in materials science, physics,
              biochemistry, and  computer science. The nanomanipulator is designed to be 
              assembled from commercially available components and a major  commercial
              instrument company is an integral part of the  project. This assures that the
              instrument, as designed and  completed, will address the generic needs of the
              microscopy  community.  ***
