Title       : Acquisition of a Tandem Accelerator for the Support of Materials Research
               Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9512599

Award Number: 9512599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322390             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Weete   (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9157,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  9512599  Weete    The ion accelerator laboratory at the Nuclear Science
              Center at  Auburn University will be upgraded through acquisition of a  tandem
              accelerator equipped with a radio frequency (rf) exchange  ion source, a high
              voltage source injector system, and a high  energy quadrupole focusing lens.
              The new machine replaces a  twenty-six year old accelerator which is nearing
              the end of its  serviceable life. The accelerator laboratory functions
              primarily  in support of various materials research programs in different 
              colleges and departments. These efforts focus primarily on thin  film systems
              and interactions, such as silicon carbide and III-V  compound semiconductor
              epitaxial film characterization, ion-  induced radiation damage in insulators,
              materials oxidation  processes, and electronics packaging and diamond film
              technology.  Analysis techniques available in the accelerator laboratory for 
              materials studies include proton induced x-ray emission (PIXE),  Rutherford
              backscattering spectrometry (RBS), light ion  channeling (LIC),  fast neutron
              activation analysis (FNAA), and  some ion implantation capabilities. Most of
              these techniques will  be available in the upgraded facility, and the new
              machine will  facilitate development of expanded analysis capabilities such as 
              neutron activation/time-of-flight techniques.  %%%  The new tandem accelerator
              will allow the laboratory to provide  efficient research support for materials
              science programs through  improved access to modern analytical techniques. It
              replaces an  ancient unit which currently consumes large material and human 
              resources for its maintenance. The accelerator laboratory has a  long history
              of collaborative research with nearby minority  institutions, and the program
              has a long-term commitment in  support of educational opportunities for
              minority students in the  physical sciences which the new accelerator will
              enhance.  ***
