Title       : Acquisition of a Shared DNA Sequencing Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1995      
File        : a9512406

Award Number: 9512406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101219             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Dyer David-Dyer@uokhsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rodney K. Tweten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory J. Palumbo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Ferretti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Hildebrand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma HSC
	      P O BOX 26901
	      Oklahoma City, OK  731260901    405/271-4000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This application proposes to acquire the necessary instrumentation for 
              developing a Shared DNA Sequencing Facility at the University of  Oklahoma
              Health Science Center. This instrumentation will include an  automated DNA
              sequenator with attendant computers and software for  collecting DNA sequence
              data, an optical disk drive for archiving  sequence data, a Sun workstation and
              an additional Macintosh computer  for DNA sequence analysis, and a
              spectrophotometer for analysis of  template DNA and primer concentration and
              purity for sequencing  reactions. Currently, we have state-of-the-art
              facilities that support  cell biology, genetics and most other aspects of
              molecular biological  research. However, rapid automated DNA sequencing is not
              currently  available on the Oklahoma City campus. Automated DNA sequencing can
              be  performed in the laboratory of Dr. Bruce Roe, in the Department of 
              Chemistry on the University of Oklahoma/Norman campus (roughly a 30  minute
              automobile drive). However, this facility is heavily used by the  laboratories
              of Dr. Roe and his collaborators, precluding routine use  of that
              instrumentation for the projects proposed in this application.    The research
              projects in the Department of Microbiology and Immunology  that will
              immediately benefit from this facility include: i) three  projects to examine
              structure/function relationships in eucaryotic and  procaryotic proteins
              (Lloyd, Gilmore and Tweten), ii) a project that  will examine the evolutionary
              development of MHC loci in minority  populations (Hildebrand), iii) a project
              that will examine the  evolutionary relationships among poxviruses (Palumbo),
              iv) a project  examining procaryotic plasmid/chromosomal interactions
              (Gilmore), and  v) two projects that will sequence the genomes of a
              gram-positive and a  gram-negative coccus (Dyer and Ferretti). Some of these
              projects are  currently supported by extramural funding, and the availability
              of this  Shared DNA Sequencing Facility will dramatically increase the 
              likelihood o f extramural funding for other projects. Intertwined with  and an
              essential component of this scientific enterprise is significant  training in
              basic molecular biology. This training includes the ongoing  research education
              of post-doctoral fellows and graduate students  within the Department of
              Microbiology and Immunology. Further, several  programs in the Department and
              the University support research training  for undergraduate students, minority
              high school teachers and minority  high school students. Thus, the
              instrumentation proposed for this  Shared DNA Sequencing Facility will
              significantly enhance the research  and research training environment within
              the Department of Microbiology  and Immunology. In support of this, the
              Department of Microbiology and  Immunology has committed funds to support a
              technician dedicated to the  facility, and to support the service contracts
              necessary to maintain  the facility for the initial three years of operation.  
               Although the Shared DNA Sequencing Facility will be housed in the  Department
              of Microbiology and Immunology, the facility will be  available to all
              investigators on the Oklahoma City campus, subject to  user fees to help defray
              costs. Thus, this facility will have  significant impact outside the
              Department, enriching the research and  research training capability of the
              entire University of Oklahoma  Health Science Center campus. Consistent with
              this potential, we have  obtained significant institutional support for this
              Shared DNA  Sequencing Facility, as the Health Sciences Center has pledged
              matching  funds (dollar-for-dollar) to purchase the instrumentation to be
              housed  in this facility.
