Title       : Instrumentation for Research in Computionally-Intensive Econometric Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1995    
File        : a9512435

Award Number: 9512435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Ruud   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel L. McFadden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With partial support from the National Science Foundation, the University of
              California, Berkeley will upgrade its Econometrics Laboratory Scientific
              Workstation Facility (EML/SWF). Its UNIX network was established in 1991 and
              designed to support research and instruction in computationally intensive
              methods in economics, as well as applied research using these methods. Given
              the number and complexity of the software it supports, the very large size of
              many economics data bases and the number of users, the present system in
              inadequate and prone to failure. Under this grant, three compute servers and
              one file server will be upgraded. Disks will be added that free storage for a
              planned network gopher server for econometric software and data.  The EML/SWF
              is a facility used by a worldwide network of econometricians who are engaged in
              research on computer-intensive methods. In addition, the facility is used by 34
              members of the Berkeley economics faculty who are conducting 22 organized
              research projects, and by other economists at Berkeley who need specialized
              software the facility supports. The EML/SWF provides a broad spectrum of
              software for algorithm development and econometric applications, in a framework
              designed for economic research, particularly in computer intensive methods. The
              facility also supports instruction in the graduate program of the Department of
              Economics. In addition to a sequence of four semester-long econometrics
              courses, courses in macroeconomics, labor economics and public finance use the
              facility to teach technique and to expose students to large economic data sets.
              Approximately 265 graduate students use the EML/SWF for course work and
              dissertation research. The upgrade therefore will have a significant positive
              impact on both research and teaching.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
