Title       : Analytical Ultracentrifuge for Biochemical Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1998   
File        : a9512912

Award Number: 9512912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88133              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard O. Spivey ospivey@biochem.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven P. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We are requesting the acquisition of the Beckman model XL-A  analytical
              ultracentrifuge. This instrument is a  state-of-the-art ultracentrifuge built
              along guidelines  developed by the leading research experts. Though scarcely 
              three years old, this instrument has made an impressive  impact in the field
              with nearly 100 references to its use in  a recent bibliography. It is clear
              that virtually all  biological researchers pursuing structure-function studies 
              will include this method in their repertoire in the near  future. No comparable
              instrument is manufactured elsewhere.  The past near abandonment of this
              approach is due to several  factors, but the difficulties in maintenance and
              use of the  old model E instrument are sufficient reasons by themselves.  It is
              true that accurate alternative methods now exist in  many cases for determining
              molecular weights of proteins,  e.g., DNA sequencing and mass spectrometry.
              However,  analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC) excels in its  versatility to
              accommodate a wide range of experimental  conditions and different types of
              macromolecules. Perhaps  most important is the superiority of AUC in many cases
              for  analyzing complex associating macromolecules. Another  advantage of AUC is
              that it is based on rigorous model  equations and is a primary method unlike
              secondary methods  that require standards and the assumption that these 
              standards behave in the same manner as the molecule being  studied. In
              addition, AUC can provide hydrodynamic  parameters from which shapes of
              macromolecules can be  estimated. Another important advantage of this new AUC 
              instrument is that it is compatible with computer programs  for controlling and
              analyzing experiments giving it an  extraordinary advance in user-friendliness.
              Now even  non-experts can analyze very complex macromolecular systems 
              utilizing powerful calculation-intensive methods with  relative ease and a
              modest amount of training and  advisement. These programs continually being
              improved, are  available through th e internet users groups that also allows 
              users to access all leaders in this field.          The PI (HOS) of this
              application has nearly 20 years  of experience using the model E analytical
              ultracentrifuge  and related methods for studying simple and complex 
              associating systems. He has even more extensive experience  in computer methods
              of data analysis - methods that are  especially valuable in analyzing data from
              the new AUC  instrument.          The projects described in this application
              depend  extensively on the special advantages of the requested AUC  instrument.
              For example, the majority of the studies are  concerned with macromolecular
              associations. It is often true  that two (or more) methods can provide greater
              insights than  either method alone. Such is the case with AUC also as 
              illustrated in the project below on polysaccharide  structures. Here the
              combination of intrinsic viscosity and  sedimentation velocity data provide
              information on molecular  shape that is independent of the molecular hydration.
               Fortunately, we have top-of-the line viscometry and other  modern methods that
              are complementary to AUC. In summary,  the projects described below are at the
              forefront of basic  research and will be greatly enhanced by, and in some case 
              critically dependent on, analytical ultracentrifugation.  This method has
              remarkable versatility and the current  instrument sought provides outstanding
              advances in  technology and ease of use.          Currently there is no
              functional AUC instrument in the  State of OK. However, in ~ relatively short
              time we have  identified an impressive array of scientists in OK (about  25)
              who have expressed both a keen desire and an important  need for the XL-A. In
              addition, many others in OK will  undoubtedly find the instrument extremely
              helpful to their  research as they become familiar with its capabilities and 
              their research develops.          Because of its central value in molecular
              biology and  polymer chemistry and its expected prevalence in future   labs, it
              is important that our students become familiar with  this instrument and
              method. We have vigorous research  activities for both undergraduate through
              postgraduate  students. In addition, we have recently obtained two major 
              grants serving minorities: a Howard Hughes grant,  "Undergraduate Biological
              Sciences Education Program," of  $1,000 000. over the next 4 years, and an NSF
              grant,  "Oklahoma State Alliance for Minority Participation in  Science" for
              $5,000,000 over the next 5 years. Both of these  grants were obtained and are
              administered by faculty in  Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. Upon
              acquisition of the  instrument, numerous students supported by these programs 
              will have the opportunity to become trained in this eminent  technology.
