Title       : Nanofabricated Devices for Picoliter-Scale Analyses of Embryonic Gene Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9512697

Award Number: 9512697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255822             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Roukes roukes@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael G. Harrington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  Many  important analytical studies of biomolecules are not feasible  because
               current technology is both too insensitive and at a scale  too  gross  for 
              experimentation with extremely small  sample  volumes.  The  overall  objective
               of  this proposal is to explore  the  potential  of  micro-  and  nanometer
              scale technology to overcome these  limitations.  Two underlying principles
              motivate this work:           molecular  detection  capability  can  be 
              greatly  enhanced  in  micro/nanometer scale devices.       small  volumes, 
              from micro- to pico-liters or  less,  can  be  more   appropriately handled in
              small devices.       The  ultimate objective in these endeavors is to realize 
              integrated  instruments  that  permit in situ extraction and analysis  of 
              targeted  molecular components from an individual cell. In these initial
              efforts,  the  immediate goal is to study a specific class of molecules 
              involved  in   the   process  of  sea  urchin  embryogenesis  using 
              prototypical  microdevices  specifically  designed for this  research. 
              Transcription  factor   (TF)   proteins  regulate  differential  gene 
              expression   in  temporally  and spatially restricted regions of the embryo  by
               binding  with high affinity to specific DNA sequences. With existing
              technology,  functional  TF/DNA binding studies can only be achieved using 
              hundreds  of  thousands  of embryos. To study TF/DNA binding from  small 
              regions  within  an embryo, or from individual cells, microdevices that 
              provide  the  following  functions will be sequentially constructed, 
              evaluated,  and optimized in this research pro~ram:          Manipulation and
              transport of cells, small tissue fragments,  and  solutions.          Lysis  of
               cells/organelles to open their  contents  for  further  analysis.      Reagent
              mixing, to combine synthetic, fluorescent oligonucleotides and   unlabeled,
              non-specific DNA with cell extracts.       Electrical conductivity
              measurements/optical absorption spectroscopy   upon picoliter solutions.      
              Electrophoretic separation and detection of fluorescent molecules.       Many
              materials systems widely employed in contemporary nanostructure  research are
              chosen to optimize electronic or photonic properties,  but  these  are not
              necessarily ideally suited, nor perhaps even compatible,  with biological
              systems. An important thrust in this initial program is  the   development  of 
              materials/processing  combinations,   especially  highly-anisotropic dry
              etching procedures, which permit high resolution  microfabrication while
              retaining biological compatibility. Devices will  be  constructed  using both
              high resolution optical and  electron  beam  lithography,  dry  and  wet
              etching processes,  and  both  thermallyand  sputter-  deposited  thin  film 
              materials.  At  each  step  of   their  development,   the  instruments 
              created  will  be   applied   to   the  aforementioned  TF/DNA binding assays.
              This iterative  and  interactive  research,  carried  out on both
              nanofabrication and biological  fronts,  will  drive  the practical attainment
              of new classes of high resolution  instruments for biological science.       It
               is anticipated that this work will spawn new research efforts at  the
              nanometer scale in both the science of biological phenomena and the  technology
              of bioinstrumentation.
