Title       : Instrumentation for Laser Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1995    
File        : a9512552

Award Number: 9512552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laren M. Tolbert laren.tolbert@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary B. Schuster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Netzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mostafa A. El-Sayed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              As part of major initiatives in advanced materials,  telecommunications,
              biotechnology, and environmental  research, Georgia Institute of Technology
              (GT) is building a  world-class timeresolved spectroscopic facility. This 
              facility will form the nucleus of modern time-resolved  spectroscopy in the
              Southeast, and will be available to  researchers at Georgia Tech, Georgia State
              University (GSU),  and Clark Atlanta University (CAU), a historically black 
              university. Availability to users outside this core group  will be on a
              case-by-case basis. Professors Schuster and E1-  Sayed have moved instruments
              from their former  universities  for state-of-the-art measurements of
              picosecond and  nanosecond fluorescence lifetimes as well as for time- 
              resolved absorption experiments ranging from picosecond to  millisecond
              timescales. These complement existing  instruments for nanosecond fluorescence
              and picosecond  absorption spectrometers available currently at GT and GSU.  In
              addition, Georgia Tech has provided funds for time-  resolved (3-5, us) Fourier
              transform infrared and Raman  spectrometers. Prof. El-Sayed has also moved a
              subpicosecond  (~ . 5 ps) absorption spectrometer from UCLA. However, this 
              instrument is based upon a dye laser pumped by a mode-locked  YAG laser, and
              its poor stability and lack of wavelength  tunability limit its utility and
              reliability. Therefore,  funds on a 50% cost sharing level are requested from
              NSF to  complete the laser spectroscopy laboratory by the  acquisition and
              installation of a Ti-sapphire-based  femtosecond absorption spectrometer,
              including capabilities  for infrared and resonance Raman measurements with a
              time  resolution of ~ 100 fs. This instrumentation will be located  in newly
              renovated space and will be managed by a  full-time  laser spectroscopist, Dr.
              Li Song, under the direction of  Prof Mostafa El-Sayed. Salary support  at a
              50% level is  also requested for Dr. Song.    This facility will also
              complement existing facilities for  fast signal processin g in
              telecommunications through the  Georgia Center for Telecommunications
              Technology, funded by  the state, and will provide much intellectual synergism
              with  the research community at that center. At the moment, four  different 
              groups will be major users of the requested  equipment. The primary user group
              of Prof. El-Sayed will  eludicate the molecular mechanisms of the
              solar-to-electric  energy conversion by the other photosynthetic system in 
              nature, bacteriorhodopsin (bR). In this system, the  absorption of light leads
              to rapid retinal isomerization  which results in charge separation, ion
              migration, protein  conformation changes, and proton pumping from inside the 
              cell to its membrane surface, leading to the conversion of  ADP into ATP. The
              subpicosecond transient optical absorption  and fluorescence equipment will be
              used to understand the  molecular origin of the protein catalysis of the
              primary  process (the retinal photoisomerization) of bR  photosynthesis, using
              bR, and its different mutants. In  separate studies, femtosecond dynamics of
              photoinitiated  bond-breaking will he deterrnined.    Schuster's group will
              study the nature of transients  produced upon irradiation of substituted
              anthraquinones in  DNA complexes, leading to double strand cleavage, and will 
              also investigate the dynamics and energetics of electron-  transfer in cyanine
              borates. Tolbert's group will study  ultrafast proton transfer in "super"
              photoacids, as well as  charge migration in polymethine dyes. Netzel's group
              will  study energy and electron transfer between pyrene  chromophores on a DNA
              backbone. Schwerzel proposes  studies  of energy and electron transfer in
              colloidal semiconductors.  Although space does not permit detailed
              descriptions,  additional studies in electron and energy transfer are 
              anticipated by the groups of Dabney Dixon (GSU), Mark  Mitchell (CAU), and Paul
              Wine (GT).
