Title       : A High-Speed Fluorescence Activated Cell-Sorter for Multiple Use Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9512902

Award Number: 9512902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129207             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Ford spford@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carole A. Heath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Tylka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    Funding is requested for a state-of-the-art high speed  fluorescence
              activated cell sorter to be utilized by a group of seven  major users on the
              Iowa State University campus. The technology  utilized in flow cytometry has
              advanced rapidly in the past five years  to include both high speed processing
              of multi-parameter signals for  both analysis and sorting, as well as the
              incorporation of larger flow  cell tip orifices to accommodate the sorting of
              larger particles (up to  400 micron diameter flow cell tips). The justification
              for requesting  matching funds for the purchase of a high speed sorter can be
              viewed in  three sections. First, the existing EPICS 752 instrument within the 
              facility has been in operation for eight years and has become the  limiting
              factor in the progression of the projects outlined here as a  result of
              increased downtime and the slow rate of data processing for  both analysis and
              sorting. Secondly, many of the research projects have  common requirements that
              the ELITE ESP cytometer will be able to  provide which will enable these
              projects to progress forward. They  include the large scale production sorting
              (> 106 cells) of large cell  or particle subpopulations that represent only a
              small portion of the  overall distribution (< 5 %). The following cell or
              particle types are  both large, often fragile, and represent a minor portion of
              the  population to be sorted. They include: swine inner cell mass cells (35 
              microns), Arabidopsis protoplasts (35 microns), soybean cyst nematode  eggs
              (100 microns), and mouse ine trophoblastic giant cells (200-300  microns). The
              rapid cell sorting capabilites are also required for the  large scale
              production sorting (> 106 cells) of the traditional smaller  mammalian cell
              types such as Iymphocytes for the purpose of assaying  cytokine production and
              hybridoma cells to be analyzed for the loss of  or mutation with the gene
              encoding the heavy chain for antibody.  Additionally, the expansion to a
              multiple laser system will facilitate   the move to four color analyses and
              cell sorting in the case of the  swine Iymphocytes. Finally, the operation of
              the Facility which will  house this instrument has a well documented and
              solidly financed  educational component for training faculty, post doctoral
              research  associates, as well as graduate and undergraduate students in both
              the  experimental design, sample preparation, and use of the fluorescence 
              activated cell sorter in research and the Facility will continue to  fulfill
              this componet with a state-of-the-art instrument. The new ELITE  ESP will be
              used extensively for all of these purposes in both research  as well as
              teaching.
