Title       : Acquisition of an Advanced Plant Molecular Genetics Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1995    
File        : a9512366

Award Number: 9512366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255448             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Michelmore rwmichelmore@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne B. Britt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan B. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda F. Bisson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fredrick A. Bliss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   We will acquire and operate instruments for a high-throughput  automated
              plant molecular genetics facility. The facility will comprise  of an automated
              DNA sequencer, a DNA extraction robot, a laboratory  workstation, a
              thermocycler, a phosphoimager, and supporting computers.  The facility will
              primarily provide three areas of research support:  DNA sequencing,
              quantitative analysis of gene expression, and genetic  analysis.       The
              facility will impact at least 24 productive research programs  in nine
              departments that study plant molecular genetics, ranging from  fundamental
              molecular genetics on model species to applied crop  improvement programs. We
              are currently severely limited by the lack of  this instrumentation. All these
              studies would benefit from this  facility. Several experiments are impossible
              without it. Reliable  generation of accessible DNA sequence data is a
              fundamental component  for many biological investigations, particularly gene
              identification  and characterization. Accurate measurement of gene expression
              is  critical to studies on gene function. Molecular markers have now been 
              developed for most of the species under study; these should now be  utilized.
              This facility will allow a scale of experimentation that  would be otherwise
              impossible in an academic setting. Automated DNA  extraction as well as
              template preparation and analysis will allow  large numbers of samples to be
              run with accuracy.       Both the UC Davis Office of Research and the College
              of  Agriculture and Environmental Sciences are committed to developing this 
              facility as demonstrated by their level of financial support. Their 
              contribution, together with that from Keygene, constitutes a 50% match  to the
              amount requested from NSF. The College will provide technical  support for a
              total of five years, two years beyond the funding period.       We will
              continue to develop and apply efficient molecular marker  technologies. In
              particular, we are collaborating with Applied  Biosystems to analyze Ampli fied
              Fragment Length Polymorphisms as  codominant markers on their instruments. This
              will increase the utility  of their machines and allow hundreds of markers to
              be analyzed on many  individuals. It will also reduce the generation of
              radioactive waste.
