Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for Research in Molecular Microbial Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1995    
File        : a9512279

Award Number: 9512279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Woodworth   (Principal Investigator current)
              Luis A. Actis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary R. Janssen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph M. Carlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jnanendra K. Bhattacharjee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to purchase equipment that will build  upon and
              enhance existing research capabilities in the area of  molecular microbial
              biology in the Department of Microbiology. The  funds requested will not only
              provide state-of-the-art equipment to  enhance the department's research
              programs, but will also strengthen  the department's capabilities for training
              graduate and undergraduate  students in the most modern techniques in molecular
              microbial biology.  The P.I. (Mary E. Woodworth), and the Co-P.I.s (Luis A.
              Actis, J.K.  Bhattacharjee, Joseph M.Carlin, and Gary R. Janssen) have 
              well-developed research programs in molecular microbial biology. In  addition,
              the five other faculty members in the Department of  Microbiology have active
              research programs that will benefit from the  use of this equipment. The focus
              of the research to be conducted  within the scope of this proposal is broad in
              that it will encompass  research projects on regulatory mechanisms of viral DNA
              replication,  genetic and molecular analysis of iron acquisition systems in 
              bacteria, the molecular genetics of Iysine biosynthesis in yeast, the 
              molecular mechanisms of regulation of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase  (IDO) and
              the translation of leaderless mRNAs in bacteria. The  training of undergraduate
              and graduate students in the department's  teaching and research laboratories
              will become more sophisticated and  appropriate to today's special need for
              first-rate graduates in  science and for scientifically literate citizens. The
              laboratory  course in Microbial and Molecular Genetics for undergraduate and 
              graduate students will be described as an example of how the requested 
              equipment will accomplish these goals.
