Title       : Acquisition of Plant Growth Chambers for Plant Biotechnology Research and
               Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1995      
File        : a9512209

Award Number: 9512209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27765              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne Rogers   (Principal Investigator current)
              Takashi Ueda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kirk V. Cammarata  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salem International Univ
	      223 West Main Street
	      Salem, WV  264261227    304/782-5011

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9141,9157,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Salem-Teikyo University (S-TU) is a not-for-profit United States  institution of
              higher learning located in rural Appalachia. Although no  financial support is
              derived from Teikyo University, the merger has  brought about the opportunity
              for sharing research resources and  faculty with the international science
              community. At the same time, we  continue to have a special impact on the
              Appalachian region. About 60%  of the S-TU student body comes from around the
              U. S.    S-TU is committed to developing both undergraduate and M.S. programs
              in  molecular biology/biotechnology within the Natural Science and  Mathematics
              Department, which also offers majors in mathematics,  environmental science,
              and biology. New courses related to  biotechnology include an intensive course
              on research techniques and  advanced courses in cell biology and molecular
              biology. Near completion  of the program, undergraduates will conduct
              independent research. The  undereraduate program was established in 1992. The
              offering of the  master's program is pending approval from the North Central 
              Association.    S-TU's molecular biology/biotechnology research is in
              cooperation with  Tampa Bay Research Institute (TBRI) in St. Petersburg, FL and
              with  Teikyo University School of Science and Engineering in Utsunomiya, 
              Japan. S-TU is specializing in the biology and genetic engineering of  plants,
              and it is for this research that support is being sought. Drs.  Suzanne Rogers,
              Takashi Ueda, and Kirk Cammarata have established  active research programs and
              several undergraduate students are now  involved.    Presently, the development
              of research is hampered by inadequate  culture facilities. A small laboratory
              which was converted into a  dedicated plant tissue culture area has proved
              inadequate for two  reasons: temperature and humidity variations in the room,
              and the  different conditions required by separate investigators. Hence, funds 
              are requested to purchase four separate plant growth chambers with  controls
              for temperature, li ght, and humidity. These should provide the  necessary
              control of environmental conditions for all current and  foreseeable research. 
                The areas of research that will benefit from the NSF funding are  directed
              either toward elucidation of control of gene expression in  plants or toward
              genetic transformation of plants to improve quality or  economic use. Dr.
              Rogers is developing methods for propagating rare and  fragile plants by
              cloning and regeneration procedures. Dr. Ueda is  studying the genetic program
              controlling plant seed development7  particularly those genes regulating
              production of the storage protein  zein in corn. Dr. Cammarata is examining
              roles of various defense and  stress-related genes encoding chloroplast
              localized products  (polyphenol oxidase, etc.).
