Title       : Development of an Outdoor Seawater Facility to Increase Research Capabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1996     
File        : a9512268

Award Number: 9512268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83594              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Tenore tenore@cbl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              H. R. Harvey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Secor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward D. Houde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  The Chesapeake Biological Laboratory (CBL) will be suggested  to construct
              an  Outdoor Seawater Facility to study the ecology, toxicology,  energetics,
              and biochemistry  of organisms from a wide spectrum of taxa (bacteria, algae, 
              invertebrates and fishes).  The  facility will enhance current research
              initiatives at CBL in  trophic transfers of contaminants, trophic and community
               dynamics, migration, and recruitment.  These  initiatives depend upon both
              laboratory and field approaches  which often cannot be  reconciled because of
              scaling considerations.  The outdoor  Seawater Facility will provide a critical
              mesocosm-scale  level to complement current CBL strengths in laboratory and 
              field investigations.    The Outdoor Seawater Facility will be available to
              CEES  scientists, graduate students, and visiting scientists in  several
              disciplines.  The facility comprises a 167-sq. meter  cement pad with seawater
              plumbing, drainage, portable  canopies, and flexible-design tanks and raceways.
               The  facility will significantly enhance the range of research  and training
              programs at CBL and will also be a unique  facility in the region available to 
              visiting/collaborating investigators.  When completed, the  facility will be a
              major contributor to the success of CBL's  mission in its three programmatic
              areas: Ecosystem  Studies, Fisheries Science/Ecology, and Environment 
              Chemistry/Toxicology.
