Title       : Fluorometric and Electrophoretic Instrumentation for the Identification and
               Scoring of Genetic Markers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1995   
File        : a9512883

Award Number: 9512883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl A. Batt cabl0@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   A core facility will be established to assist in the formatting of  assays
              to score genetic markers in a large number of progeny. Funds for  an Perkin
              Elmer LS5OB fluorometer are being requested that in  conjunction with existing
              equipment in the Analytical Chemistry and  Peptide/DNA Synthesis Facility will
              serve the needs of the  collaborating Users. The facility will be unique in
              providing the User  access to state-of-the-art technology for marker screening.
              A core  technology to be explored is a multi plex PCR allelic discrimination 
              assay (TaqManTM recently developed by Perkin Elmer/ Applied Biosystems 
              Division and demonstrated useful in a number of applications by the Pl.  The PE
              LS50B will be used to establish a capability in designing and  formatting
              TaqManTM assays to score for existing and newly discovered  markers. This
              technology is a robust, quantitative PCR-based assay that  can be applied to
              marker identification or allelic discrimination  assays. It can be used to
              screen literally hundreds of samples with  either qualitative or quantitative
              readouts. An integral need in both  of these techniques is an oligonucleotide
              synthesis facility capable of  phosphoramidite chemistry and oligonucleotide
              analysis. The  collaborating scientists have as their common focus the
              identification  and usage of genetic markers to assist in the selection of
              progeny.  Individual efforts range from marker assisted selection of 
              agronomically valuable traits (biochemical pathways, disease  resistance) in
              plants to genotyping cattle for alleles linked to  superior milk production.
              This facility will enhance existing expertise  and make available
              state-of-the-art equipment for carrying out these  studies. It will complement
              existing programs by establishing a core  facility with equipment beyond the
              funds currently at the disposal of  any single investigator or collectively
              through pooling their  resources. Results from this effort will, through their
              publication in  the public domain further the know ledge base in a variety of 
              applications of marker assisted selection. Further the equipment will  help
              enhance the educational mission of the university both through  traditional
              training of graduate students as well as special workshops  offerings. The PE
              LS50B will be housed in the Analytical Chemistry and  Peptide/DNA Synthesis
              Facility, maintained through an existing  supervisory structure and operated
              with the assistance of an existing  technical staff .
