Title       : U.S.-Japan Collaborative Project on Post-Earthquake Reconstruction Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1997     
File        : a9512844

Award Number: 9512844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Lee gclee@mceermail.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9512844  Lee  This is a three-year continuing award supporting a  collaboration
              between engineering research centers in the  United States and Japan.  The U.S.
              principal investigator is  Professor George C. Lee, Director of the National
              Center for  Earthquake Engineering Research (NCEER), State University of  New
              York, Buffalo. This award is jointly funded by the Japan  Program of the
              Division of International Programs and the  Earthquake Hazard Mitigation
              Program, Division of Civil and  Mechanical Structures, Directorate for
              Engineering.    During the course of this cooperative project, the 
              investigators in NCEER will work with researchers in the  International Center
              for Disaster Mitigation Engineering  (INCEDE), University of Tokyo, led by its
              Director,  Professor Tsuneo Katayama.  They will attempt to identify  exemplary
              strateeies for post-earthquake reconstruction and  recovery that have potential
              cross-societal applicability  through coordinated and cooperative case studies
              in the  United States and Japan.    The devastating events in Northridge,
              California in 1994 and  in Kobe, Japan in 1995 have shown that dense population
               centers are very vulnerable to major earthquakes.  These  events further show
              that earthquake mitigation research  efforts to improve design and construction
              methods and  emergency response policies and procedures can substantially 
              reduce the loss of life and damage to buildings and  lifelines.  By convening a
              multidisciplinary team of  engineers and social scientists to address these
              issues,  this U.S.-Japan project will build upon the "systems  integrated"
              approach in earthquake hazard mitigation  research implementation that has been
              the underlying theme  of the NCEER since 1986.    For the most part, this grant
              supports research visits in  Japan by U.S. senior investigators, postdoctoral 
              researcheps, and graduate students.  Scientists from several  universities and
              research institutes are involved in the  work of both centers, NCEER and
              INCEDE, thus giving a   national character to the cooperative work.  ***
