Title       : Acquisition of a Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Time of Flight (MALD-TOF) Mass
               Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1995    
File        : a9512208

Award Number: 9512208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164444             (Estimated)
Investigator: George R. Newkome gnewkome@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     The instrument requested in this proposal is the Bruker BIFLEX 
              Matrix-Assisted LASER Desorption Time-of Flight Mass Spectrometer 
              (MALD-TOF-MS) with HIMAS Detector, FAST accessory, SCOUT multisample  membrane
              target and observation optics, an Nd:YAG laser and PolyMASS  software for Mn,
              Mw and polydispersity index measurements with easy  comparison to GPC data. The
              Bruker BIFLEX is specifically designed for  research in bio-analytical and
              polymer sciences. External mass  calibration for both molecular ions and
              structurally significant  fragment ions is typically 0.01% to 0.1%. The BIFLEX
              is extremely  sensitive and provides molecular weight information for sub
              picomoles  of a sample. The HIMAS detector, when used in place of an EM
              detector,  provides increased high-mass sensitivity and is recommended by the 
              manufacturer for the linear analysis of high mass molecules,  particularly
              polymers. This detector has a dynamic range of 20,000 to  150,000, providing
              maximum mass accuracy.       The use of the mass spectrometer will be overseen
              by the Institute  for Biomolecular Science (IBS) with the daily use,
              maintenance and  scheduling of the instrument supervised by a Research
              Assistant  Professor and graduate research assistant in the new Bioscience 
              Facility at University of South Florida. IBS is a consortium of 78  scientists
              from four USF colleges and research institutes in the Tampa  Bay area that
              promotes research interactions that cross the boundaries  between biology,
              chemistry and molecular biology and offers a mechanism  for collaboration. In
              addition, Dr. Rebecca O'Malley will act as a  consultant on all the projects
              included in this proposal. She holds a  Ph.D. in mass spectrometry and operates
              an active mass spectrometry  research program that has been in existence since
              1980 at the USF. She  also established a research program in multiphoton
              ionization  time-of-flight mass spectrometry and, more recently, one in laser 
              desorption time-of-flight mass spectrometry.         Research  projects using
              the MALD-TOF-MS will center on the  characterization of polymers, peptides and
              proteins. Dr. Newkome (PI),  Drs. O'Malley, Harmon, and Garcia-Rubio,
              concentrate their efforts on  polymers. Their projects involve the
              characterization of novel  dendrimeric polymers- the investigation of the
              factors that affect  cation attachment to synthetic polymers; radiation
              resistant polymer  scintillators and optical polymers that optimize optical
              radiation  resistance in scintillator and fiber cladding polymers; and the 
              characterization of complex polymer molecules such as copolymers and  branched
              polymers. Drs. Solomonson, Barber, Neame and Ferreira focus  their efforts in
              the area of protein and peptide characterization.  Typical experiments include
              the analysis of disulfide bond  arrangements, analysis of sites of
              post-translational modification, and  the conformation of attachment of
              prosthetic groups.       The requested instrumentation has a broad mass range
              that is small  peptides and polymers, as well as intact proteins and larger
              polymers.  Its extreme accuracy at low mass levels is critical for synthetic 
              chemists and investigators who are defining peptide fragmentation  patterns.
              These  features make this instrument uniquely suited to the  research
              activities conducted at this institution. Furthermore, to the  best of our
              knowledge, there is no mass spectrometer at USF or in the  Tampa Bay area. This
              is a serious problem for education and research at  this large (35,000
              students) Research II university. Having a MALD-TOF  Mass Spectrometer will
              allow the integration of "hands-on" experience  into established graduate
              courses, increasing students' understanding  of the applications of MS to
              chemical and biochemical problems. In  addition, the instrument will be
              available for thesis and dissertation  research and thus improve the quality of
              the graduate student  investigations.  When IBS faculty were polled about the
              instrument most needed at USF to  augment ongoing research and att ract
              excellent young faculty and  students, they overwhelming voted for a mass
              spectrometer that could  handle large polymers and peptides. For some of the
              protein and polymer  chemists the need is central to their research programs
              and for others  it will allow them to expand into new directions. The use of
              mass  spectrometry for large synthetic polymers and biomolecules is  relatively
              recent but is a growing and exciting field. The combination  of cooperative,
              diverse and interactive scientists, large graduate and  research programs and
              the participation of the Institute for  Biomolecular Science should ensure that
              this instrumentation is used to  its fullest extent to improve the biomolecular
              science program at USF.
