Title       : The Structure of Social and Economic Isolation in Underclass Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  1996   
File        : a9512005

Award Number: 9512005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119823             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne S. Hurlbert jhurlbert@lapop.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Beggs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Irwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward S. Shihadeh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Tolbert, II  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 1041,1092,CVIS,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of the structure of social and economic isolation in low-income
              populations.  The project investigates three problems; the first two relate to
              social capital theory, whereas the third is methodological.  First, the
              investigators will examine the micro-level behaviors and social structures
              relevant to spatial mismatch theory, which concerns the lack of low-skill
              employment opportunities in the immediate vicinity.  Second, the investigators
              will test the hypothesis that inner-city residents paradoxically rely primarily
              on strong ties (e.g., close friends, relatives) for day-to-day assistance, but
              lack the weak ties (friends of friends, acquaintances) which would aid them in
              such instrumental action as job-finding.  Third, the work will explore the
              efficacy of standard survey data collection methods in an inner-city
              neighborhood.  This will be done through interviews with 600 residents of a
              poor neighborhood in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  %%%   This project will improve
              our understanding of the social roots of the increasing problems of low-income
              neighborhoods, including high rates of poverty, unemployment, teenage pregnancy
              drug use, serious crime, and other indicators of social disorganization.  It
              will examine the linkage of economic isolation (poverty and welfare dependence,
              loss of economic capital, lack of access to jobs) with social isolation (the
              isolation of low-income persons from mainstream individuals and institutions,
              and their inability to gain access to the information, influence, and other
              job-finding assistance that would allow them to escape poverty).  The study
              will be a major step forward in testing theories about the roots of poverty.
