Title       : Acquisition of Philips CM200-FEG, CM120 Electron Microscope and Accessory
               Equipment for Molecular Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1995      
File        : a9512221

Award Number: 9512221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald A. Milligan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We seek funds to establish a center for advanced molecular microscopy.  The
              requested instrumentation includes a Philips CM200T FEG; a Philips  CM120-cryo;
              a Gatan cryo-transfer system, anticontaminator, and  dry-pumping station for
              each of the microscopes; a Gatan 1k x 1k  slow-scan CCD and a Gatan Imaging
              Filter. The choice of Philips  instruments is based on ease of use and known
              quality of the  instruments, and the reliability and quality of the service
              from this  company. The new microscopes and cryo-accessories will replace
              existing  8-year-old equipment which, based on preliminary data on our
              specimens  collected on a CM200T-FEG, is not adequate in terms of performance
              or  resolution for obtaining the data we need to proceed to the next level  of
              structural understanding of our specimens.    Based on tests carried out over
              the last 6 months, the new instruments  will dramatically improve both the
              quality and the quantity of data  that can be collected. The field emission
              electron gun (FEG) provides a  more coherent electron beam for imaging.
              Consequently, the image  contrast transfer function remains strong to much
              higher resolution  than on conventional images, thus allowing higher resolution
              data to be  extracted from the images. Our preliminary data indicate that at
              both  moderate (20-40  and high (3.5-10 resolution, the CM200T-FEG provides 
              very significant - sometimes dramatic - improvements in the resolution 
              obtained in images of our specimens.    Both microscopes incorporate the new
              Philips "Compu-Stage" - a  much-improved, computercontrolled goniometer. The
              design of the new  goniomenter (there are no contacts with the low temperature
              part of the  cold stage) results in much greater specimen stability. The cold
              stage  equilibrates very rapidly after insertion and after stage translations. 
              We estimate that these advantages will speed up data collection by a  factor of
              5-10.    The research of the user group focuses on 3-D molecular microscopy: 
              determination of the near-atomic, s econdary, tertiary and quaternary 
              structure of molecules and macromolecular assemblies by cryo-electron 
              microscopy and image analysis. The common goal of the user group is to 
              calculate 3-D structures of biological molecules and macromolecular  complexes
              to determine how they work. In all cases, higher resolution  than can currently
              be achieved with our present instrumentation is  essential for progress. The
              biological specimens under investigation  include acto-myosin, ncd-microtubule
              and kinesin-microtubule complexes  (Milligan), membrane proteins and ion
              channels (Milligan, Mitra, Unwin,  Yeager), plant and animal viruses (Beachy,
              Johnson, Yeager), and  synthetic organic nanotubes (Ghadiri).    Training is an
              integral part of the activities. Postdoctoral fellows  and graduate students
              will receive advanced theoretical and practical  training in high resolution
              cryo-electron microscopy (imaging and  electron diffraction), image analysis,
              high resolution structure  determination and structure interpretation.    The
              proposed center for advanced molecular microscopy will incorporate  the
              following technologies: cryo-electron microscopy, <200kV imaging  and electron
              diffraction, a field emission electron source, analog and  digital image
              acquisition, and zero-energy-loss imaging and electron  diffraction. Together
              with the computational and visualization  capabilities for image analysis and
              structure determination that  already exist within the user group, the
              requested instrumentation will  create a unique research and training facility
              which will have a major  impact on the regional, national and international
              research  infrastructure.
