Title       : Acquisition of a Free Air CO2 Enrichment Instrumentation for Studying the
               Effects of Changes in Atmospheric CO2 Concentration & Precipitation on
               Mediterranean-type Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1995 
File        : a9512628

Award Number: 9512628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter C. Oechel oechel@sunstroke.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Sparks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This request is for construction of state-of-the-art  instrumentation which
              would allow study of the effects of  changes in CO2 concentration on
              regenerating oak woodland in  southern California. There is an  urgent need to
              develop and  make available new instrumentation allowing the study of 
              ecosystem-level  responses to elevated CO2. Currently available data from 
              chamber-based studies, while valuable, do not  allow confident predictions of
              ecosystem-level responses.  Obtaining ecosystem-level responses to elevated 
              CO2 requires ecosystem-level manipulations of CO2. At  present, Free-Air CO2
              Enrichment (FACE) is the  most promising technology available for such
              large-scale  manipulations.    We propose to expand our existing Free-Air CO2
              Enrichment  (FACE) facility, which currently   consists of a single FACE ring
              in the California chaparral,  with plans to build a second, control ring, by  
              constructing six more rings in adjacent regenerating oak  woodlands. Our FACE
              system allows the   experimental manipulation of atmospheric CO2 concentration 
              over relatively large areas (177 m2) of   ecosystems without the use of
              chambers, presumably  eliminating or minimizing "chamber" effects. These  
              additional rings will each be maintained at one of five CO2  concentrations
              from current ambient (350 ppm) to more than  twice current ambient (750 ppm) in
              100 ppm increments. This  expanded FACE facility will allow large collaborative
               studies of the effects of elevated CO2 on ecosystem  source/sink status, water
              flux, energy balance,  productivity, soil nutrient processes, and
              community-level  processes. We anticipate this  facility will attract 
              cooperation with numerous scientists and students from  around the world,
              because of the unique opportunities to  study CO2 effects on intact ecosystems
              at a relatively large  scale, because of the likelihood that semi-arid woody 
              ecosystems will respond positively to CO2, and because of  the  international
              interest in semi-arid ecosvstems in ~eneral  and in Med iterranean-type
              ecosystems in particular.    Our expanded FACE facility will not only
              contribute to  greater knowledge about the responses of  semi-arid ecosystems
              to elevated CO2, but will also lead to  better predictions of how
              ecosystem-level  processes, including ecosystem source/sink status, may  change
              in the future. The facility will also allow  enhanced collaboration on an
              international scale and will  result in unparalleled opportunities for student 
               training.                             11
