Title       : Acquisition of a Parallel Computer for Structural Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1999       
File        : a9512538

Award Number: 9512538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $434236             (Estimated)
Investigator: Toshiko Ichiye ichiye@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph G. Yount  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              ChulHee Kang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremy N. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Satterlee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal seeks funding for a new high performance,  parallel computer for
              computational biology and chemistry,  specifically to study the structure and
              function of  biological macromolecules. Washington State University has  built
              considerable strengths in the studies of biological  macromolecules, of which
              both the Nuclear Magnetic Resonance  (NMR) Center and the new X-Ray
              Crystallographic facilities  are important components. However, the key feature
              missing  is the lack of computing power. Computers provide the  crucial link
              since they are needed both for processing the  large data sets obtained from
              NMR and crystallographic  structure determination experiments as well as for 
              theoretical studies such as molecular dynamics simulations  and electronic
              structure calculations that provide the  connection between structure and
              function and that also  provide new directions for experiments.    Modern
              research in structural biology requires fast  computers, with ever increasing
              needs because of rapid  advances in experimental methods that require analysis
              of  larger and larger data sets and because of the increasing  importance of
              computer simulations in understanding  structure function relationships. In
              addition to daily  computational needs, each of the five principal 
              investigators has projects that require massive computing  capabilities. These
              projects include studies of myosin,  enzymesubstrate complexes, electron
              transfer complexes,  protein-nucleic acid complexes, and the role of water in 
              protein function.    Currently, computing for structural biology at WSU is
              being  carried on workstations owned by individual investigators.  Many of
              these workstations are more than 5 years old, which  means that they are at the
              limit of hardware reliability and  are orders of magnitude behind current
              workstations in  speed. For instance, computer simulations currently being 
              carried out take weeks of computer time on our fastest  workstations (IBM
              RS/6000 350). The only university  facilities are  an IBM 3090-300 and a VAX
              cluster (slower  than many personal computers), which are heavily overused  and
              expensive. Moreover, our most commonly used commercial  software is not
              available for these computers. Although new  inexpensive workstations (5 to 7
              times faster than our  RS/6000) may be used for many simple problems,
              researchers  at WSU are facing more and more problems that require very  fast
              computation, huge amounts of memory and/or huge amounts  of disk space beyond
              the reach of individual investigators,  even those that use computers as a
              major research tool.  These needs can be met in part by Supercomputing Centers,
               but these centers are becoming overloaded so a middle level  between that
              route and workstations is a vital need not  currently met on this campus.   
              Parallel processing computers such as the one proposed here  are an ideal
              solution for academic research. They can have  speeds equivalent to vector
              supercomputers such as Cray  computers, but at a fraction of the cost. These
              computers  have multiple processors of the same type that are found in  the
              fastest workstations, but the combination of these  processors into a single
              chassis provides several important  advantages over multiple independent
              workstations. First,  computation speed can increase almost linearly with the 
              number of processors by distributing the computational  "load" across several
              processors. Second, expensive  resources such as memory and software can be
              shared by  multiple users. Third, operations and maintenance of a  single
              machine are much less, leading to a great saving in  personnel time. Fourth,
              different processors may be  dedicated to different types of usage at different
              times,  allowing efficient usage of the processors. Finally, the  modular
              nature allows investigators to increase the  efficiency of the machine by
              simply adding additional  processors if money becomes available.    The
              proposed computer will replace our outdated workstations  in fulfilling routine
              computational needs, but  more  importantly, will allow investigators at WSU to
              pursue the  new avenues not possible on those workstations. Moreover, it  will
              have an impact on not only the researchers currently  directly involved in
              structural biology, but will provide a  means of introducing state-of-the-art
              computational methods  in structural biology and chemistry to researchers
              across  the campus. The computer will be accessible by any networked  personal
              computer or workstation, and staff are already in  place who would provide
              consultation. With the addition of  new faculty and the growing interest of
              existing faculty in  structure-function studies, it is crucial that a new 
              computer be obtained.
