Title       : Property Rights and Conflict in the Brazilian Amazon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1996     
File        : a9512107

Award Number: 9512107
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277660             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary D. Libecap   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee J. Alston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernardo Mueller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1094,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research builds on a previous project, "Property  Rights and Land Use on
              the Brazilian Frontier", by examining the  circumstances under which violence
              occurs in providing property  rights to land in the Amazon and its economic
              impact on land  values, land use and investment, and tenure.  This is an 
              important topic because secure land tenure increasingly is viewed  as an
              important condition for investment and how natural  resources are ultimately
              exploited, particularly forests and  biodiversity in developing countries.  The
              question arises, what  policies will provide tenure routinely to support
              economic  development and when is the process likely to lead to conflict  and
              violence with the dissipation of economic rents and over  exploitation of
              natural resources?  For a people who are poor by  most standards and for a
              region with rich natural resources,  tenure policies and their potential link
              to violence in the  Amazon is a critical issue in need of further scientific
              study.    This project involves collecting and analyzing two unexploited 
              sources of data on violence and land tenuring.  Using these data  along with
              other census data, the interaction among violence,  land value, tenure, and
              investment will be examined.  The  analysis will involve a two stage
              econometric technique that has  been developed to examine the simultaneous
              relationships among  land value, tenure, investment, and violence.  Additional
              data  will also be collected  from secondary sources on policy  formation
              regarding Amazon settlement and tenuring.    In addition, land claimants will
              be surveyed in a region which  enjoyed major government subsidies for ranching
              and also  experienced the most deaths from violent conflict over land  between
              1970-1985.  These subsidies are important because they  significantly raised
              expected land rents and may have encouraged  rapid and conflicting settlement
              of the region by both ranchers  and by small claimants or squatters.  Moreover,
              land agencies  responsible for titling, may  not have provided secure title to 
              land in a timely fashion. which would have added to chaotic and  over
              exploitation of the land and its natural resources.  ***                       
                            From these surveys and the analysis of the results, we can 
              determine the conditions under which violence over property  rights to land
              occurs and its impact on land value and  investment.                          
              Tailandia will provide a time-series data set on settlers  (tenure, plot size,
              land value, investment, age, sex, education  and other socio-economic
              characteristics, distance to market,  wealth) from 1992 through 1996/1997 that
              will be valuable to  other researchers. We already have assembled survey data
              for six  sites for 1992-93 for 249 small holders. The resurvey of part of  this
              group will allow us to observe changes in turnover and  consolidation,
              investment, and land value. With increased  economic growth in Brazil in
              general, we expect greater activity  in the Amazon.    The Amazon in Brazil is
              still largely unsettled and covered with  forest. Recent estimates from land
              satellite imagery indicate  that approximately 10 percent of the Brazilian
              Amazon is  deforested. It is thus not too late for policy to affect the fate 
              of much of the region. Much has been written about the settlement  of the
              Amazon and the attendant conflict associated with it. What  is lacking is
              documentation as to where and when conflicts arose  and an analysis of the
              determinants and impact of violence. The  research team has developed skills
              and knowledge of the region,  tenuring policies, primary and secondary data
              sources, and survey  technqiues.
