Title       : A Field Emission, Intermediate Voltage Electron Microscope for Structural
               Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1997  
File        : a9512954

Award Number: 9512954
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Taylor taylor@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth H. Roux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald L. Caspar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Keller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lee Makowski  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This application proposes the purchase of Philips CM300-FEG electron  microscope
              with a maximum 300 kev accelerating voltage and field  emission illumination.
              The CM300-FEG is fully computerized with a  revolutionary goniometer and
              capabilities that are particularly well  designed for electron tomography and
              cryoelectron microscopy (cryoEM).  A specialized holder and anticontaminator
              will be purchased to  facilitate cryoEM of biological specimens and a CCD
              camera from Gatan  with Macintosh computer system to facilitate development of 
              computerized on-line data collection and to obtain instant feedback on  the
              quality of specimen preparation. The capabilities of this  instrument will
              enhance the research of 6 full time faculty who use  electron microscopy as an
              integral part of their research. Research  projects include electron tomography
              of insect flight muscle (Taylor),  electron crystallography of  actinin
              (Taylor) and the Ca2+-ATPase  (Taylor), electron diffraction of oriented gels
              of tobacco mosaic virus  (Caspar), 3-D reconstruction of helical filaments of
              the major sperm  protein (MSP) from Ascaris suum (Roberts & Stewart), 3-D
              reconstruction  of filamentous bacteria viruses and pili (Makowski), studies of
              the 3-D  geometry of immune complexes (Roux) and studies on the structure of
              the  cytoskeleton (Keller). This instrument will enhance these projects (1) 
              through high resolution imaging of thicker specimens, (2) through  digital
              survey of specimens prior to data collection by means of  on-line image
              recording, (3) by enabling development of protocols for  automated tilt series
              data collection for tomography by virtue of its  motorized and computerized
              specimen stage (4) by facilitating electron  diffraction of oriented,
              multilayered arrays of filaments, (5) by  facilitating high resolution imaging
              of 2-D crystalline and  paracrystalline arrays of proteins and multiprotein
              complexes, (7) by  enabling high resolution imaging of single molecules and
              small  complexes by utilizing the high c oherence of the field emission 
              electron source and the high depth of focus provided by 300 kev  electrons.
