Title       : US-Mexico Symposium in Plant Biology; Cocoyoc, Mexico, November 5-9, 1995
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1995      
File        : a9512648

Award Number: 9512648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maarten J. Chrispeels   (Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia Walbot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Federico Sanchez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Soc of Plant Physio
	      
	      Rockville, MD  20850    /   -

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0521400   Plant Productivity                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Americas Program award will support travel and related expenses for ten
              U.S. scientists and five postdoctoral and graduate students, to participate in
              a joint U.S./Mexico symposium to be held on November 6-9, 1995 in Cocoyoc,
              Morelos, Mexico.  Organizers are Dr. Martin Chrispeels, University of
              California, San Diego, and Dr. Virginia Walbot, Stanford University, in
              collaboration with Dr. Federico Sanchez, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de
              Mexico.  Topics will include agrobiology, molecular physiology and
              biotechnology of crops important to Mexican agriculture.  The conference will
              consist of a series of symposia, minisymposia and poster sessions, organized
              around six important topics in plant biology, including development of cereals,
              biotechnology, and disease and insect resistance.  The major goal is to provide
              a vertical integration of approaches and subject matter from the molecular
              through the level of crop physiology.  This joint U.S.-Mexico symposium and
              minisymposia will be held in conjunction with the VII National Congress of
              Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of Plan ts , under the auspices of the
              Biochemical Society of Mexico.  The  meeting will provide an opportunity for
              U.S. and Mexican scientists, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers to
              initiate contacts and collaborations, and strengthen already established ones. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
