Title       : Acquisition of Biophysical and Computational Instruments for Studies of Proteins
               and Protein-Ligand Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1995    
File        : a9512595

Award Number: 9512595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197794             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Baker dabaker@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wim G. J. Hol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests biophysical instrumentation and computing  equipment to
              enable a broad interdisciplinary investigation of  fundamental aspects of
              protein folding and protein-ligand interactions.  The participating research
              groups are from the Biomolecular Structure  Center and the departments of
              Biochemistry, Biological Structure, and  Bioengineering at the University of 
              Washington.    The dramatic increase in the power of computers over the last
              five  years has ushered in a truly exciting new era in structural molecular 
              biology. There is now hope of understanding the multitude of complex 
              interatomic interactions in proteins at the level of protein folding  and
              proteinligand interactions. The development of adequate  computational models,
              however, requires detailed biophysical  characterization of relevant
              experimental systems. We propose to take a  combined biophysical and
              computational approach to understanding the  interactions which underlie the
              structure and function of proteins.  Spectroscopic methods will be used to
              probe the kinetics and  thermodynamics of protein folding and protein-ligand
              interactions in  detail. These results will be used to develop computational
              models that  have as their long range goals the understanding of the rules
              linking  amino acid sequences, protein 3-dimensional structures, and 
              protein-ligand interactions.    The work described in this proposal has three
              main thrusts. The first  part is focused on understanding the dependence of
              protein folding on  amino acid sequence, using extremely simple model proteins.
              The second  part is focused on the detailed understanding of a model
              proteinligand  interaction: the binding of biotin to streptavidin. The third
              part  seeks to extend knowledge gained in parts one and two to develop more 
              general methods for experimentally and computationally charactelizing a  wide
              valiety of protein ligand interactions, and for understanding the  "restricted
              folding" of a short peptide which is enclosed by a larger  multimeri c protein
              assembly.    The links between three areas are not merely conceptual; the 
              biophysical and computational methods required to address all three  issues are
              highly overlapping. In each case the range of scientific  questions currently
              accessible is limited by our current inability to  experimentally determine
              such key kinetic parameters as on-rates and  off-rates and to monitor protein
              folding reactions. We are similarly  limited by current computational resources
              as to the size and  complexity of model systems which may be simulated. The
              requested  instrumentation therefore consists of (1) absorption and circular 
              dichroism spectrometers with associated stopped-flow apparatus to  follow the
              thermodynamics and kinetics of protein folding in solution,  (2) surface
              plasmon resonance (SPR) apparatus which allows exquisitely  sensitive
              measurement of the kinetics of protein-ligand binding, and  (3) computer
              equipment to support the theoretical and predictive side  of the investigation
              as well as visualization of the model systems  under study.
