Title       : Acquisition of Electron Microscope for Electron Crystallography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9512182

Award Number: 9512182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David l. Stokes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NYU Medical Center
	      550 First Avenue
	      New York, NY  100166481    212/263-6693

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal concerns the acquisition of a state-of-the-art electron 
              microscope by the newly created Skirball Institute at New York  University
              Medical Center for determination of protein structure at  nearatomic
              resolution. The microscope has a Schottky field emission gun  and is capable of
              operating at 200kV. In addition, accessories will  make it possible to image
              frozen-hydrated biological specimens at high  resolution. Finally, digital and
              analogue interfaces will allow control  of the microscope by external computers
              and will be used to customize  the operating modes.    Two projects are
              described that use methods of electron crystallography  to study the molecular
              structure of Ca2+-ATPase from sarcoplasmic  reticulum and of the anion
              transporter from erythrocytes (Band 3). In  the case of Ca2+-ATPase, thin,
              multilamellar crystals diffract to 3.5    resolution and 3-D data will be
              collected by tilting specimens and  recording both electron diffraction and
              images. The same strategy will  be used for 2-D crystals of Band 3, which in
              initial studies have  produced optical diffraction to 12  . In both cases, the
              aim is for 3-D  reconstruction at ~7   resolution, from which elements of
              secondary  structure will be identified and related to the extensive set of 
              biochemical and biophysical data for each protein. For Ca2+-ATPase, the 
              relatively strong electron diffraction provides hope for a  reconstruction at
              higher resolution, which may eventually allow tracing  of the peptide chain.
              Both of these projects also involve tubular  crystals of their respective
              proteins, which provide structural data at  more moderate resolutions (~15  ),
              but which offer the opportunity to  study conformational changes of the
              molecules. Such conformational  changes are integral to the respective
              mechanisms of ion transport and  elucidation of the corresponding structures
              will be essential for fully  understanding these mechanisms.    A collaborative
              project with the Neurobiology Program at the Skirball  Institute  is also
              described. This involves immunoelectron microscopy of  tissue sections in an
              attempt to understand the sequence of signals  that lead to formation of a
              neuromuscular junction during development.  In addition, other investigators
              are being recruited into the  Neurobiology Program with interests in
              structure/function relationships  of voltagegated ion channels. Ultimately,
              active collaborations between  the electron microscopists and the
              neurobiologists are likely to  engender a crystallographic project involving
              these channels.    The building of a structural biology group at the core of a
              major new  research institute at New York University Medical Center will not
              only  provide extensive training opportunities for the graduate students, but 
              also bring New York University to the forefront of this important  field. The
              lack of structural information for membrane proteins  represents an
              acknowledged problem for the basic research community and  all of the projects
              to be pursued on the requested electron microscope  would specifically address
              this problem. In addition, the unique  capabilities of this microscope for high
              resolution imaging of  biological molecules would make it a major resource for
              structural  biologists throughout the northeastern United States.
