Title       : Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1995    
File        : a9512223

Award Number: 9512223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Giselle Thibaudeau giselle@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dwayne A. Wise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald T. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry Hanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joel D. Bumgardner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      Funds acquired for the addition of academic research  instrumentation
              for multi-user purposes have become  extremely valuable  during these times of
              expanding collaborative research  efforts and  times of tight funding.
              Equipment for academic research  which is  accessible to investigators from
              various disciplines is a  beneficial  and realistic approach to obtaining funds
              for large pieces  of equipment  that would normally be out of the realm of
              possibilities for  individual  laboratories.        Mississippi State
              University is a Land-Grant  Institution and as  such, research is an integral
              part of the mission of the  university.  There is an electron microscope core
              facility on campus that  has been a  valuable service to the University's
              research community for  20 years.  One of the scanning and one the transmission
              electron  microscopes in  the facility have been upgraded in the previous five
              years.  Despite the  many established and productive collaborations resulting 
              from this  resource, we feel it is important to take advantage of  recent 
              developments in optical microscopy to take us to an even  higher level  of
              sophistication. We have taken a team approach and  strategically  planned to
              enhance particular areas across campus and  demonstrated  strength and
              excellence in these specific areas of research  and  instruction. The
              university is building the research  infrastructure by  bringing together
              groups of researchers with different  specific aims  and scientific expertise
              and enhancing interaction across  the  disciplines. We believe that this
              cross-disciplinary  approach to  research has proven successful as evidenced by
              the success  of the  common facilities already in place and are confident that 
              the  multi-user instrumentation requested in this proposal will  be as 
              successful.        This proposal requests funds to purchase a Molecular 
              Dynamics  CLSM 2010 Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope. This  instrument will 
              serve the research needs of a number of faculty from var ious  Colleges 
              throughout Mississippi State University. We have a critical  mass of 
              investigators whose work involves microscopy of viruses and   iving  cells
              extending from the molecular level to interactions  between  pathogens, cells
              and tissues. Dr. Thibaudeau, investigates  processes of  embryonic development,
              particularly the neural crest, using  the axolotl  and zebrafish as model
              organisms, Dr. Wise, microtubule  dynamics and  microtubule motors during
              mitosis, Dr. Hanson, biochemical  characteristics of channel catfish viruses,
              Dr. Baker, the  functional  morphology of cuticular sensory receptors and
              identifies  patterns of  sensory neurons and muscles of insect legs, antennae
              and  palps, and  studies patterning of neurons within the insect CNS, and Dr. 
              Bumgardner, aspects of cell/material interaction. These  investigators  at
              Mississippi State are conversant with the advantages and  limitations  of
              digital imaging fluorescence and reflectance microscopy.  The  diversity in
              expertise is apparent from the above list and  includes  light, electron and
              optical microscopy, molecular biology,  spectroscopy, image graphics and
              structural and  computational biology.  Researchers in other departments across
              campus have also  expressed an  interest in the availability and use of the
              confocal  microscope should  purchasing funds become available.        The
              benefits of a laser confocal microscope are  severalfold; (1)  superior spatial
              resolution of the often subjective  interpretation of  cellular phenomena is
              provided by multiwavelength confocal  microscopy,  (2) information as to the
              three-dimensional organization of  cellular  and subcellular structures and the
              time dependent change in  their  organization during development and in
              response to specific  perturbations can be obtained, (3) quantification of 
              cellular features  and/or processes (e.g. dimensions, frequency of occurrence, 
              rate of  uptake, organelle movement) and representation of this data  in number
               form is possible. These a re only a few applications of the  technology 
              envisioned by the applicants. Investigations from the  molecular level  to
              cell/cell and cell/tissue interactions have reached the  limits  imposed by the
              subjectivity of less modern microscopic  methods and by  the difficulty and
              labor-intensiveness of manually  processing  sufficient information to create
              3-D images and databases  for  statistical analysis. Collectively this group of
              researchers  at  Mississippi State University have the experience and 
              collaborations  established to utilize state-of-the-art multiwavelength 
              confocal  instrumentation to collect and analyze new kinds of  qualitative and 
              quantitative information, thus increasing the productivity  and value of  our
              ongoing research. The acquisition of a confocal  microscope would  help insure
              that Mississippi State maintains state-of-the-  art  microscopy equipment and
              would be directly useful to  research efforts  in several laboratories across
              campus and eventually to  neighboring  institutions in the state of
              Mississippi.
