Title       : Acquisition of a Unique and Comprehensive System for Studying Atmospheric
               Heterogeneous Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1995 
File        : a9512181

Award Number: 9512181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Finlayson-Pitts bjfinlay@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Darin W. Toohey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Hemminger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              F. Sherwood Rowland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Heterogeneous reactions have been found to be of crucial importance to various
              processes and phenomena in the  atmosphere, such as the Antarctic ozone hole.
              Currently, there is increasing interest in the role of heterogeneous  reactions
              in tropospheric chemistry. A unique experimental apparatus will be developed to
              study the interaction of  particles with gases under conditions simulating
              atmospheric conditions. The apparatus will consist of: (1) a system  capable of
              generating particles of known size distribution, number density, and
              composition; (2) a reaction chamber,  which can be run in either a static or a
              dynamic mode, with temperature and pressure control; (3) an atmospheric 
              pressure ionization mass spectrometer for measurement of a variety of gases at
              levels down to about 1 ppb; and (4)  a long pathlength Fourier-transform
              Infrared Spectrometer to follow some aspects of particle composition in real 
              time. Furthermore, incorporated into this new state-of-the-art system will be
              the capability of collecting particles  for post-reaction analysis using a wide
              variety of analytical techniques available in the laboratory.    Initial
              studies will focus on the interactions of sea salt particles with oxides of
              nitrogen, the subject of ongoing  research and increasing international
              interest. Also, other reactions of atmospheric interest will be studied,
              including  those of alumina particles emitted by solid fuel rockets. The mass
              spectrometer component will provide an important  and unique analytical tool
              for probing experimental protocols or the sampling and analysis of a variety of
              species  in ongoing tropospheric and stratospheric field campaigns. This system
              will play a role in expanding graduate  programs in atmospheric chemistry at
              the University of California, Irvine.***
