Title       : Acquisition of a Cryogenic Elementary-Particle Detector Facility for Dark Matter
               Searches and Neutrino Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  1999    
File        : a9512242

Award Number: 9512242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terrence W. Rettig                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Blas Cabrera cabrera@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David O. Caldwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard Sadoulet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A Cryogenic Elementary-Particle Detector will be acquired by  a consortium of
              institutions including Stanford University  (principal institution), UC
              Berkeley and UC Santa Barbara.  The instrumentation will be used primarily in
              the Stanford  Underground Facility (SUF).  The three Principal  Investigators
              are Blas Cabrera, Professor of Physics at  Stanford and Director of SUF;
              Bernard Sadoulet, Professor of  Physics at UC Berkeley and Director of the
              NSF-funded Center  for Particle Astrophysics (CfPA); and David Caldwell, 
              Emeritus Professor at UC Santa Barbara.  The Cabreras and  Caldwell groups are
              supported by the DOE High Energy Physics  program.  This unique low temperature
              facility will be built  to operate large-mass cryogenic particle detectors for 
              research on dark matter and neutrino physics experiments,  and for
              investigating industrial applications. Under the  coordination of CfPA, the
              groups from these three  institutions, along with research personnel from
              Lawrence  Berkeley Laboratory (LBL), Santa Clara University and the  Institute
              for Nuclear Research (INR) in Baksan, Russia are  performing a search for the
              dark matter that makes up at  least 90% of the mass of the universe.  This
              problem is one  of the most important in cosmology and science today and is 
              the central theme of the CfPA.  Our team is looking for  weakly interacting
              massive particles (WIMPs) such as  supersymmetric particles, which may
              constitute this dark  matter.  We are expecting to improve the sensitivity of
              the  previous searches by more than a hundred times within a few  years using
              novel detectors which operate at very low  temperature.  By simultaneously
              measuring the ionization and  lattice vibrations created by particle
              interactions within  crystals, we obtain an unparalleled rejection tool against
               ubiquitous radioactive backgrounds which have limited  previous experiments. 
              The proposed instrument will be operated in the Stanford  Underground Facility
              (SUF).  It offers about one cubic foot  of space at  a temperature of 10mK and
              an ultra-low  radioactive background environment.
