Title       : A Confocal Microscope for Cell and Developmental Biology Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1996      
File        : a9512886

Award Number: 9512886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanna B. Olmsted olmj@cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This application requests funds for the purchase of a Bio-Rad  confocal system
              integrated with a Nikon microscope. The seven major  users of this facility are
              junior and senior faculty in the Department  of Biology at the University of
              Rochester, and all are funded from  national granting agencies (NSF, NIH,
              USDA). The current programs of  the users involve carrying out studies on fate
              specification, cell-cell  interactions and morphogenesis in developing
              organisms (Drosophila, sea  urchins, Arabidopsis); the role of cytoskeletal
              elements in cellular  and organismal functions; the mechanisms of nuclear
              transport; and  regulation of genome packaging. These projects are unified in
              using  molecular, genetic and/or biochemical techniques to ask how specific 
              gene products influence cellular and developmental processes. In order  to
              carry out quantitation, dynamic analysis and co-localization  studies, all of
              these projects now require a confocal microscope system  which is: 1) reliable
              and easily used by a number of individuals; 2)  has multiple types of optics;
              3) has flexibility in the excitation and  emission wavelengths; and 4) has
              excellent resolution in the Z and X/Y  axes. Image analysis software that
              allows further quantification and  manipulation of the confocal data is also
              requested.    As members of the Department of Biology, all of the users are
              also  involved in education of undergraduate and graduate students in both 
              formal and informal settings. In the context of each of the research  projects
              described, the requested instrumentation will be used by  graduate students and
              postdoctorals in training. The instrumentation  will also be employed for
              demonstrations in undergraduate courses and  outreach programs, and for
              hands-on experiences- in advanced laboratory  courses and independent
              undergraduate research projects.
