Title       : Development of the MIT Quantitative Microscopy and Imaging Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1995 
File        : a9512316

Award Number: 9512316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279725             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elazer R. Edelman eedelman@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. F. Dewey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ian W. Hunter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Lauffenburger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                    Microscopy is ubiquitous among measurement methods in the  biological
              sciences and related engineering disciplines. Virtually all  laboratories at
              MIT utilize some form of microscopic technology, yet  these images are commonly
              obtained, stored, and analyzed on individual  machines using
              commercially-available systems and standardized  processing software.
              Interpretations often remain qualitative, and  storage capabilities available
              to individual users limit data transfer  speed and the number of raw and
              processed images that can be  maintained.        Today, however, computerized
              networks can greatly enhance and  extend image acquisition, processing,
              analysis, storage, and  interpretation. Accordingly, this project aims to
              develop a  Quantitative Microscopy & Image Processing Network (QMIPN) that will
               enable access to facilities capable of acquiring, transferring,  storing, and
              recalling images rapidly and efficiently. Advanced  methodologies for
              quantitative image interpretation will be available  from both central and
              remote sites. QMIPN will also serve as a platform  for developing new imaging
              modalities, further enhancing hardware and  software image processing modules,
              and establishing automated and  remote forms of image acquisition and analysis.
                      Three phases are planned:  PHASE I -- The Principal Investigators will
              use relevant research  projects as prototypes to define network capabilities.
              Light,  fluorescent, confocal, atomic-force, and transmission electron 
              microscopes will be connected to a central server/router. These  microscopes
              will be adapted to provide common interface, data storage,  and analysis
              paradigms, along with automated remote access and image  manipulation. Local
              computer terminals will control each microscope and  sample, communicate with
              the central processor, and perform basic image  filtering. Acquired images will
              be transported via high-speed ATM  connections and downloaded to large capacity
              systems so that more  complex, computer-intensive proces sing methods can be
              employed.  PHASE II -- This network will be broadened to involve an increased 
              number of investigators and projects, employing either the core  microscope
              facilities or their own individual laboratory microscope  facilities.
              Inexpensive new CD-ROM writing capabilities will be used to  create a large
              database of stored images. By developing indexing and  retrieval methods, these
              images can be a world-wide source of  information.  PHASE III -- The network
              will be extended to an even wider group of  investigators both on and off
              campus. Accessibility of our network  through the Internet will provide a
              powerful teaching tool that can be  tapped by other less-advantaged
              institutions with a relatively small  investment. This would raise the
              possibility of developing innovative  outreach programs to enrich curricula,
              e.g., at smaller minority  schools that do not have strong research programs.  
                    Three major benefits will grow as the network develops:  1. Increased
              research efficiency and innovation, resulting from    multi-user     facilities
              involving investigators with diverse interests and    skills, in     terms of
              both applications and techniques;  2. Increased research productivity,
              resulting from wide dissemination    and     application of stateof-the-art
              image acquisition and processing    methods;  3. Increased cooperation among
              scientists and engineers on and off    campus in     terms of both research and
              teaching, resulting from the ease of    access to     visual images display and
              analysis from electronic information    networks.        Substantial matching
              funds have already been raised from a  variety of institutional and other
              non-federal sources, standing ready  to be leverage this grant.
