Title       : A Femtosecond Resolution Transient Optical Spectrometer for the Study of Energy
               and Electron Transfer in Natural and Articial Photosynthetic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1995   
File        : a9512970

Award Number: 9512970
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal W. Woodbury NWoodbury@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Su Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Devens Gust  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Blankenship  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    The Photosynthesis Center at Arizona State University has  developed a
              major research program investigating fast energy and  electron transfer during
              solar energy conversion in both natural and  artificial systems. Ultrafast
              optical laser spectroscopy is a key tool  in this research effort. Six groups,
              representing about 40 faculty,  postdocs and students, are actively using an
              existing femtosecond time  resolution transient absorbance spectrometer to
              study bacterial, plant  and synthetic antenna and reaction center complexes.
              This research  includes designing and synthesizing molecular devices which
              mimic the  fast rates and high yields of the natural systems but are much
              simpler  chemically and may have applications as molecular switches and logic 
              gates. Also, investigation of the structurally well defined reaction  centers
              of the purple nonsulfur bacteria is leading towards an  understanding of the
              photophysics of the initial solar energy  conversion event and towards an
              understanding of the role played by the  protein in modifying the thermodynamic
              and kinetic parameters of  electron transfer. Research is also underway into
              the light harvesting  and energy trapping reactions of the Photosystem I
              reaction center of  higher plants as well as in a related photosynthetic
              reaction center  from Heliobacillus mobilis.          A great deal of progress
              has been made with the present  instrument, but as the experiments performed
              have become more and more  sophisticated, limitations have been reached in
              available time  resolution, sensitivity, noise suppression, photon excitation 
              densities, available excitation and probe wavelengths, capabilities to  perform
              multiple excitation pulse experiments, and simply in the amount  of time
              available for each group on the apparatus. The purchase of a  new instrument is
              proposed with greatly expanded capabilities. Unlike  the present instrument
              which uses an actively mode-locked Nd:YAG laser  synchronously pumping a dye
              laser as the source of ultrafast pu lses,  the new system will employ a
              self-mode-locked titanium sapphire laser  pumped by a CW argon ion laser. The
              pulses from this source will be  amplified in a solid-state regenerative
              amplifier to the millijoule  level at kilohertz repetition rates and used to
              generate up to two  excitation pulses at any wavelengths between 400 nm and 2.4
              rnicrons  with pulse durations of roughly 50 fs. In addition, part of the 
              regeneratively amplified pulse will be used to generate a white light 
              continuum, allowing simultaneous absorbance change measurements at many 
              different wavelengths in a single experiment. By using optical gating  in a
              nonlinear crystal, the instrument  will also have the capability of performing
              femtosecond time resolution  emission decay studies.          Purchase of the
              proposed femtosecond system will open up a number  of new research avenues for 
              photosynthesis investigators at ASU. New excitation wavelengths will  allow
              more specific preparation of molecular excited states Multiple  excitation
              pulses at higher photon densities will allow the creation of  specific
              intermediate states with one pulse whose photochemistry can  then be
              investigated with a second excitation event. The higher time  resolution of the
              system will both help in the investigation of  processes previously detected
              but not resolved on the 100 fs timescale  and also open up a window into the
              molecular vibrations of the system  coupled to the absorbance transitions and
              photochemistry. Higher  signal-to-noise absorbance change data will allow more
              thorough  investigation of natural photosynthetic systems with large numbers of
               pigments whose absorbance masks the small absorbance changes associated  with
              the primary photochemistry of solar energy conversion.
