Title       : U.S.-Netherlands Center to Center Cooperative Research in Membrane Science and
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1997     
File        : a9512728

Award Number: 9512728
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47780              (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Krantz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan R. Greenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Noble  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 5948,9165,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the establishment of a strong research-based linkage between
              two centers of excellence in membrane technology in the U.S. and The
              Netherlands. These are the University-Industry Cooperative Research Center in
              Separations Using Thin Films of the University of Colorado, Boulder, directed
              by Professor William B. Krantz, and the Center for Membrane Science and
              Technology at the University of Twente, The Netherlands, directed by Professor
              Heiner Strathmann.  With seventy research staff, this Dutch organization is the
              largest and strongest membrane research center in the world.  It has
              interdisciplinary strengths in both the fundamental science and applied
              technology aspects of membranes.  The U.S. center is a relatively new one, and
              is stronger in the engineering side of membrane research.  It hopes to benefit
              from the Dutch expertise in membrane chemistry and thermodynamics as well as
              its experience in technology transfer to its industrial partners.      Staff
              and students of the two centers will collaborate in several areas of research,
              but generally these lie in the area of processes and models for the formation
              of new types of membranes for use in environmental applications.  Specific
              research topics will include a thermally induced phase-separation process,
              methods to minimize macrovoid defects in phase-inversion membranes, hybrid
              membranes, zeolite membranes, polymeric membranes and metallic membranes.   
              Ultimately the joint research to be performed should contribute new knowledge
              about the separation processes effected by membranes, and how to enhance the
              processes and develop new membrane materials for use in more hostile
              environments   Over its three year duration, this award will support nine
              research visits lasting from three weeks to three months to be made by three
              senior staff and six graduate students of the U.S. center.  Funds for the award
              are provided by the Western Europe Program of the Division of International
              Programs, and the Separation and Purification Processes Program of the Division
              of Chemical and Thermal Systems.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
