Title       : Acquisition of a Charged Coupled Device (CCD) High Intensity X-ray Diffraction
               System for Materials Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1995    
File        : a9512503

Award Number: 9512503
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Galen D. Stucky stucky@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred Wudl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cyrus R. Safinya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley F. Chmelka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lori A. Kohlstaedt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9157,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9512503  Stucky    A charge coupled device (CCD), high intensity X-ray 
              diffractometer will be acquired and utilized for materials  synthesis and
              biotechnology research. The CCD detector and  associated software allow for
              nearly single photon detection  efficiency and rapid readout time of 512x512
              pixels. The ease  of use and rapid screening time of this instrument will
              permit  the quick characterization of crystals as small as a few  micrometers
              and of molecular crystals that  are unstable and  tend to deteriorate in the
              X-ray beam. Biomolecular phases and  liquid crystal/membrane based composites
              with large unit cell  structures that produce a large range of scattered
              intensities  will be structurally accessible with this instrument. Zeolites, 
              porous mesostructured materials, and fullerine-type structures  that cannot be
              otherwise characterized because of their low  scattering cross section, will
              also be studied. The large  improvement in sensitivity provided by this
              instrument, in  combination with available nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
              resources, represents a unique capability for studying  complicated partially
              ordered polymeric materials.  %%%  The high sensitivity, fast data collection,
              x-ray  diffractometer  will enable a  new materials characterization 
              capability that will impact an existing interdisciplinary  program of over one
              hundred students and faculty. It will  facilitate research programs concerned
              with the design,  synthesis, and processing of advanced materials, studies of
              non-  equilibrium transformations in complex fluids and biological  systems,
              and protein structure-property relationships.  ***
