Title       : Acquisition of Time-Domain Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9512274

Award Number: 9512274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $481540             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Doetschman ddoetsch@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alistair J. Lees  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janice L. Musfeldt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne E. Jones, Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Stanley Whittingham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                   This award from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will help the
              Department of  Chemistry at SUNY Binghamton acquire a time-domain electron
              paramagnetic resonance  spectrometer (TD-EPR).  The research activity to be
              supported includes: (1) room- and low-  temperature TD detection of short-lived
              excited states and electron transfer intermediates in  surface
              photoelectrophotochemistry, (2) TD-EPR at low temperatures to detect
              paramagnetic  photoexcited states of CH-bond activating carbonyl complexes and
              SS-EPR studies of  Cubenzimidazole complexes in microelectronics, (3) SS-EPR of
              bis-  ethylenedithiolotetrathiofulvalenes, etc. and varaible temperature TD-EPR
              of spin relaxation to  characterize conductivity-relevant phenomena, (4) TD-
              and SS EPR of transition metal  impregnation of solid-state materials for
              storage battery development, (5) EPR of carbenes in  cyclodextrins and
              zeolites, (6) SS- and TD-EPR in solution and frozen solution of intermediates 
              in tetraphenylborate photochemistry, (7) temperature dependence of TD-EPR T2's
              in spin probe  models to characterize reactant molecular motion in zeolites,
              clays, porous silicas and  carbonaceous materials, TD-EPR spin relaxation of
              natural free radicals in carbonaceous  materials to characterize radical
              motions and interactions.    An electron paramagnetic resonance (ER)
              spectrometer is an instrument used to obtain  information about the molecular
              and electronic structure of molecules.  It may also be used to  obtain
              information about the lifetimes of free radicals which are often essential for
              the initiation  of tumor growth and/or a variety of chemical reactions.
