Title       : Microscopic Imaging Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1996     
File        : a9512949

Award Number: 9512949
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32956              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mariano A. Garcia-Blanco garci001@mc.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests partial funding for a Microscopic  Imaging Laboratory to
              be used by members of the Departments  Molecular Cancer Biology of the Duke
              University Medical  Center and Department of Botany of Duke University. The 
              users already have a Zeiss AxioSkop microscope outfitted for  fluorescence
              microscopy, which was purchased with funds from  Duke University. This
              application proposes to purchase a  Hamamatsu cooled charged coupled device
              (CCD) camera with a  thermal printer and monitor that would provide the 
              capability of high resolution and high sensitivity imaging.  Accessories that
              would greatly enhance the flourescent  capabilities of the instrument and the
              camera are also  proposed. Moreover, a Z-axis stepper is proposed in order to 
              be able to obtain 3D reconstructions.       Two areas of great interest are
              represented by the work  proposed here: first, the understanding of key
              regulatory  events in the cell cycle of eukaryotes and second, the  unraveling
              of the architecture of the eukaryotic nucleus.  The work on the cell cycle is
              carried on by Drs. Lew,  Garrett, Horowitz, Kombluth and Swenson. The
              relationship  between regulatory events in the cell cycle and cellular 
              morphology is studied by Dr. Lew using the baker's yeast  Saccharomyces
              cerevisiae. Dr. Swenson is elucidating  signalling pathways controlling entry
              into meiosis in surf  clam and amphibian oocytes. Dr. Horowitz's laboratory 
              focuses on the regulation of the cell cycle in mammalian  cells. The regulation
              of DNA synthesis as an integral  decision of cycling cells is investigated in
              Xenopous laevis  eggs by Dr. Kornbluth.       Work on nuclear architecture is
              ongoing in the  laboratories of Drs. Garcia Blanco, Kohorn and Kornbluth.  The
              project in Dr. Garcia Blanco's laboratory focuses on the  relationship between
              nuclear architecture and the  machineries that processes pre-rRNA and
              pre-mRNAs. Dr.  Kohorn, in collaboration with Dr. Garcia Blanco, is 
              investigating the nuclear architecture in Chlamydomonas.  Th is organisms
              provides the possibility of doing biochemical  and genetic analysis of nuclear
              functions and is much better  than Saccharomyces cerevisiae for studies that
              visualize  nuclear structure.       These projects require precise image
              acquisition and  storage systems. The continuation of the work requires a  high
              sensitivity and high resolution camera to elucidate new  cellular structures.
