Title       : Construction of Winterized, Self-Contained (Kitchenette), Family-Accommodating,
               Researcher Housing (Duplex) at the Southwestern Research Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9512310

Award Number: 9512310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69003              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wade C. Sherbrooke wcs@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Southwestern Research Station (SWRS) of the American  Museum of Natural
              History (AMNH), located in southeastern  Arizona, offers field biologists from
              numerous U.S. and  international institutions a field research facility with 
              access to a wide range of biological communities and a great  diversity of
              species.  The primary objective of the Station  is providing accommodations and
              scientific facilities to  support research at a remote site.    This project
              addresses a variety of housing needs for  researchers working at the Station. 
              The duplex residence  will solve housing problems, at various times of the
              year,  for a diverse scientific clientele.  First, it will provide  additional
              sleeping quarters for up to twelve individuals,  relieving acute crowding
              during peak use by scientists in  spring and summer.  Second, as a winterized
              building with  kitchenettes in each unit, it will serve as winter (November- 
              March) housing for researchers when the dinning room is  closed for the season.
                Third, it will be used to house  researchers and their assistants who are
              engaged in studies  on nocturnal organisms, providing an isolated, quiet 
              location for daytime sleeping.  And, fourth, by  incorporating two sleeping
              areas in each unit, the duplex  will be appropriate housing for families with
              children who  are the Station for extended periods.  The building will  provide
              housing conditions not currently available at SWRS,  thus facilitating use of
              the Station by scientists, and  creating opportunities not previously
              available.
