Title       : Acquisition of a 500 MHz NMR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1996     
File        : a9512478

Award Number: 9512478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip H. Bolton pbolton@wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Irina M. Russu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9169,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      We propose the acquisition of a three channel, pulsed field  gradient
              500 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometer for use in  doctoral and
              postdoctoral research training in research groups of eight  Wesleyan faculty
              based in the Departments of Chemistry and the  Department of Molecular Biology
              and Biochemistry and outside users from  Connecticut College and Trinity
              College. Graduate courses and  instruction in spectroscopy, and particularly
              NMR, are a focus of our  Molecular Biophysics program, supported by an NIH
              Training Grant.  Undergraduate thesis research is also encouraged at Wesleyan,
              and use  of the instrument by trained undergraduates is also envisaged. There 
              are currently two 400 MHz NMR instruments at Wesleyan, one of which has  been
              recently upgraded and a second which currently is approaching  obsolescence. A
              300 MHz instrument supports the need of undergraduate  teaching laboratories in
              chemistry and the routine analytical needs of  the synthetic chemistry research
              groups. The proposed instrument would  restore our capacity for high level NMR
              research and provide field  strength and electronics for state of the art 2D
              and 3D experiments on  proteins and nucleic acids, and also the ability to
              perform novel  experiments on smaller molecules which are not feasible on the
              NMR  instruments currently available here.              Wesleyan based research
              to directly benefit from this  initiative include a) projects directed by two
              faculty who specialize  in NMR spectroscopy in their research: NMR Studies of
              Nucleic Acids and  Proteins (Prof. Bolton, Chemistry, ACS, NSF and DOE funded);
              NMR  Studies of RNA, DNA and Protein-DNA Interactions (Russu, MB&B, NIH 
              funded); b) projects from six faculty whose work involves or relates to  NMR
              spectroscopy: Theoretical Aspects of NMR on DNA (Prof. Beveridge,  Chemistry,
              NIH funded); Enantioselective Catalysis in the Synthesis of  ,~Blockers (Prof.
              Bruno, Chemistry, NSF funded); Synthetic Organic  Electrochemistry (Prof. Fry,
              NSF and EPRI  funded); NMR Studies in  Natural Product Synthesis (Prof. Jacobi,
              Chemistry NIH funded);  Biophysical Investigation of Protein-Protein and
              Protein-DNA  Interactions (Prof. Mukerji, MB&B, a new faculty member);
              ,~-Lactamase  Active Site Structure and Function (Prof. Pratt, Chemistry, NIH 
              funded), Kinetics of Multielectron/Halide Transfer Self-Exchange  Reactions
              (Prof. Westmoreland, Chemistry, NIH funded). In addition,  there are projects
              from two faculty from nearby liberal arts colleges:  Solution Structure of a
              Band 3 Protein Domain (Prof. Branchini,  Connecticut College), and NMR
              Investigation of Osteocalcin and Related  Peptides (Prof. Prigodich, Trinity
              College), both of whom have external  funding.          The objective of the
              science programs at Wesleyan is to provide  high-quality courses and research
              opportunities for undergraduate and  graduate students in preparation for
              careers in science and education.  Specific initiatives in support of women in
              science, programs for  developing the interest of minorities in science, and
              access for the  handicapped are provided. The proposed 500 MHz NMR would place 
              scientific instrumentation at an appropriate level for an institution  of our
              Si7R and educational mission.
