Title       : Development of a Variable Flow Seawater Flume and High- Speed Video Imaging
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2002      
File        : a9512348

Award Number: 9512348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151925             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon D. Witman jon_witman@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George E. Goslow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0208000   Water Resources                         
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,9157,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We propose to develop a variable flow sea water flume and high-speed  video
              imaging system for studies of feeding, dispersal and locomotion  in moving
              fluids. A sea water flume and video system in the Department  of Ecology and
              Evolutionary Biology will assist the research/education  programs of the Marine
              Ecology group (Bertness and Witman) and the  Vertebrate Morphology group
              (Goslow and Swartz). Water flow plays an  important role in mediating
              ecological interactions. The specifics of  this mediation are largely unknown,
              however, and their elucidation  remain a major research focus of
              Bertness,Witman, and their students. A  sea water flume with variable water
              flow rate and volume and a means  for documenting rapidly occurring biological
              response will enable  studies of the effects of internal waves, variable food
              supply and  temperature on populations of suspension-feeding invertebrate
              animals.  The system will also facilitate studies of the way(s) marine
              predators  respond to increasing water flow under controlled conditions. 
              Vertebrate animals are also affected by their physical environment  which is
              reflected in body shape and locomotor style. The mechanisms by  which
              morphology is shaped by physical parameters is the focus of the  research
              programs of Goslow, Swartz and their students. For example, a  group of
              seabirds, the 'wing-propelled' divers, use their wings to  'fly' underwater as
              well as in the air; an ability which necessitates  some evolutionary
              compromises for one if not both media. Among fishes  and marine mammals,
              considerable diversity of body form, fin shape,  bone structure and locomotor
              pattern exists which can only be  understood by careful manipulative studies. A
              flume with controlled  flow characteristics which is instrumented to monitor
              the water column  and the locomotor movements of the organisms under
              investigation will  provide a focus for training students in modern
              manipulative studies  designed to determine the evolution of complex forms.
