Title       : Family Social Capital and Academic Achievement of Immigrant Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1995      
File        : a9512108

Award Number: 9512108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80132              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lingxin Hao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 1041,1092,CVIS,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of family social capital and academic achievement of immigrant
              children.  Four kinds of family social capital are identified as relevant to
              child educational outcomes: 1) Networks with members of the extended family,
              such as grandparents; 2) parent involvement in school, for example attending
              parent-teacher meetings; 3) immigrant and ethnic culture; 4) parent-child
              interaction, such as supervising homework and discussing materials learned in
              class.  Theories on how these factors operate to enhance education will be
              tested using data from NELS:88, a longitudinal survey that collected data on
              eighth graders in 1988 with two follow-up waves at two-year intervals,
              including oversamples of Asian and Hispanic students.  The analysis will
              involve three phases.  First, cross-sectional analysis of data on eight and
              twelfth graders will examine the creation and maintenance of family social
              capital and identify its level effects.  Second,  longitudinal analysis of
              academic achievement growth among Asian and Hispanic immigrant students from
              eighth to twelfth grade will identify the effect of changes in family social
              capital on achievement growth.  Third, the analyses in the first two phases
              will be extended to compare immigrant results with those for the native-born
              children.  %%%   This study will contribute to the advancement of our knowledge
              about the role of the family in children's academic achievement, by testing the
              effect of family social capital on the reproduction of human capital in
              children and comparing the results across immigrant and native-born ethnic
              groups.  It will also provide evidence for designing policies to strengthen the
              family and school-family connections and help in the allocation of public
              resources to improve parents' human capital and family social capital.
