Title       : Empirical Distinctions Between the 'Reasonable Person' Standard and 'Reasonable
               Woman' Standard in Evaluating Sexual Harassment Cases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1995    
File        : a9512792

Award Number: 9512792
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Wiener   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9512792    Wiener  The productivity and well-being of the American workforce is
              much affected by hostile work environments that encourage or actually
              constitute sexual harassment  The legal standards used to judge what
              constitutes a hostile work environment remain controversial.  This study will
              study the differences in the normative expectations of male and female workers
              about social-sexual conduct at work and how the law might accommodate such
              differences.  It pursues its goal through three studies.  Study I combines
              qualitative and quantitative methods to map the cognitive schemes used by males
              and females to think about sexual harassment.  Study II extends the P.I.'s
              previous research testing the effects of gender, identification with victim or
              perpetrator, and self-referencing on sensitivity to reasonable person/woman
              perspectives.  Study III seeks to increase participant sensitivity by
              presenting them with facts about male and female perceptions of sexual
              harassment.  The results of the project should advance our understanding of the
              reality of sexual harassment in the work place by describing the normative
              boundaries (community standards?) of social-sexual misconduct that the law
              might recognize.  %%%%  The productivity and well-being of the American
              workforce is much affected by hostile work environments that encourage or
              actually constitute sexual harassment  The legal standards used to judge what
              constitutes a hostile work environment remain controversial.  This study will
              study the differences in the normative expectations of male and female workers
              about social-sexual conduct at work and how the law might accommodate such
              differences.  It pursues its goal through three studies.  Study I combines
              qualitative and quantitative methods to map the cognitive schemes used by males
              and females to think about sexual harassment.  Study II extends the P.I.'s
              previous research testing the effects of gender, identification with victim or
              perpetrator, and self-referencing on sensitivity to reason able person/woman
              perspectives.  Study III seeks to increase participant sensitivity by
              presenting them with facts about male and female perceptions of sexual
              harassment.  The results of the project should advance our understanding of the
              reality of sexual harassment in the work place by describing the normative
              boundaries (community standards?) of social-sexual misconduct that the law
              might recognize.  ****
