Title       : Archaeological Investigations in the Nihewan Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1995  
File        : a9512647

Award Number: 9512647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathy D. Schick kaschick@ucs.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas Toth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Schick and her colleagues
              will conduct one season of archaeological fieldwork in the Nihewan Basin, Hebei
              Province, northern China. This region holds some of the earliest documented
              archaeological evidence for early hominid occupation of eastern Asia. A number
              of sites from the Early and Middle Pleistocene, ranging from approximately 1.0
              to 0.5 million years in age and been identified and several have been excavated
              within the past two decades. The Nihewan basin is particularly important
              because of the excellent conditions of preservation at both archaeological and
              paleontological sites and thus the great potential for behavioral and
              environmental reconstructions during this important time period of human
              evolution and population dispersal. Dr. Schick and her colleagues have located
              within the Basin a new area which appears rich in archaeological sites. During
              a 2-month field season they will investigate the distribution, chronology and
              context of these sites. They will conduct systematic survey and test excavation
              to tie these occurrences in with sites previously investigated. The work will
              also integrate the sites into the larger geological and environmental setting
              and allow reconstruction of the subsistence strategies these early humans
              employed. It will also provide the basis for future larger scale excavation. 
              Archaeologists know that the earliest hominids first appeared in Africa and
              only later spread to other parts of the world. While many African sites have
              been excavated to provide insight into hominid adaptation, very little is known
              about how these peoples spread to other continents and adapted the very
              different environmental conditions which confronted them. The research which
              Dr. Schick and her colleagues will conduct should help to remedy this. The
              information collected will be of interest to many archaeologists.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
