Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Mechanics of Failure of Metal Matrix Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9512748

Award Number: 9512748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: George N. Frantziskonis frantzis@email.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. Meisner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1037,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9512748  Frantziskonis (PI)  Meisner (co-PI)    This award supports a 12 month
              Japan Society for the  Promotion of Science Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.
              George  Franziskonis (PI) and Mark Meisner (co-PI) , Department of  Civil
              Engineering and Engineering Mechanics, University of  Arizona to complete
              research at Saitama University, Saitama,  Japan.  Drs. Franziskonis and Meisner
              will work with  Professor Eiichiro Tsuchida, professor in the Department of 
              Engineering at Saitama University, on a research project  entitled, "Mechanics
              of Failure in Metal Matrix Composites."    The proposed research will consist
              of basic research to  determine the fundamental  factors governing the
              reliability of continuous fiber, metal  matrix composites in aggressive, high
              temperature  environments.  Analysis will focus on certain metal matrix 
              composites containing ductile metallic fiber-matrix  interface layers.  The
              principal modeled subject materials  will be various phases blended titanium
              aluminide  matrices reinforced with continuous fibers.  Variables such  as
              having ductile interface layers of refractory or noble  metals will be modeled
              and investigated.    The topics being investigated are currently relevant to
              the  scientific community and the benefits to be obtained from  collaborative
              research valuable.  The Experimental Center  for Engineering Materials at
              Saitama University and the  Composite and Heterogeneous Materials Center at the
               University of Arizona are both excellent research facilities  and their
              cooperation on this project -- considered by both  parties to be the initial
              stage of a long term partnership -  - will likely yield results for both the
              United States and  Japan as well as the international scientific community as a
               whole.  ***
