Title       : Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope for Research and Research
               Training in the Liberal Arts College Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1999  
File        : a9512508

Award Number: 9512508
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel G. Blackburn daniel.blackburn@mail.trincoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Priscilla Kehoe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine C. Broadbridge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity College
	      300 Summit Street
	      Hartford, CT  061063100    203/527-3151

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9161,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Five  natural  science  departments and  programs  at  Trinity  College 
              (Hartford CT) join to request matching funds from the NSF to purchase a 
              Transmission  Electron  Microscope (TEM) and  ancillary  equipment,  in  order 
              to  incorporate  their use into faculty research,  undergraduate  research 
              training, and collaborative faculty/student research  at  the  college.    As 
              a  highly-selective,  secular,  liberal-arts  institution,  Trinity  College  
              maintains  a  long-standing  commitment   both   to   quality  undergraduate 
              education and to faculty research. Trinity's  laboratory  facilities  are
              excellent, and its science faculty is highly productive  in  research and
              scholarship. Nevertheless, until last year the college  entirely  lacked 
              electron microscope facilities. Drawing  on  its  own  resmurces,  the college
              has now procured and installed both a  scanning  electron microscope (SEM) and
              an atomic force microscope (AFM), and has  located  and  designed space for a
              TEM facility. The college  has  made  acquisition  of the TEM a top priority,
              and requests NSF assistance  in  order to make this acquisition a reality.   
              The  presence of a TEM on campus will have a multitude of benefits.  It  will
              (1) provide an important instrument needed in research by existing  faculty; 
              (2) substantially increase the opportunities for research  by  Trinity 
              undergraduates; (3) permit development of upper-level  courses  that  provide
              training in EM techniques; (4) allow incorporation of  EM  technology  into 
              several existing laboratory courses  that  deal  with  research methods; and
              (S) help the college recruit science faculty  for  several  key  positions that
              will become vacant  during  the  next  few  years. It should also help the
              college in recruitment of undergraduates  to programs in the natural sciences
              and engineering.    TEM  capabilities are needed for investigative research
              currently being  conducted  by  nine members of the science faculty in five
              departments/  programs:  Biolog y, Engineering, Neuroscience, Chemistry, and 
              Physics.  Each  of  these  faculty members would expect to develop 
              collaborative  student/   faculty  research  projects  involving  TEM.  In  
              addition,  acquisition  of  TEM  technology will permit  development  of  two 
              new  research-oriented  courses ("Electron Microscopy"  and  "Principles  of 
              Crystallography and Transmission Electron Microscopy") and the addition  of 
              new  laboratory  exercises  for at least  ten  upper-level  science  courses. 
              Most  students  majoring in the sciences  at  Trinity  choose  careers in
              scientific research or the health professions. Consequently,  introduction  of
              EM technology will have a substantial  impact  on  the  college's  ability to
              attract and train students who will  be  research  scientists and medical
              professionals well into the next century.    Trinity College is committed to
              providing 50% matching funds.
