Title       : Acquisition of Biophysical Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1995    
File        : a9512477

Award Number: 9512477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167140             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth E. Neet 2163683684  (Principal Investigator current)
              Antony M. Dean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Kemp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Mueller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Finch U of Hlth Scs Chi Me
	      3333 Greenbay Rd
	      North Chicago, IL  600643037    847/578-3200

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    Request is made in this application for Biophysical  Instrumentation for
              the characterization of proteins. The instruments  are: a BIALite biosensor
              (Pharmacia), Isothermal Titration and  Differential Scanning Calorimeter
              (MicroCal), Dynamic light scattering  instrument (Protein Solutions, DLS),
              Stopped flow attachment (SLM, SF),  and Image Analyzer (Appligene, IA). These
              state-of-the-art instruments  allow characterization of the size, shape, and
              interactions of proteins  in rigorous, thermodynamic ways not previously
              readily accessible. The  group of instruments complement each other and
              represent a broad,  unified approach to studying the physical chemical
              properties of  interesting and important proteins. The Biosensor directly
              measures  protein-protein or ligand-protein interactions in real-time. The 
              Calorimeter measures the thermodynamics of ligand binding (ITC) and 
              denaturation (DSC) of proteins. The DLS provides direct determination  of the
              hydrodynamic radius of native proteins in solution. The SF  attachment will
              enable fluorometric kinetic measurements in the msec  region. The IA will
              facilitate quantitation of proteins on gels for  purity assessment, interaction
              analysis, record keeping, and  publications.          The major focus of the
              group of four investigators applying for  these instruments is the study of
              function related to structure in a  diverse set of proteins. The requested
              instruments are needed by this  group of senior and junior investigators to
              strengthen the physical  chemical basis of the structural studies that are
              being done. The  department currently contains a protein sequencing core
              facility, a  molecular graphics computing center, and a spectroscopic
              laboratory  (circular dichroism and flourescence). The five new instruments
              will  complement these facilities and enable the goals of characterization of 
              proteins and protein-protein interactions to be greatly enhanced with  this
              modern technology.          The four protein systems under study are: nerve 
              growth factor  (NGF), its receptors, and related neurotrophins;
              phosphofructokinase  (PFK) from several species; yeast mitochondrial ATP
              synthase; and  isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) with evolutionarily related 
              dehydrogenases. All four of the investigators heavily utilize site  specific
              mutagenesis. The characterization of the molecular weight of  the native state
              (by DLS) and the polypeptide chain (with the  assistance of IA) of mutant
              proteins is extremely important for  understanding the affects of individual
              amino acid residues on  function. Direct determination of the thermodynamics of
              ligand binding  to PFK and IDH will be greatly facilitated with the ITC
              calorimeter.  Direct studies of association of NGF with its receptors and the 
              association of the subunits of the ATP synthase will be possible with  the
              Biosensor. Characterization of the stability of native and mutant  proteins in
              all four systems willbe possible with the DSC calorimeter  and complement
              previous results of the stability of NGF from so~vent  denaturation. Rapid
              kinetic studies of ligand binding to IDH, PFK, and  the NGF receptor will be
              achievable with the SF attachment to the  currently existing SLM fluorometer
              and may be critical in the studies  of the catalytic site of PFK, IDH, and ATP
              synthase.          No other access to instrumention of this type currently
              exists at  FUHS. These instruments will also be made available to other 
              investigators in the school and will probably be more broadly used than 
              currently described.
