Title       : A Phosphorimager for Research in Plant Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1995   
File        : a9512943

Award Number: 9512943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32425              (Estimated)
Investigator: Heven Sze HS29@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Wolniak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   A multi-user phosphorimager is requested by a group of  investigators in
              the Department of Plant Biology and the Center for  Agricultural Biotechnology.
              This instrument is often referred to as a  fast, accurate, filmless
              autoradiography system. It facilitates the  rapid and sensitive quantitation of
              radioactivity on gels or blots  without scintillation counting or
              autoradiography. Highly sensitive  storage phosphor screens capture the image
              of the experimental sample  ten times faster than film. The broad linear
              dynamic range of the  phosphoimager permits quantitative detection of both
              strong and weak  signals in a way that film simply cannot. Digital images are
              compiled  and analyzed with a microcomputer. We propose to use this powerful 
              instrumentation in a wide range of applications, including the  quantitative
              analyses of DNA-protein interactions by gel retardation,  measurement of
              transcript levels by RNA gel blots or RNase protection  assays, and kinetic
              measurements of enzyme activity and protein  phosphorylation. The acquisition
              of a phosphorimager will permit us to  obtain quantitative information and
              answers to research questions that  would otherwise be impossible to obtain
              using conventional X-ray film  and autoradiography. Six of the seven
              investigators are currently  supported by competitive grants from federal
              agencies. In all cases,  the proposed experiments requiring analyses by the
              phosphorimager are  essential to the long-range goals of understanding the
              molecular basis  for plant pathogenesis, signal transduction, membrane
              transport and  mitosis.
