Title       : Acquisition of an Integrated Imaging Resource
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9512321

Award Number: 9512321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve A. Kay   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Progress in cutting-edge biomedical studies has become increasingly  dependent
              upon the technology required to measure biological processes  as they occur in
              living organisms, tissues and individual cells. This  has led to the broad
              application of imaging techniques in fundamental  and applied bioscience. The
              most important aspect of our proposal is  the assembly of a critical mass of
              investigators focused on the problem  of studying gene expression and protein
              activities in intact living  cells. We plan to bring together a large group of
              University faculty  who are already pushing the capabilities of available
              imaging  technology. This limitation in currently available imaging equipment 
              makes the Advanced Cellular Imaging Facility (ACIF) the next logical  step in
              the development of many novel research programs.    There are three classical
              imaging problems that limit each of our  biological research programs:
              sensitivity, resolution and speed. These  parameters are obviously linked, and
              increasing one often occurs at the  expense of decreasing anothep.
              Nevertheless, our goal is to develop a  facility that will dramatically improve
              all three capabilities over our  existing equipment. At the core of the ACIF
              will be the Integrated  Imaging Resource (IIR), a customized instrument
              designed to perform a  broad range of video microscopy experiments. The IIR
              will emphasize the  following features: optimized optical paths to reduce light
              loss;  several types of stage chambers for the maintenance of living specimens 
              during image acquisition; a high-sensitivity cryogenic CCD camera; a  high
              resolution/high readout rate CCD camera; a massively parallel  processing unit
              capable of high speed image deconvolution and 3D  reconstruction, which will
              also process confocal images; silicon  graphics workstations for rapid and
              convenient image acquisition and  processing. The IIR will be expected to
              perform bright field as well as  low-light fluorescence and luminescence
              imaging in living preparations  from both  plant and animal specimens. It will
              greatly augment the  fluorescence microscope facilities that currently exist in
              individual  laboratories, and will be of use to both confocal and wide-field 
              microscopists.    The ability to keep abreast of the latest technology and to
              acquire  hardware and software beyond the reach of individual investigators is
              a  main goal of establishing ACIF and acquiring the IIR. A consequence of  this
              goal is the generation and fostering of collaborative efforts  amongst
              investigators in both the Health Science Center and the College  of Arts and
              Sciences that will make the University of Virginia an  internationally
              recognized center of excellence for research in  cellular imaging. The ACIF
              participating faculty will be responsible  for training both undergraduate and
              graduate students in its use,  through direct hands-on training as well as the
              development of a  seminar course in the applications of video imaging to life
              science  research.
