Title       : Japan STA Program: The Behavioral Ecology of the Mid-water Community of the
               Kuroshio Current
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9512769

Award Number: 9512769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Hunt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0521700   Marine Resources                        
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9512769  Hunt    This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency 
              of Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. James C.  Hunt, Monterey Bay
              Aquarium Research Institute, at the Japan  Marine Science and Technology Center
              (JAMSTEC), Yokosuka,  Japan.  Dr. Hunt will work with Dr. Jun Hashimoto at
              JAMSTEC  in a project entitled, "The Behavioral Ecology of the Mid-  Water
              Community of the Kuroshio Current."    The proposed research will examine the
              role of squids within  the mid-water community through the use of deep-sea 
              submersibles.  These squids are important commercially and  biologically.  By
              combining in situ observations with  laboratory experiments, he will consider
              several specific  hypotheses relating distribution patterns and feeding 
              behaviors to information acquired from sonar equipment.  The  result will
              provide an understanding of the mid-water food  web, how this web might change
              as environmental conditions  change, and how to accurately assess and manage
              marine  resources.    The proposed research addresses topics that are both
              current  and important in the field of biological oceanography and  JAMSTEC
              will provide the applicant with some of the most  advanced crewed and robotic
              submersible systems available in  the world.  The applicant will pioneer
              significant  exploratory use of the diving equipment for midwater  biological
              research.   Both applicant and host scientist  have discussed the project in
              detail, they have provided  plausible and testable hypotheses, and it is likely
              the  research will yield positive and mutually beneficial results  for both the
              United States and Japan.  ***
