Title       : Character Based Methods for Reconstructing the Evolutionary History of Natural
               Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1997       
File        : a9512092

Award Number: 9512092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tandy J. Warnow   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald A. Ringe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We address the problem of inferring the evolutionary history of a  set of
              natural languages. The methodology we propose can be used  when languages are
              described by qualitative characters, where  qualitative characters are
              functions (based upon linguistic  properties, such as sounds and lexical items)
              which define  partitions of the set of natural languages into distinct 
              equivalence classes. Evolutionary trees are also inferred for  biological taxa
              described by qualitative characters, and perhaps  the most popular method for
              constructing evolutionary trees in  biology is based upon the parsimony
              criterion. We have developed  a methodology for encoding linguistic information
              as qualitative  characters and efficient algorithms for constructing the most 
              parsimonious trees for linguistic data which promise to provide  robust and
              significantly more informative trees than can be  obtained using any of the
              previous methods to date. A direct  consequence of the methodology we are
              developing is the ability  to test hypotheses;  in particular, this methodology
              enables the  linguist to determine whether the particular linguistic 
              information is evolutionarily relevant, and whether the  interpretation of the
              information is correct.         We will produce algorithms and software which
              will quickly  generate the most parsimonious trees for a given data set. These 
              methods have the promise of greatly improving the ability of  historical
              linguists to derive evolutionary trees because of the  following:        
              Character data has not been fully used by historical            linguists, who
              have instead had to rely upon distance data       or only those characters
              which are completely directed.         Character-based methods, since based
              upon primary data.       provide information about evolutionary history that
              cannot       reliably be obtained through the use of distance data      
              (distances are compressions of multi-dimensional information       into a
              single dimension).         The methods we will develo p will probably return
              optimal       trees in polynomial time, and will also determine those      
              aspects of phylogenetic trees which hold for all solutions       to the input.
