Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for a Mouse Genetic Manipulation Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1995      
File        : a9512392

Award Number: 9512392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Dickson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn T. Merlino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen P. Schiffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to acquire equipment to create a  Transgenic
              Mouse Facility at Georgetown University (GU). During the  past 10 years, GU has
              undergone dramatic expansion of its funded  research in the basic Life
              Sciences. This has allowed undertaking of a  large scale expansion of its
              rodent viral antigen-free Research  Resources Facility (RRF) animal facility
              under direction of Dr. Stephen  P. Schiffer, DVM. A strong need to provide a
              facility for production,  characterization, breeding, and transfer of
              transgenic mice has arisen  as the power of this type of experimental model has
              become evident.  Transgenic mouse technology allows the generation of mouse
              strains  expressing a gene(s) of interest in a specified range of cell types
              and  in a specified window in time or development, depending upon the  promoter
              of the gene. The technique can allow profound insights into  gene regulation
              and gene function in a normal physiological context. A  transgenic mouse
              facility does not currently exist at Georgetown  University. Our proposed
              facility will produce transgenic mouse strains  at competitive costs for
              University investigators in relevant basic  science departments and
              interdisciplinary programs (Neuroscience, Cell  Biology, Microbiology and
              Immunology, Physiology and Biophysics,  Pharmacology, Biochemistry and
              Molecular Biology, Pathology and  Biology). The facility will become a critical
              feature of graduate (and  undergraduate training) programs in each of the above
              mentioned fields  of study, and will train new faculty as well. The fundamental
              research  projects to be supported by the facility include studies on gene 
              function and regulation in the biological processes of cell division,  cell
              death, and cell differentiation. Specifically, transgenic mouse  research
              projects from four interdisciplinary focus groups of faculty  are identified in
              the areas of Immunology, Neurobiology, Developmental  Biology and Reproductive
              Biology. In addition, we have created a unique  Biotechno logy exchange
              agreement with the Jackson Laboratory (Bar  Harbor, ME) whereby the Jackson
              Laboratory will serve as a respository  and distribution for new strains of
              mice generated by our facility and  our facility will receive strains of
              interest and technical advice from  the Jackson Laboratory. Leadership of the
              facility include Robert B.  Dickson, PhD, Professor of Cell Biology and
              Pharmacology; Stephen P.  Schiffer, DVM, Director, RRF Animal Facility; and
              Glenn T. Merlino,  Adjunct Associate Professor of Pathology. The facility will
              be overseen  by a committee of basic scientists from Georgetown University with
              a  research interest in Transgenic Mouse Technology and its applications.
