Title       : A Confocal Microscope and Imaging System for Biological Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1996   
File        : a9512973

Award Number: 9512973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139241             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodolfo J. Rivas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur N. Popper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Payne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Mount  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    Ten biologists from the Departments of Zoology and Psychology of  the
              University of Maryland, College Park are requesting funds to  purchase a
              laser-scanning confocal microscope and image analysis  workstation to support
              and enhance their research. Drs. Mount, Payne,  Popper and Rivas will be the
              primary users of the instrument. Within  our multidisciplinary group, the uses
              of confocal microscopy include  investigations of neuronal polarity in
              cerebellar granule neurons (Dr.  Rivas, Co-PI on this grant), regeneration of
              sensory hair cells in the  ear (Drs. Dooling and Popper), the role of calcium
              ions in  phototransduction (Dr. Payne), the development of central auditory 
              projections in the CNS (Drs. Brauth, Carr, and Hall), how the correct 
              processing of RNA from protein-coding genes is specified in higher  organisms
              (Dr. Mount), homology of invertebrate auditory neurons  (Yager), and
              investigations of stream meiofauna (Dr. Palmer). These  laboratories have a
              large number of postdoctoral, graduate and advanced  undergraduate students who
              will use the confocal microscope during  their research training.        We are
              requesting a Bio-Rad MRC 1024 confocal imaging system  coupled to a Nikon 300
              inverted epi-fluorescence microscope, and a  Silicon Graphics "Indy." image
              analysis workstation for quantitative  image analysis and three-dimensional
              image reconstruction. The confocal  system will include a krypton-argon laser
              (with emission lines at 488,  568, and 647 nm), triple dichroic beamsplitter,
              four detection channels  (three PMT-based detector channels and one detector
              for transmitted  light), and high resolution 24-bit acquisition software. This
              system  will allow us to image up to three separate fluorescent channels for 
              multi-label applications. An inverted configuration with DIC optics is  needed
              so that the epi-fluorescence Nikon microscope can be used for  cell cultures,
              and to provide ample access for micromanipulation, as is  required by several
              of our users.        Confocal micr oscopy will significantly enhance the
              research  programs of each of the core investigators, and will allow them to 
              pursue areas of research that have heretofore been extremely difficult  or
              impossible to examine with conventional microscopy. In contrast to 
              conventional fluorescence microscopy, in confocal microscopy  out-of-focus
              structures do not contribute to background because they  receive little or no
              illumination, and any fluorescent signal produced  by them is rejected by the
              instrument. Unlike conventional microscopy,  where one must physically cut a
              thick tissue into extremely thin  sections for imaging, the extremely shallow
              depth-of-field of confocal  microscopy allows the optical sectioning of either
              intact cells or  thick specimens (such as embryos or brain slices). Optical
              sections  taken at successive focal planes can be re-combined using 
              computer-generated techniques to produce a highly informative 
              three-dimensional reconstruction of an entire tissue or cellular  structure.
              These characteristics make this technique essential for our  multi-disciplinary
              studies, all of which require optical sectioning  through thick biological
              specimens with elimination of out-of-focus  fluorescence.        Each of the
              investigators in this proposal will use the optical  sectioning and
              quantitative capabilities of the confocal imaging  system. For example, Dr.
              Rivas will use the confocal to study the  development of fluorescently-labeled
              neurons that were implanted into  the brain. Using conventional fluorescence
              microscopy, out-of-focus  fluorescence from thousands of implanted neurons
              masks the structure of  any particular cell. Indeed, individual neurons extend
              through many  focal planes, allowing sharp focusing only on particular portions
              of  the cell. Drs. Brauth, Carr, Dooling, Hall, Popper, and Yager face  similar
              methodological problems as they attempt to study the complex  structure of
              neurons in the auditory nervous system. Dr. Mount will use  the confocal to
              make optical sections th rough thick Drosophila embryos,  and Dr. Palmer will
              use the confocal to section through invertebrate  whole mounts.        Dr.
              Payne will extend our use of the confocal into the area of  neuronal cell
              physiology. Dr. Payne will investigate a localized  light-induced elevation of
              intracellular calcium that is co-incident  with the electrical response of
              photoreceptors to light. Drs. Rivas and  Yager will also use the confocal for
              live neuronal imaging, using the  optical sectioning capabilities of the
              confocal to image  fluorescently-labeled neurons in thick brain slices or
              embryos. Thus,  in each area of our research, the confocal will greatly improve
              our  ability to study correlated structure and function.
