Title       : A Confocal Microscope for the Basic Science Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1996  
File        : a9512935

Award Number: 9512935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157552             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas B. Murphy dbmurphy@jhmi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Jensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    This is an application for two items that will allow  state-of-the-art
              data analysis and image processing: a Leica/Leitz TCS  4D-UV scanning laser
              confocal microscope, and a Power Macintosh-based  workstation with image
              processing and image analysis software. The new  microscope will be housed in
              the Basic Science Microscope Facility. It  will serve investigators from more
              than five basic research departments  at the Johns Hopkins Medical School. Our
              six major users require  confocal microscopy for the following purposes: high
              resolution  colocalization of fluorescent labels in fixed cells and tissues;
              clear  differentiation of signals in cells stained with multiple labels, 
              simultaneous recording of multiple fluorochromes for accurate  registration and
              efficient processing; excitation at both UV and  visible wavelengths; and 3D
              views of complex structures in cells,  embryos and neural tissues. The
              Leica/Leitz TCS 4D-UV microscope best  fits these needs. The Leica has (i) an
              upright microscope body equipped  with the best optics for DIC and confocal
              fluorescence microscopy, (ii)  multiple wavelength excitation provided by an
              Ar/Kr laser, and UV  excitation provided by an argon ion laser, (iii)
              simultaneous  collection and display of DIC and 3 fluorescence images, (iv) the
              most  accurate collection of either XZ or XY images with resolution in the 
              Z-axis documented at 360 nm, and (v) a convenient and efficient  multi-user
              environment. Images will be stored on hard drives or  magneto-optical drives
              accessible to all laboratories in the medical  school via our EtherNet network.
              Volume rendering, 3D reconstruction,  and other image analyses will be
              performed on a separate Power  Macintosh-based workstation located in the same
              Microscope Facility,  using software such as VoxelView and Adobe Photoshop. The
              Johns Hopkins  Medical School currently has one old confocal microscope, which
              does  not have these features. The Leica confocal microscope described in  this
              proposal will give all of our use rs access to modern image and  data analysis,
              and will be time-efficient, dependable, and easy to use.
