Title       : Kin Recognition in Polyphenic Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1995     
File        : a9512110

Award Number: 9512110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Vleck                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Pfennig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Pfennig, David  9512110                              Abstract                   
                            This research will use amphibians as a model system to 
              understand how and why certain animals identify their  relatives.  Larval
              Arizona tiger salamanders are unusual in  that they occur in nature as two
              distinct types: a 'typical'  morph and a 'cannibal' morph.  The cannibal morph
              is  produced only when larvae are crowded at high densities, and  this morph
              feeds primarily on other tiger salamanders.  When  housed with smaller larvae
              that differ in relatedness,  cannibals preferentially consume less related
              individuals,  both in the laboratory and in the field.  This  discrimination is
              most pronounced among larvae from families  that are especially likely to
              produce cannibal morphs.  This  research will test two non-exclusive
              evolutionary hypotheses  on why cannibals recognize their relatives.  First, by
              not  eating a relative, with whom the cannibal shares some genes  due to common
              descent, cannibals can indirectly increase  their own genetic representation or
              "inclusive" fitness in  the population.  Alternatively, cannibals may avoid
              eating  kin to lessen their chances of dying from disease.  In  nature, a
              deadly bacterium can infect these animals, and  cannibalism is an especially
              efficient way of acquiring the  disease. Moreover, this infectious agent may be
              highly  transmissible among close relatives, perhaps because kin  have similar
              immune systems.  This research will use field  observations and field and
              laboratory experiments to test  specific predictions made by each hypothesis.
              Tiger  salamanders are an ideal model system for separating the  direct and
              indirect inclusive fitness consequences of kin  discrimination.  This study
              thus promises to help resolve  why certain animals recognize kin, which is
              important to  current theories concerning the evolution of altruism.  The 
              research will also increase understanding of the role of  kinship in disease
              transmission.
