Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Crystallographic Studies of Physiologically Important
               Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1995  
File        : a9512766

Award Number: 9512766
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane H. Peapus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
              Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Diane Peapus, Department of Biochemistry, Case
              Western Reserve University, at the Department of Chemistry, Kyoto University,
              Kyoto, Japan. Dr. Peapus will work with Professor Kunio Miki on a research
              project entitled, `Crystallographic Studies of Physiologically Important
              Enzymes.`  The project aims to identify the structural basis for the biological
              function of key enzymes in important metabolic pathways using protein
              structures determined by X-ray crystallography.  Two enzymes, metapyrocatechase
              and famesyl pyrophosphate (FPP) synthase, will be examined.  The structure of
              the native enzyme along with the structures of bound forms will give
              information on 1) protein/substrate and protein/inhibitor binding interactions,
              2) the geometry of the active site iron atom in bound and unbound states, 3) a
              molecular rationale for substrate specificity, and 4) mutations and/or
              conditions which would possibly relax substrate specificity or enhance
              detoxification.  These studies will broaden our general understanding of the
              relationshop between the structure and function in biological mechanisms and
              open the way for possible intervention in regulating these pathways by either
              genetic, pharmaceutical, or chemical methods.  The proposed research addresses
              a fundamental concern in the field of chemistry and the participants are
              well-matched for a cooperative effort.  As Professor Miki is a recognized
              expert in the research area and Dr. Peapus has had considerable experience in
              the research techniques to be used, it is expected that both participants will
              benefit from the exchange.  As such, the research satisfies the objectives of
              the program in its emphasis on the exchange and transfer of scientific
              knowledge through international collaboration.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
