Title       : Japan STA Program: The Theoretical Study of Metal/Ceramic Interfaces using Ab
               Initio Calculation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1995  
File        : a9512726

Award Number: 9512726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: John Hoekstra   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9512726  Hoekstra    This award supports a 15 month Science and Technology
              Agency  of Japan Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. John Hoekstra,  Department of
              Materials Science, University of Washington,  at the Osaka National Research
              Institute (ONRI), Osaka,  Japan.  Dr. Hoekstra will work with Dr. Masanori
              Koyama, at  the Osaka National Research Institute on a research project 
              entitled, "The Theoretical Study of Metal/Ceramic Interfaces  Using Ab Initio
              Calculation."    The purpose of the research is to study the properties 
              associated with the bonding of metal and ceramic interfaces.  Knowing the exact
              nature of the chemical bonds at the  metal/ceramic interface is extremely
              important in many of  today's highly technical industries, such as the 
              semiconductor and aerospace industries.  In this study, they  will use computer
              simulation to examine the chemical bonds  at the atomistic level to fully
              describe both the electronic  and ionic contributuions to the bonding.  With
              this  knowledge, current use of metal/ceramic materials can be  optimized, and
              possible new uses may be discovered.    The proposed research is of
              considerable theoretical and  practical interest to the materials science
              community and  the benefits to be obtained from collaborative research 
              valuable.  The Osaka National Research Institute is an  excellent research
              facility, and the research plan between  the host scientist and Dr. Hoekstra is
              well-conceived.  The  research will likely yield positive results for the
              United  States and Japan as well as the international scientific  community as
              a whole.  As such, the research satisfies the  objectives of the program in its
              emphasis on the exchange  and transfer of scientific knowledge through
              international  collaboration.  ***
