Title       : Chemosensory Ion Channels in Amphibian Skins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9512053

Award Number: 9512053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Avijit Chaudhuri                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272492             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley D. Hillyard hillyard@ccmail.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karin V. Hoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   Amphibians are unique among the vertebrates in obtaining salt and water by
              absorption across the skin rather than by mouth.  To do this, toads adopt a
              characteristic behavior, called the water-absorption response, pressing the
              belly to a moist surface.  The ability of some toads to survive in desert
              environments requires them to correctly identify surfaces where water is
              available, and not filled inappropriately with salts.  The toad skin appears to
              serve an analogous function to the way the tongue tastes solutions before
              swallowing.  This project tests the novel hypothesis that the cellular process
              of tasting sodium salts by the toad skin is similar to that for taste bud cells
              in the tongue.  This project uses desert toads to evaluate the process of salt
              taste transduction at the behavioral, cellular, and neurophysiological levels
              in this unique model system.  Results will clarify how cells at the surface of
              an animal can communicate the salt content of water in the environment to the
              nervous system, to allow a decision of how to utilize that water.  This work
              will have an impact beyond neuroscience on general physiology, in clarifying
              perception is coupled to behavior to maintain water and salt balance.  Results
              will also be important for environmental biology, in clarifying how amphibians
              tolerate extremes in water availability and water quality, and how
              environmental degradation may affect survival of amphibian populations.
