Title       : An Automated Nutrient Analyzer System for Biological Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1996   
File        : a9512945

Award Number: 9512945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50398              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Petty petty@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alice L. Alldredge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                     This  is  a  request for funds for the purchase  of  an  automated 
              nutrient  analysis system. This would be a multi-user  instrument,  and  would
              be housed in a shared-use analytical and instrumentation facility  at  UCSB's 
              Marine  Science Institute (MSI).  The  new  analyzer  would  replace  a 
              ten-year-old  system that no longer  has  the  capabilities  required to
              support current and proposed research projects.              Knowledge  of the
              concentrations of dissolved inorganic  nutrients  in  aquatic  systems is of
              fundamental importance to a  wide  range  of  biological  studies. Areas of
              interest to researchers at MSI  encompass  both fresh and salt water systems,
              and have included such diverse areas  as  hydrological  and ecological studies
              of Amazonian  lake  and  river  systems, nutrient dynamics in areas of merging
              water masses and coastal  upwelling,  biogeochemical  processes  in 
              California's  Sierra  Nevada  watershed,  water  quality  and nutrient  cycling
               studies  in  coastal  estuaries,  and ecological studies in both northern and
              southern  polar  regions.  A11  of  these studies have required the  analysis 
              of  large  numbers  of  water  samples for up to five nutrient  species. 
              Nutrient  analyses  have been done using an analyzer system that is now  over 
              10  years  old, and which suffers from various problems, including unstable 
              detectors, relatively poor detection limits, and general obsolescence.         
                  Some  of  the  aforementioned  projects  are  ongoing,  while  new 
              projects  requiring  nutrient analyses are  starting  up  and/or  being 
              proposed almost continuously. A feature they all have in common is  the  need 
              for better and faster nutrient analysis. In the nutrient  cycling  studies  of 
              coastal marshes and estuaries, for example,  a  system  is  required that can
              automaticallv handle the wide range of concentrations  (1  to  1000  uM)  and 
              salinities (O to 34  ppt)  that  are  routinely  encountered  (error-prone 
              manual dilutions  and  salini ty  adjustments  having been necessary in the
              past). In the programs dealing with  polar  systems,  sample  size  (for 
              logistical  reasons)  and  analysis  time  (because of sample stability) are
              critical. And in a recently initiated  long-term  program  to monitor the
              chemical, physical,  and  biological  parameters  influencing  sedimentation in
              a coastal  area  featuring  a  high-resolution sedimentary record, the rapidly
              changing  oceanographic  conditions require timely nutrient analyses (to
              provide quick  feedback  to  the  project),  with  both  high sensitivity  (to 
              detect  depleted  waters),  and high precision (to follow subtle long-term
              changes).  The  requested analyzer system would fill all of these requirements.
                           The system we are requesting is the Perstorp Flow Solution III,  a
               continuous-flow analyzer with capabilities for both flow injection  and 
              segmented   flow   technologies.  It  would  be  configured   for   the 
              simultaneous  analysis  of  up  to five  nutrient  species  (phosphate, 
              nitrate,   nitrite,  silica,  and  ammonia),  and   would   include   a 
              random-access   autosarnpler,  peristaltic  pump,   injection   valves, 
              analysis  cartridges for the , five nutrients, double-beam  photometric 
              detectors,   and  a  PC-type  computer/controller  with   Windows-based 
              software.
