Title       : Quantum State Resolved Studies of Gas-Surface Interaction Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1997   
File        : a9512232

Award Number: 9512232
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg Sitz gositz@physics.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the PhysicalChemistry program of the Chemistry   Division,
              Professor Greg O. Sitz of the Chemistry Department of the   University of Texas
              at Austin will perform a series of gas-surface   scattering experiments.  A
              combination of molecular beam and laser based   state preparation and detection
              techniques will be used to performm fully   quantum state resolved studies of
              gas-surface interaction dynamics.  The   scattering and dissociation of
              molecular hydrogen and deuterium from   single crystal copper surfaces  will be
              studied to determine the relative   importance of translational, rotational,
              vibrational and molecular   alignment in dermining the outcome of the
              scattering event.  Stimulated   Raman scattering will be used to prepare
              hydrogen molecules incident on   the copper surface in a selected rotational
              state of the first excited   vibrational state.  Scattered molecules will be
              detected in a quantum   state specific manner by multiphoton ionization.  The
              initial encounter of a molecule with a solid surface can lead to   several
              possible results depending on the molecule , the surface, and the   energy
              partitioning amongst the many available degrees of freedom.  These  
              possibilities include inelastic scattering, trapping, sticking and bond  
              breaking.  In the last case, a bond in the molecule can be broken, paying   the
              energy price by forming one or more chemical bonds to the surface.    This is
              the essence of the ability of many surfaces to promote or   participate in
              chemical reactions. In many cases of interest, however,   even though the
              reaction is energetically favorable, the reaction   probability is low because
              of the presence of a barrier: the reaction is   said to be activated.  Of
              central concern is the nature of this   activation barrier and the dynamical
              mechanism for crossing it.  This   research focuses on gas-surface interactions
              in systems where   dissociative adsorption is an activated process.  By
              performing this   research with fully state resolved measurements new insight
              into surface   dynamics will be gained and existing theories will be
              stringently tested.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
