Title       : Normative Foundations in Risk Judgments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1997   
File        : a9512060

Award Number: 9512060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl F. Cranor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Concern about exposures to toxic substances is part of our lives.  This project,
              informed by appropriate scientific information, addresses this concern by
              developing a philosophic analysis of normative assumptions in risk judgments. 
              The research focuses on the comparison between risks from toxic substances and
              those from other human activities and exposures.  The discussion of risk
              comparisons has been dominated by the scientific and technical risk assessment
              community, with little input from philosophers.  This discussion has been
              insensitive to some of the problems posed by special properties of toxic
              substances and some of the differences between them and ordinary risks in life.
               It has tended to overlook many features of the acceptability of risk exposures
              and to appeal to a particular paradigm, utilitarianism and cost-benefit
              analysis, in assessing the acceptability of risks.  The goal of this research
              is to identify a much broader and richer matrix of features of risk-taking and
              risk-exposure, that can be taken into consideration when assessing the
              acceptability of risk .   The first research task is to articulate further some
              of the normative distinctions underlying the different risk judgments we make
              as individuals.  These distinctions, which have begun to be developed in the
              risk perception and risk communication literature, include such factors as
              magnitude and probability of harm and benefit, numbers and distributions of
              people affected and voluntary or involuntary occurrence, whether the risks are
              appreciated or avoidable, and so on.  The second task involves the
              systematization and assessment of these factors in light of
              non-consequentialist as well as utilitarian features in moral theories.  The
              goal here is to broaden the understanding of relevant moral paradigms in
              understanding and evaluating risk judgments.  The project will result in
              articles and presentations, and a book length monograph.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
