Title       : Mechanism of Chaperonin Specificity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9512711

Award Number: 9512711
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel J. Landry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             ~  SI      @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    ~  SI   ~
               SI        4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       C   D   E   F   G   H   I   J   K   L 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          /  @    *  Index 1             ` ,      $                       `  
                                                                                  9512711
              Landry  Chaperonins are a class of molecular chaperones characterized by a ring
              shaped oligomeric structure and the distinctive ability to use ATP to promote
              protein folding. Prokaryotic chaperonins usually are composed of two types of
              polypeptide, cpn60 and cpnl0, which in Escherichia coli are GroEL and GroES.
              GroEL has a weak ATPase activity, binds and stabilizes unfolded proteins, and
              releases them in the presence of ATP. GroES, also known as the co chaperonin,
              binds to GroEL in the presence of ATP, increases the cooperativity of the GroEL
              ATPase, and promotes ATP dependent discharge and folding of GroEL bound
              proteins. Since GroEL/GroES is necessary for folding in vivo of a large
              fraction of E. coli proteins, the mechanism of chaperonin action must not
              depend on specific features of substrate proteins. However, the bacteriophage
              T4 encoded co chaperonin, Gp31, is specifically required for GroEL dependent
              bacteriophage capsid assembly. The mechanism of chaperonin function is poorly
              understood, and how co chaperonins promote folding and whether they confer
              substrate specificity is presen tly unknown. This research addresses co
              chaperonin structure/function relationships and investigates how Gp31
              specifically supports chaperonin function in bacteriophage T4 growth.
              Chaperonin assisted citrate synthase refolding will be evaluated for GroES in
              which the mobile loop has been specifically mutated  to reduce or enhance GroEL
              binding. GroEL binding affinities will be measured by fluorescence techniques
              with GroES variants containing tryptophan. The effect on mobile loop dynamics
              and peptide conformation will be analyzed by nuclear magnetic resonance
              experiments. The affinity of GroES for GroEL will be compared to that of Gp31
              for wild type and mutant GroEL. A genetic screen will be carried out to
              identify novel GroES mutants that have acquired the ability to replace Gp31 in
              T4 growth. These studies will illuminate mechanistic features of chaperonin
              function and identify determinants of chaperonin specificity for substrates and
              co chaperonins. This information will be useful for heterologous gene
              expression in biotechnological applications. %%% The folding of proteins into
              their active three dimensional structures is facilitated by a group of proteins
              called molecular chaperones. Several types of molecular chaperones are found in
              all organisms. One type of chaperone is composed of two ring shaped structures;
              and in the bacterium E. coli, they are called GroEL and GroES. GroEL and GroES
              bind to each other when they are assisting the folding of other proteins. GroEL
              alone can bind and release unfolded proteins, but GroES is essential for
              certain proteins to fold correctly. The importance and specificity of the
              GroES/GroEL interaction is shown by the chaperone requirements of the bacterial
              virus T4. This virus encodes its own version of GroES which is necessary for
              viral infection. This research will investigate how GroES directs the function
              of GroEL and why the viral version of GroES is necessary for viral infection.
              ***                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                           ....()()))()()                                    
                                                             Oh     +'  0                    
                                $       H       l                                            
                D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       marcia
              steinberg                    marcia steinberg            @    m 2QI            
                           @         S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                     
                   (                                                   B                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   RI                        
               @      oSI                                                                    
                                           @    `4<                                   
              Microsoft Word 6.0                                                      4      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            e =       e                                                      
                                                                                          D  
                  D       D       D       D       \       f       D           C   p       t  
                  t       t       t       t       t       t                                  
              #
