Title       : Acquisition of a Computer Facility for Hydrologic and Environmental Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1996        
File        : a9512398

Award Number: 9512398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Cabaniss scabanis@kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert T. Heath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1038,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  The Water Resources Research Institute (WRRI) of Kent State University 
              (KSU) seeks to establish a computer facility for the analysis and  distribution
              of graphical data for research in water resources. The  facility will consist
              of a central file and compute server, a network  of graphical workstations for
              processing and displaying  three-dimensional data and PowerPC workstations for
              processing and  displaying two-dimensional data, and the necessary input-output
              support  for high quality image acquisition (scanners, digital cameras, video 
              cameras) and output (color and black-andwhite printers, slide maker).   
              Environmental research requires a collaborative, interdisciplinary  approach
              because of the complexity of natural systems. Field  observations must be
              integrated with laboratory experiments. Knowledge  from one discipline must be
              applied to interpret data in another. The  sheer size of some systems (spatial
              and temporal) requires data sets  too large for a single group of investigators
              to acquire or to  evaluate. The proposed facility is specifically intended to
              enhance  collaborative research related to water in the environment, including 
              on-campus, in-state and out-of-state collaborations. The network will  simplify
              transfer of graphical data among WRRI members and between KSU  and off-campus
              workers. The file/compute server will provide on-campus  access to large
              environmental and climate-modeling databases and will  facilitate the
              numerically intensive calculations required for modeling  complex systems.
              Graphical workstations will enable 3D visualization of  climatological,
              hydrological and chemical structures in real time. The  facility will be
              administered by WRRI, an interdisciplinary  organization created to foster
              interdepartmental, collaborative  research on water resource problems.   
              Current research in WRRI which would be supported by this facility  includes
              projects on water quality, climate and global change,  ecosystem health, and
              the application of molecular level  tools to  macroscopic environmental
              problems. All the PI's are engaged in water  quality research, with specific
              interests in developing biological and  chemical methodologies (Leff,
              Cabaniss), system level studies of  chemical and biological perturbations of
              ecosystems (Heath, Leff,  Smith), modeling of catchment-basin flow and
              pollutant transport  (Carlson, Maurice), and mapping of water quality on a
              regional or  national scale (Carlson, Lee). Drs. Maurice and Smith (Geology)
              are  also examining the role of water in climate and global change. Drs. 
              Carlson, Heath, Leff (Biological Sciences) and Lee (Geography) are  examining
              ecosystem health on microscopic and macroscopic levels. Drs.  Cabaniss
              (Chemistry), Heath (Biological Sciences) and Maurice are  exploring the
              application of molecular-level tools- molecular  spectroscopy, biochemical
              assays, atomic force microscopy- to  environmental problems.
