Title       : Acquisition of a 128 Channel EEG Recording System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1995    
File        : a9512170

Award Number: 9512170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100692             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Srebro dick@striate.swmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas SW Medical Ctr
	      5323 Harry Hines Blvd
	      Dallas, TX  753909105    214/648-5100

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    Bioelectric fields can be measured on the human scalp in response  to
              sensory stimuli and in association with cognitive tasks. Evoked  potential (EP)
              and event related potential (ERP) scalp fields, the  terms used for these
              bioelectric fields, are important objects in  research on fundamental issues
              concerning sensory processing in humans.  Scalp potential fields offer good
              temporal resolution (less than 1 ms);  brain activity can be "tracked" during
              processing, a feature  unavailable to other modalities of functional brain
              imaging. Magnetic  field recording also supports tracking but at a cost more
              than 10 times  that of bioelectric field recording.                In most
              contemporary applications, bioelectric field recording  has suffered from
              inadequate spatial sampling. Both theoretical and  empirical studies suggest
              that the Nyquist sampling interval on the  scalp is about 2.5 cm. More than 100
              electrodes must be placed on the  scalp to capture potential fields without
              risking distortion, a  recording density that until recently has been out of
              practical reach.                This proposal is made to acquire equipment for
              high density  spatial sampling which will be used by several researchers, their
               graduate students and post-doctoral fellows. The research projects  supported
              by this facility will span a wide range from engineering  through sensory
              psychology. It will bring together a group of  researchers with complimentary
              backgrounds and act as a catalyst for a  sophisticated research program aimed
              at understanding how the human  brain processes sensory information. These
              researchers are from three  institutions, Southwestern Medical School (SWMS),
              University of Texas  at Dallas (UTD) and Southern Methodist University (SMU),
              all located  close to the proposed facility.                        No
              comparable facility exists within or near the Dallas metro  area. UTD has a
              32-channel "BEAM" system. SWMS has a 32-channel  "homemade" recording system in
              operation. Neither school or the ir  combination can provide the required
              recording equipment.                It is proposed to purchase a 128-channel
              recording system from  Electrical Geodesics Inc. (EGI), an S.B.I.R.
              grant-supported company  under a "Beta" site agreement to reduce costs. The
              system, "Net  Station", will include EGI's Geodesic sensor nets that allow 128 
              electrodes to be placed on the scalp in about 20 minutes, state of the  art
              amplifiers, a flexible data acquisition system, and software for  signal
              processing, convenient display of results, as well as  statistical testing.
              These functions are vital to making the facility  useful to the researchers. It
              is also proposed to acquire an optical  disk to support the large data storage
              requirements of the project. A  three-dimensional digitizer completes the
              equipment requirements  allowing experimenters to record all electrode
              locations for adequate  display and processing.                Important as the
              equipment and software are to the success of  this project, it is also
              recognized that the facility must provide  apppopriate support staff for the
              researchers at least for the first  few years of its operation. Thus it is
              proposed to hire an electrical  engineer who will serve as the chief technical
              person. In addition,  SWMS is prepared to support the salaries of the P.I., who
              will act as  the administrative head of the facility and of a well-trained 
              technician who will be responsible for subject scheduling, equipment 
              maintenance and who will assist in the actual data acquisition process.  During
              the three years of this project, the goal is to develop the  facility so that
              it becomes a "stand alone" research resource supported  by its users.
