Title       : A Cryostat for Biobehavioral Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9512833

Award Number: 9512833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21689              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michela Gallagher   (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda A. Dykstra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louis Gariepy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald T. Lysle Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This multi-user biology equipment proposal requests funds to  purchase a
              cryostat that will be used in a variety of research projects  in the Psychology
              Department at University of North Carolina - Chapel  Hill. The user group
              consists of four faculty with active research  programs who are members of the
              Experimental and Biological Psychology  Program (Gallagher, Lysle, Dykstra) and
              the Developmental Psychology  Program (Gariepy). In addition, three of the
              users are members of the  Neurobiology Curriculum faculty (Gallagher, Lysle,
              and Dykstra). The  proposed cryostat will replace an American Optical cryostat
              purchased  in 1984 at a cost of $5,016, which can no longer be 
              serviced/maintained. The refrigeration unit of the existing cryostat  contains
              CFCs that do not meet current standards. Parts for this  machine also can no
              longer be replaced.       The new equipment will provide facilities for the
              continued  conduct of research projects for which the existing cryostat has
              been  used. In addition, the new cryostat will have the precision needed for  a
              number of projects for which the existing cryostat has been  inadequate. For
              example, when uniform section thickness is crucial for  quantitative work (e.g.
              using iodinated ligands) the investigators have  had to arrange for time on a
              cryostat in the medical school. The  purchase of a new cryostat with high
              precision for tissue sectioning  will allow all research to be conducted within
              our multi-user facility.  The proposed purchase is for a Leica 3000 cryostat
              with dual compressor  and motorized handwheel ($28,625) and height adjustment
              module  (additional $2,360). Thirty percent of the total cost will be provided 
              from equipment funds in the Psychology Department (see attached letter  in
              appendix from the Psychology Department Chair).       As described in the
              detailed Description of Research, the  applications for which a cryostat is
              needed range from standard  histological methods to molecular neurobiological
              research. These  latter inclu de studies using quantitative methods for in
              vitro  autoradiography, mapping of labelled oligonucleotides administered in 
              vivo and in situ hybridization histochemisty. In addition to serving  the needs
              of the faculty within the user group, the equipment will also  be extensively
              used in research training at undergraduate, graduate and  postdoctoral levels.
