Title       : Processing Visual Information from Unattended Locations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9512089

Award Number: 9512089
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139448             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Shiffrin shiffrin@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Asher Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9512089  SHIFFRIN    Attention refers to the means we use to allocate scarce
              mental  resources to deal with the many demands upon our cognitive  systems. 
              It is now well established that attention applied to  incoming stimuli improves
              perception and memory for that  material.  This research will explore the
              converse:  When as much  attention as possible is allocated to one source of
              incoming  information, does other arriving information receive any  processing
              whatever?  The answer is not presently known, but has  critical import for
              theories of cognition.  The answer also will  provide crucial information
              needed to design training programs  for tasks with cognitive and motor
              components.    The research will explore this issue within the visual system. 
              A  number of letters will be presented briefly and simultaneously in  a
              circular array.  Prior to presentation, attention will be  directed to one
              position in the array.  Since timing will be such  that eyemovements cannot be
              made, movement of attention will be  internal.  Control conditions will be used
              to verify that as much  attention as possible is directed to the cued position.
               Most  decisions will be made about the letter presented at the cued  location,
              but occasionally the subject will be asked to make some  simple decision about
              the letter presented at a distant location.   The research will ask whether the
              accuracy of such decisions is  greater than what would be predicted from pure
              guessing.   Theories of automatic processing mandate that unattended 
              information receives processing, but research to date, because of  some
              critical flaws, does not provide the needed evidence.   This  series of studies
              is designed to provide definitive answers.  It  will also ask what types of
              information get processed in such  unattended conditions.    An important
              feature of the research project will be the  development of a
              mathematical/simulation model of attention,  automatic processing, and their
              relationship, extending research  that has already b egun in the investigators'
              laboratories.    ***
