Title       : The Long-Term Effects of Early Education Intervention
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a9512670

Award Number: 9512670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382778             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Currie currie@simba.sscnet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Duncan Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,DHCI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9512670  Currie    Head Start is one of the most popular and widely-known early 
              intervention programs in the country.  Policy makers and the  general public
              appear to believe that the benefits of Head Start   and well-known and
              well-documented.  However, a careful reading  of the literature shows that the
              evidence in support of lasting  effects of Head Start is limited.  Previous
              research by the  investigators indicates that Head Start has significant
              effects  on the test scores and schooling attainment of young white  children
              and these effects persist into adolescence.  But among  black children, there
              is no evidence that the immediate gains  associated with any lasting effect on
              human capital outcomes.   However, their research is based on a very small
              sample and few  of the differences are statistically significant.  This project
               will provide further evidence about who gains from Head Start by   examining
              the form of the benefits and the persistence of the  benefits using data from
              the National Longitudinal Survey of  Young (NLSY) in combination with the
              National Longitudinal  Survey s Child-Mother files (NLSCM) and the Panel Study
              of  Dynamics (PSID).  The NLSY and NLSCM provide an extensive set of  
              information on an array of child human capital outcomes including  cognitive
              test scores and educational attainment.  Children in  those data are relatively
              young and so it is not possible to  fully examine the longer run effects of
              Head Start.  This gap  will be filled by exploiting a special module of the
              PSID that  was designed, in part, by the Principal Investigators of this 
              project.  The module contains a rich education history which will  be combined
              with over twenty five years of longitudinal data on  labor market outcomes of
              respondents and their parents.      More specifically, this project seeks to
              answer three questions  raised by previous research about Head Start.  First,
              can a case   be made for early intervention programs or are child outcomes 
              really largely predetermined by  maternal endowments as some have  claimed. 
              Second, are cognitive test scores a meaningful  yardstick for measuring the
              effects of early intervention  programs, and are racial and ethnic differences
              in average scores  meaningful when judged in terms of more concrete outcomes?  
              Answers to these questions will set the stage for the analysis of  the
              fundamental question: does Head Start participation affect  long-term outcomes
              such as high school completion, teenage  pregnancy, criminal activity, and the
              schooling attainment of the  former participants' own children?
