Title       : U.S.-Indo Workshop on New Directions in the Interaction of Energetic Protons
               with Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1995    
File        : a9512799

Award Number: 9512799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Pratt rpratt@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9512799  Pratt  Description:  This proposal requests support for the US-Indo 
              Workshop entitled "New Directions in the Study of the Interaction  of Energetic
              Photons with Matter".  The workshop will convene in  Darjeeling, India,
              November 1995 and will be hosted for its one  week duration by the North Bengal
              University and its affiliate,  St. Joseph's College.  The coordinators are
              Richard Pratt,  University of Pittsburgh and Swapan Sen Gupta, North Bengal 
              University.  Its subject is the interaction of energetic photons  with matter,
              as in such processes as photoabsorption, photon atom  scattering,
              bremsstrahlung and pair production.  Leaders from  Indian and US research
              communities will together examine the  opportunities provided by emerging
              technologies and identify new  directions for the research.      Scope:  The
              workshop is important considering the interest in  this subject that has been
              generated by the advent of a new  generation of synchrotrons.  The interaction
              of energetic photons  with matter is a modern field in which there is a long
              tradition  of research in both countries.  There is substantial experimental 
              work going on in India in this field and the basis for developing  cooperative
              research activities very strong.  Proceedings of the  workshop will be
              published.         ***                                                         
                             Pakistan and is the next step in developing a relationship 
              between scientists who are doing research in this field.  s area  of research. 
              ngoing relationship in the exchange of information  foin developing .  The
              International Conference on Non-  Accelerator Particle Physics will convene in
              Bangalore, India  from January 2-9, 1994.  Gaurang B. Yodh, University of 
              California, Irvine and R. Cowsik, Tata Institute of Fundamental  Research and
              Director, Indian Institute of Astrophysics,  Bangalore are the organizers. 
              This conference is dedicated to  the discussion of the fundamental physics that
              emerges from  diverse areas of non-acc elerator particle physics such as: Solar
               Neutrino Astronomy, Cosmic Rays, Particle Physics, Neutrino  Physics and the
              Detection of Dark Matter.  Substantial progress  has been made in these fields
              during the past five years and it  is widely thought that definitive answers to
              several questions of  Physics beyond the Standard Model can now come from Non- 
              Accelerator methods of inquiry.  The conferees will review recent  developments
              in the various aspects of Particle Physics, their  implications in
              astrophysical situations, experimental detection  of dark matter, theoretical
              interpretation and empirical and  physical models of the large scale structure
              of the Universe.     Scope:  This conference will precede a major
              interdisciplinary  research program between the Indian Institute of
              Astrophysics and  the University of California, Irvine.  As considerable
              research  is going on in the US in all fields to be discussed at this 
              conference, it will be important for the US researchers to  present their work
              to an international body of some of the most   respected scientists from all
              over the world.    ***
