Title       : NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program: Sensor-Based Planning Control of Cooperating
               Mobile Robots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9512743

Award Number: 9512743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81184              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur C. Sanderson acs@cat.rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This award supports the collaboration of  Professor Arthur C. Sanderson of the
              Center for Advanced Technology in Automation, Robotics, and Manufacturing and
              the Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering at Rensselaer
              Polytechnic  Institute and Professor Shin'ichi Yuta, Director of the
              Intelligent Robot Laboratory, Institute of Information Sciences and
              Electronics, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.  Project funding will
              enable Dr. Sanderson to spend six months in Japan, resident at the University
              of Tsukuba, in order to study topics in experimental robotics including
              multisensor fusion, sensor-based planning, and distributed architectures. 
              Professor Sanderson has previously developed important analytical results and
              algorithms which enable the design of sensor-based robots and describe their
              performance in complex environments. Professor Yuta has developed an
              outstanding laboratory for experimental studies of mobile robots. In this
              project, Professor Sanderson will combine his expertise with that of Professor
              Yuta to carry out experiments which demonstrate new capabilities for multirobot
               cooperation and evaluate these capabilities for new applications.  This
              proposal brings together research scientists from two countries working in the
              area of robotics research.  The U. S. scientist will have the opportunity to
              become familiar with the extensive experimental facilities and research methods
              provided by the University of Tsukuba while contributing to the overall
              research effort. Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of the
              Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge through an
              international collaboration.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
