Title       : Acquisition of an Advanced Surface Microscopy Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1995     
File        : a9512231

Award Number: 9512231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $665000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley Chiang chiang@physics.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan L. Balch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce C. Gates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald P. Land  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zuhair A. Munir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiangdong Zhu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles S. Fadley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Subhash H. Risbud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. Daniel Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas L. Abbott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan M. Kauzlarich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9157,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9512231  Chiang      An advanced surface microscopy facility, consisting of an
               ultrahigh vacuum low energy electron microscope (LEEM) and a  ultrahigh vacuum
              scanning tunneling microscope  (STM)  installed within the same vacuum system
              with sample transfer  between the two instruments, will be established. The 
              combination  of the two instruments, LEEM and STM, within  the same ultrahigh
              vacuum environment  will enable the  structural study of the surfaces of
              materials with both  atomic resolution (STM) and in real time (LEEM). Both 
              microscopes will permit control of the sample temperature  during imaging and
              deposition of metals and adsorbates. The  facility will be used by eleven
              investigators and their  research groups to study surface properties in several
              key  areas. These include: (1) dynamics of surface structural  changes, such as
              nucleation and growth of metal,  semiconductor, and oxide overlayers; (2)
              structural effects  on adsorbates, such as segregation, diffusion, and 
              reactivity; (3) synthesis and characterization of nanoscale  materials, such as
              quantum dots, thin-film fullerene  polymers, and nanoclusters.  %%%  Two
              complementary types of surface microscopes, a low energy  electron microscope
              and a scanning tunneling microscope,  will be utilized to probe surface systems
              with varying  spatial and time resolution as a function of important 
              parameters such as temperature and coverage of adsorbates.  The possibility
              exists to image an important class of  catalysts and simultaneously investigate
              their reactivities  and catalytic properties.  ***
