Title       : A Web-Based Interactive Teaching Database Advanced Hydrology: The Mirror Lake
               Watershed
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a9978335

Award Number: 9978335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79520              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew W. Becker mwbecker@geology.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marcus I. Bursik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9978335
Becker

Every geoscience instructor recognizes the value of
              learning-by-doing, and the motivational advantage of real-world data.  Real
              hydrologic data is available on the Internet and other sources, but rarely are
              the data sets comprehensive or placed in the context of a larger Earth system. 
              This Interactive Teaching Database (ITD) will offer over 40 years hydrologic
              information collected at the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest, in a form that
              will allow for effective implementation in the classroom.  Detailed hydrologic
              data concerning the atmospheric, surface, and ground water fluxes to Mirror
              Lake will be provided, along with more general information about the hydrology,
              geology, and ecology of the Hubbard Brook Valley.  Thus, the instructor of
              hydrology will be able to create instructional exercises involving these data
              in the context of a larger environmental system.  In addition, the hydrologic
              ITD will include an interactive companion study guide that provides students
              the opportunity to practice advanced hydrologic quantitative methods.  This
              guide will take advantage of the latest in internet-based scientific
              visualization technology, including Java applets and VRML based
              three-dimensional interactive objects.  The skills to be practiced include
              estimating baseflow and ground-water recharge using streamflow recession,
              estimating evapotranspiration using an energy balance, calculating the
              hydrologic budget of a watershed, and developing a numerical model of
              ground-water flow.  Calculations will be carried-out using spreadsheets, simple
              Java-based algorithms, and the ground-water model MODFLOW.  Educational
              problems and the underlying data will be based on published studies by the U.S.
              Geological Survey to ensure data quality and to provide a resource for
              upper-level undergraduate and entry-level graduate instruction, the ITD will
              also be the first comprehensive digital compilation of data resulting from the
              intensive hydrologic study of the Mirror Lake surface and ground water basin. 
              The ITD will be designed with an open architecture, so that in the future it
              may be expanded to include more of the tremendous amount of ecologic,
              hydrologic, and geologic data that have been collected at Hubbard Brook
              Experimental Forest.

