Title       : PRoPs and Gesturing Avatars: Embodied Robotic Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a9978138

Award Number: 9978138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360593             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Canny jfc@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              G. A. Mendelsohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
 
IIS-9978138
Canny, John
University of California - Berkeley
              
$116,863 - 12 mos.

PRoPs and Gesturing Avatars: Embodied Robotic
              Interfaces

This is the first year funding of a three year continuing award.
              With the spread of personal computers and ubiquitous networking, computing has
              become a consumer technology. This growth was fed by demand for a new kind of
              computing: computers as *communication and information management tools*.  But
              for a variety of reasons, no
current technology is a reasonable substitute for
              face-to-face communication.  The ultimate computer-mediated communication form
              is telepresence via a robotic proxy. Many aspects of communication are possible
              only with this medium, and a precise characterization of those capabilities is
              the subject of this project. The project relies
heavily on concepts from the
              disciplines of inter-personal psychology and non-verbal communication. The
              former discipline deals with people's perception of a communication experience,
              how accurately they perceived the other person's intention, disposition,
              and
emotions. Non-verbal communication studies the role of particular cues,
              like gaze, gesture and posture, in contributing to a communication experience.
              In this research, telerobots are called "PRoPs'' for Personal Roving Presence.
              The name emphasizes the
personal connection between the pilot and the robot,
              and that the robot is not an autonomous agent, but a manifestation (a presence)
              of its pilot. The project focuses on telepresence in the workplace, and within
              that category, on informational (office) workplaces and laboratories (which
              involve more interaction with objects). The main
research issues to be
              explored are: (i) generating and controlling non-verbal communication cues,
              especially spatialized ones such as gaze and gesturing (ii) easy and intuitive
              navigation and (iii) affective haptics. The social contexts to be explored are
              (i)
communication (ii) persuasion and (iii) trust-building.


