Title       : Development of Semi-Classical Methods for Treating Quantum Dynamics in Condensed
               Phase Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2001    
File        : a9978320

Award Number: 9978320
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Coker coker@chem.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9216,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              David Coker is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his research on the development of semiclassical
              methods for treating quantum dynamics in condensed phase systems.  New methods
              for computing real time correlation functions in condensed phase quantum
              systems based on semiclassical expressions for the propagator will be developed
              and applied to model solution phase systems where nuclear interference and
              tunneling effects play a crucial role in determining spectroscopy, transport
              and other dynamical solute properties in solution.  The semiclassical approach
              employs a propagator method using a swarm of weighted classical trajectories,
              each multiplied by a phase factor. The time correlation function contains two
              of these propagators and thus includes interference effects between pairs of
              phase weighted classical trajectories.  Combined nonadiabatic MD and
              semiempirical electronic structure methods will be extended to study
              photodissociation and geminate recombination dynamics of triiodide anion  in
              solution. Quantal interference effects in the intramolecular vibrations of this
              molecule in solution will be explored with this new semiclassical
              approach.

Since most industrial synthetic processes occur in solution, it is
              important to gain an increased understanding of the influence that solvent has
              on fundamental chemical processes in solvated systems including molecular
              transport, proton transfer, and electronic excitation.  This theoretical
              research will lead to an improved understanding of the factors which influence
              chemical reactions in solution. 
