Title       : Geoscience Interactive Simulations for Teaching - GIST
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1999      
File        : a9978326

Award Number: 9978326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Berchem jberchem@igpp.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Schriver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9978326
Berchem

This is a one-year project to create World Wide Web and
              CD-ROM based educational software that uses an interactive approach to teach
              geoscience phenomena related to Sun-Earth interactions and Space Weather at the
              high school level.  During the development of GIST, the PIs, who are members of
              the Space Plasma Simulation Group at the UCLA Institute of Geophysics and
              Planetary Physics (IGPP), will leverage their involvement with NSF Space
              Weather and NASA Sun-Earth Connection research Projects.  The novel aspects of
              the proposed project are to deliver the content as multimedia activities
              centered around interactive simulations controlled by student research
              projects.  The highly interactive nature of numerical simulations makes this
              approach to learning a more active experience, rather than a passive one, and
              promotes and maintains interest in science.  In addition the use of research
              tools and data will provide challenging hands-on activities for students that
              will allow close contact with the traditionally inaccessible world of
              scientific research.  Although the Geoscience content will be created primarily
              to supplement science curriculum for grades 9-12, the activities will include
              advanced topics of interest to college undergraduates.  The software will be
              distributed as Java applications over standard Internet web browsers to achieve
              platform neutrality.  For those without an Internet connection, all of the
              content and necessary software will be placed on CD-ROM for distribution.
              Content creation will be carried out with the involvement of high school
              science teachers from the Los Angeles area.  The software will first be tested
              in a pilot program at Van Nuys and Venice High Schools and other schools of the
              Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD) before being released nationwide. 
              Teacher training workshops conducted by the project researchers will be held at
              UCLA.  On-site visits will be made to LAUSD high schools by UCLA students
              involved with the project to work directly with high school students.  These
              on-site visits will be made not only to help high school students use the
              software applications, but also to receive feedback on their experience with
              the program for use in further refinement of the software. 

