Title       : Statistical Methods for Environmental Social Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9978238

Award Number: 9978238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley P. Carlin brad@biostat.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan E. Gelfand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Louis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1333,1386,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Recently, there has been an explosion of both public and research interest in
              the cause-and-effect relationships between humans and their environment.  Much
              of this interest has been directed at answering questions of environmental
              justice, i.e., determining whether certain sociodemographic subgroups bear an
              undue share of certain environmental hazards.  Helping facilitate this interest
              has been the concurrent emergence of geographic information systems (GISs),
              sophisticated computer programs for "layering" multiple data sources over a
              common study area.  However, such programs at present have no facility for
              statistical inference, which is necessary for determining whether the data
              offer "significant" evidence of injustice, or whether the findings could just
              as well have arisen completely by chance.

This project focuses on developing
              necessary statistical hierarchical modeling methods for the improved analysis
              of such data sets, as well as corresponding user-friendly computing tools to
              enable use of the methods by non-expert statistical support staff.  The project
              will focus on at least three environmental social science application areas. 
              First, statistical methods for handling misaligned areal data (of the sort so
              easily mapped by GISs) will be considered.  Here the methods must accommodate
              data aggregated over misaligned regional boundaries (say, zip codes and census
              tracts), as well as boundaries which evolve over time.  Second, the methods
              will be extended to the case where data are not only misaligned, but of
              different types.  For example, one variable might be available only as a
              regional aggregate (say, percent foreign-born by zip code), while another is
              available only at certain points in space (say, daily particulate matter levels
              at a collection of fixed monitoring stations).  Finally, the methods will be
              further extended to incorporate formal tools for resolving multiple and
              conflicting priorities and goals.  Achieving environmental equity often
              involves making tradeoffs between efficiency (i.e., maximizing the overall
              difference between costs and benefits) and equity (i.e., an evenhanded
              distribution of these costs and benefits).  Benefits accruing to society will
              include improved environmental justice assessments, a systematic approach for
              handling data at different scales, and practical strategies for resolving
              conflicting analytic priorities and goals.  These should be of interest and use
              to public policymakers as they grapple with the problems of cleaning up
              existing environmental hazards, as well as equitably siting future potentially
              hazardous facilities.

