Title       : PEET: Sea Anemone Systematics: Consolidation and Synthesis of Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a9978106

Award Number: 9978106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $743635             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daphne G. Fautin fautin@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9978106
Daphne Fautin
	Taxonomic and phylogenetic knowledge of marine
              organisms, with the exception of few groups, is in poor condition, and
              specialists on the various phyla are often few in number and widely scattered
              in the world. Dr. Daphne Fautin at the University of Kansas continues her
              productive program of research and training on sea anemones, under the
              Partnerships for Enhancing Expertise in Taxonomy (PEET) program, with attention
              to the three activities embodied in PEET: training of minimally two new
              taxonomic experts in cnidarian systematics; production of monographic or
              revisionary research on various groups such as the genus Anthopleura and the
              order Corallimorpharia; and databasing of information on museum specimens,
              images and illustrations, geographic distributions, identification keys, and
              major literature in the field. Students from the undergraduate to postdoctoral
              level are involved in the renewal program, as was evident in the prior program;
              the databasing activity additionally drew in students from the computer
              sciences, to help in developing GIS resources for these benthic organisms. Dr.
              Fautin in addition is leading the organization of a major workshop on cnidarian
              research for the international congress on coelenterate biology, scheduled for
              2001.
Recent molecular findings from comparative DNA sequencing indicate, as
              indeed was suspected from prior morphological studies, that the sea anemones
              are not a single lineage or monophyletic group of organisms, but more likely
              are an assemblage of similar organisms (ca. 1400 described species) derived
              multiple times from scleractinian corals with the loss of the coral skeleton.
              Some but not all sea anemones also harbor symbiotic algae, either xanthophyte
              or chlorophyte types, but it is not known whether the symbioses mark distinct
              lineages or are ecologically variable in different parts of the world.
              Attention to these issues, with efforts to incorporate modern molecular
              phylogenetic technologies in the student training programs, distinguishes this
              latest renewal program on sea anemones.


