Title       : Genetic Regulation of Developmental Fate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a9978587

Award Number: 9978587
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin E. Denell rdenell@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan J. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Beeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This ongoing study is focused on the Antennapedia complex (ANTC)-like portion of
              the Tribolium homeotic complex, which is involved in regulating developmental
              commitments in the head and thorax. The highly specialized nature of the
              Drosophila larval head and the phenotypes of mutations in genes regulating
              commitments in this part of the embryo suggest that the roles of these genes
              have been altered considerably with respect to ancestral insects. This
              conclusion is supported by the observation that all homeotic null phenotypes
              yet described in beetles differ from those of fly orthologs.  Two questions
              drive these studies: 1) What is the physical and functional organization of the
              Tribolium homeobox cluster? 2) What are the developmental roles of the homeobox
              cluster genes and other genes important to the regulation of anterior
              developmental fate and what can they tell us about the basis of morphological
              evolution. Proposed experiments represent an extension of on-going work. A
              physical map of the ANTC-like portion of the homeobox complex will be
              completed, a genetic screen using homeobox complex deficiencies will be
              completed with the goal of identifying all genes in the complex required
              zygotically for normal development and the regulation of the homeotic gene
              expression will be examined.

Studies of Drosophila melanogaster have shown
              that embryonic developmental commitments along the anterior-posterior axis are
              controlled by homeotic selector genes in two clusters: the Antennapedia complex
              and the bithorax complex. The homeotic selector genes of the red flour beetle,
              Tribolium castaneum are organized into a single complex representing the fly
              clusters in juxtaposition. Comparative molecular studies suggest that a single,
              albeit smaller complex arose very early in animal evolution, and that the genes
              in such complexes play important roles in regulating developmental commitments
              throughout the kingdom. Tribolium offers many advantages for comparative
              studies from which evolutionary inferences can be drawn. Beetles and flies show
              many morphological specialization's but these represent variations of a common
              body plan thus providing a context for understanding the relationship between
              genetic and morphological change.

