Title       : Universal Access for the Partially Sighted Using Scanned Retinal Displays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2001      
File        : a9978566

Award Number: 9978566
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439341             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Furness tfurness@hitl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erik Viirre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne J. Weghorst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 6846      UNIVERSAL ACCESS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Virtual Retinal Display (VRD) developed by the PIs and their colleagues
              creates an image by scanning non-coherent or coherent light across the retina
              in a raster pattern, rather than using a conventional image plane screen.  The
              VRD has full color and a broad luminance range for high contrast, even in
              bright ambient daylight;  the mechanism will eventually be miniaturized to fit
              on a spectacle frame, making wearable displays feasible.   Because of these
              attributes, and the fact that VRD parameters can be configured in various
              combinations to alter characteristics of the perceived image such as field of
              view, resolution and the size of the scanning aperture, the VRD holds great
              promise for enhancing vision in the partially sighted.  The goal of this
              research is to investigate how best to realize this promise.   The small exit
              pupil of the VRD allows clear images to be seen by users with corneal
              distortions and/or partial opacities of the lens such as cataracts.  For
              central retinal diseases such as macular degeneration, the VRD can be
              configured to direct high contrast, large feature images to the peripheral
              retina.   For peripheral disorders, where only a small central area may remain
              functional, the display can be configured with a high-resolution narrow field
              of view.  Pilot tests of subjects with partial loss of vision indicate that
              even non-optimized images from the VRD can usually be seen better than CRT
              images.   The PIs will conduct psychophysical visual testing with partially
              sighted users, and systematic comparison with standard computer displays (CRTs
              and LCDs), to determine for a variety of visual disorders the appropriate VRD
              scanning and modulation characteristics for optimal image resolution, contrast
              sensitivity, color perception and absence of flicker.  The ability of users to
              view text, see video images and use common computer applications such as word
              processors, spreadsheets, and web browsers will also be assessed.   The
              expectation is that this research will ultimately lead to new visual display
              products and techniques to enhance computer access for people with low vision,
              including the growing elderly population
