Title       : Connectivity Between the Center for Advanced Engineering Fibers and Films and
               the Interdisciplinary Research Centre in Polymer Science and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9978166

Award Number: 9978166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tapan Mukherjee                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Danny D. Edie dan.edie@ces.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amod A. Ogale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Bruce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this award is to broaden the scope and enhance the quality of the
              research and educational programs of the ERC for Advanced Engineering Fibers
              and Films at Clemson University and Massachusetts Institute of Technology by
              implementing a collaborative research program with the Interdisciplinary
              Research Center (IRC) in Polymer Science and Technology which represents a
              consortium of groups of polymer researchers at Universities of Leeds, Bradford,
              and Durham in UK.  The long-range goal of the ERC is to produce software
              packages for new fiber and film formulation and processing design.  The ERC's
              research is organized in three thrusts:  Thrust 1, Computer-based product and
              process Development; Thrust 2, new Fiber and Film precursors; and Thrust 3,
              Advanced Fiber and Film Processes.  The purpose of the proposed joint research
              is to facilitate the exchange of ideas and expertise between the Clemson/MIT
              REC and Bradford/Durham/Leeds IRC, and to accelerate through collaboration both
              the computational and experimental programs currently underway at each
              location.  The primary mechanism for collaboration and technology transfer will
              be a series of extended visits by the ERC researchers to the Universities of
              Leeds, Bradford, and Durham.  Each visit will be of three-month duration and
              will include travel by a faculty member and one graduate student or a
              post-doctoral researcher.  Six such visits are planned over the course of the
              three-year duration of the grant Reciprocal visits by researchers at the
              University of Leeds are envisioned as part of the collaboration.  Funding for
              reciprocal visits will be obtained from funding sources in UK.
