Title       : GOALI: Nonlinear Control of Advanced Hard Disk Drives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a9978748

Award Number: 9978748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249974             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eduardo A. Misawa misawa@ceat.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Otis L. Funches  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              PIs: Eduardo A. Misawa, Oklahoma State University, School of Mechanical and
              Aerospace Engineering
Otis Funches, Seagate Technology

Proposal Number:
              9978748

GOALI:  Nonlinear Control of Advanced Hard Disk Drives

Project
              Abstract

This GOALIE research project explores and develops nonlinear
              control system design strategies that will allow the development of cost
              effective advanced hard disk drives with densities exceeding 100,000 tracks per
              inch.  The objective is to achieve positioning accuracy within 5% of track
              width and fast average seek times, less than 3 ms, in the presence of thermal
              effects, shock and vibration.  The ability to achieve these goals will be
              important to the disk drive industry to meet the demands expected during the
              next decade.

This challenge requires a combination of hardware developments
              and innovative servo-control strategies.  Novel control design techniques will
              be based on digital variable structure control combined with ellipsoid-based
              saturation control algorithms and implementation using embedded control.  The
              design techniques, supported by sound mathematical control theory, will be
              evaluated by designing control algorithms and tested using prototypes of
              advanced disk drives provided by Seagate.  The experiments will be conducted in
              two phases, both using DSP-based embedded control: 1) using a laser
              interferometer to measure the actual position of the read/write head by point
              measurement; 2) using the position information written on the disk itself.  In
              both cases, shock, vibration and thermal effects will be applied as
              disturbances.  The results will be evaluated against the design specifications
              projected for future products.  This research will also have strong impact on
              the development of new knowledge in the field of servo-control design
              techniques for high-precision motion control.  Proposed activities will also
              have direct impact in the undergraduate and graduate education, through the
              involvement of graduate students in the research and by bringing the results of
              advanced research into the classroom.


