Title       : PEET: Monographic Research on the Zoosporic Fungi, Chytridiomycetes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9978094

Award Number: 9978094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $748040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha J. Powell mpowell@biology.as.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joyce E. Longcore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9978094
Powell, Porter and Longcore
	The microscopic aquatic fungi known as
              chytrids have recently received notoriety because a new parasitic species
              (described by co-PI Dr. Joyce Longcore) is implicated in the population decline
              of amphibians in various parts of the world. Confusion over the status and role
              of this organism has highlighted the poor state of taxonomic knowledge of these
              fungi, which are now the focus of this major research and training project. A
              "chytrid consortium" combines the talents of the leading researchers in the
              U.S. to apply morphological, culturing, ultrastructural (electron microscopy),
              and molecular DNA sequencing technologies to problems of classification,
              identification, and phylogeny of these ecologically interesting microbes.
              Recent molecular phylogenetic analyses of 18S ribosomal DNA sequences from
              various members of the traditionally recognized "phycomycetes" have
              demonstrated the polyphyletic nature of this group, and have helped delimit a
              more natural assemblage of chytrid fungi, possibly encompassing 1500 or so
              described species in the world. Studies of laboratory-cultured strains and new
              field collections are planned, to investigate morphological, ultrastructural,
              and molecular features that yield reliable diagnostic characters for species-
              and genus-level discrimination. Outcomes of the project include comprehensive
              taxonomic monographs of natural groups within the order Chytridiales, an
              interactive and image-based identification key available on the Web, and the
              development of new cryopreservation methods for long-term storage and culturing
              of these organisms, for future molecular and biotechnological studies.
	The
              chytrid consortium includes specialists at the universities of Alabama,
              Georgia, and Maine, along with colleagues with additional expertise in modern
              systematics practice and theory, all of whom will participate in mycological
              training at graduate and undergraduate levels. A series of yearly workshops
              will highlight recent scientific and technological developments, and will
              incorporate work done by Dr. Daniel Wubah at Towson State University, who
              specializes on fungi adapted as parasites and commensals in the intestines of
              animals. Dissemination of results and products will build upon a website
              currently maintained at the University of Maine for the zoosporic fungi of the
              world.

