Title       : Nineteenth Southeastern-Atlantic Regional Conference on Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1999    
File        : a9978164

Award Number: 9978164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6450               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lester F. Caudill, Jr. lcaudill@richmond.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Richmond
	      
	      Richmond, VA  23173    804/289-8100

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9978164
ABSTRACT

The Southeastern-Atlantic Regional Conference on
              Differential Equations (SEARCDE) has met annually since 1981, and rotates among
              the research institutions in the southeast.  SEARCDE's primary objective is to
              promote research and education in the field of differential equations by
              bringing together established and new researchers, including advanced graduate
              students, for the exchange of ideas and the discussion of recent developments
              in the field.  By covering a wide range of topics, including ordinary and
              partial differential equations, integral and functional equations, numerical
              methods, inverse problems, and applications to the sciences and engineering,
              these conferences expose participants to current research outside of their
              immediate area of concentration.  They provide opportunities for all
              participants to present their own work in contributed talks, to interact with
              other researchers from the region and beyond, and to broaden their knowledge of
              the field by hearing the invited lectures of eminent mathematicians.

The
              field of differential equations continues to be one of the driving forces of
              mathematical research and its applications.  With its special format, chosen to
              minimize the cost and inconvenience of participation, and its traditional
              emphasis on the support of young mathematicians, SEARCDE brings together
              established and new researchers in this field from a vast region of the country
              on a regular basis.  The conference thereby provides unique opportunities for
              the advancement of research and education in the broad field of differential
              equations, as well as its myriad applications in the sciences and engineering. 
              In addition, this conference provides opportunities for young researchers to
              present their work to an expert audience and to further their knowledge of the
              field by interacting with more experienced mathematicians.  Such interaction is
              crucial to a young mathematician's professional development as a researcher and
              educator.

 

