Title       : Web-Based Learning and Research Tools for Earth System Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9978245

Award Number: 9978245
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74184              (Estimated)
Investigator: Muawia Barazangi barazangi@geology.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexandra F. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9978245	
Barazangi	


While major research efforts are currently underway to
              develop digital information systems in geosciences or improve existing systems,
              educators are looking for new and more effective ways to exploit these systems
              for use in Earth system science education.  This project will take advantage of
              one such research information system, and build an educational module to make
              it a valuable resource for undergraduate teaching.  The core geoscience
              information system is currently being developed for research purposes at
              Cornell University.  An add-on educational module will provide the education
              communities access to large volumes of digital data sets, analysis tools, and
              programs via WWW browsers.  The core information system to be used includes
              large volumes of digital geoscience data, such as topography, bathymetry,
              earthquake locations, faults, volcanoes, satellite imagery, etc., and data
              analysis tools.  It is Geographic Information Systems (GIS) based and Internet
              accessible.  It is unique in its design, because it provides not only digital
              data sets, but also tools to analyze the data, manipulate them and plot them
              using user provided parameters.  Up until now, educational usage of this system
              has not been exploited.  The potential value of using such a research
              environment in education is great.  This system will provide undergraduate
              students the same data sets and tools that are used y research scientists. 
              Educational training modules will tap the same data sets and methods to provide
              entry into the knowledge system.  These modules will be tested and evaluated
              both at Cornell University and Hartwick College before releasing them on the
              web.  Educators and students will be able to study any region on earth by imply
              starting a web browser in their classrooms and schools and access all data sets
              available for that region instantly.  This will allow a fair and uniform access
              to state-of -the-art information, data, and tools by all colleges-schools
              regardless of their infrastructure and geographic location.

