Title       : Lining fluid flow and surfactant transport during the unsteady opening of
               pulmonary airways and alveoli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a9978605

Award Number: 9978605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286920             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald P. Gaver donald.gaver@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9978605
Gaver
At birth, a newborn infant's lungs are liquid-filled and must be
              inflated from a collapsed state to initiate breathing.  For healthy infants, a
              modest inspiratory effort introduces air into the lung so that the atmosphere
              can directly communicate with alveoli, the primary site of gas-exchange with
              blood.  Gestationally mature lungs release surfactant that decreases the effort
              necessary to inflate the lung.  However, premature infants may lack adequate
              surfactant, increasing the surface tension.  Surfactant insufficiency coupled
              with the extremely small size of the lung results in a large inspiratory effort
              necessary to inflate the premature lung, leading to airway atelectasis
              (extensive collapse of portions of the lung), deranged pulmonary mechanical
              responses, poor ventilation/perfusion relationships and insufficient alveolar
              ventilation.  These premature airways could be opened by high pressure from a
              mechanical ventilator, however this damages the sensitive epithelial cells that
              line the airway walls, resulting in respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). 
              Surfactant replacement therapy (SRT), initiated in the late 1980's, has
              dramatically reduced the number of fatalities associated with this disease. 
              Refinements in exogenous surfactant composition continue to improve the outcome
              of RDS infants.  Nevertheless, RDS remains the fourth leading cause of death of
              premature infants in the United States.

The goal of the proposed research is
              to develop integrated models of pulmonary mechanical behavior coupled to
              surfactant physicochemical interactions.  We intend to take advantage of our
              understanding of surfactant physicochemical properties and fluid-structure
              interactions to identify surfactant properties that may protect the lung from
              RDS.  Additionally, we will attempt to use the large disparity between
              surfactant adsorption and desorption rates and the creation of surfactant
              multi-layers to specify ventilation parameters that will actively enhance
              surfactant concentration and thus optimize the opening of pulmonary airways. 
              We anticipate that these models will allow us to predict surfactant properties
              and ventilation scenarios that will be useful in improving the outcome of
              infants afflicted with RDS.


