Title       : Performance Models with Data Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a9978780

Award Number: 9978780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $416251             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suvrajeet Sen sen@sie.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia L. Higle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   Integer and combinatorial optimization models have many applications in
              engineering design as well as operations of manufacturing and distribution
              systems.  For example, issues dealing with setup time
reduction, batch size
              determination, scheduling, routing, etc. often call for integer and
              combinatorial optimization models.  Traditional approaches to these problems
              assume that data are known with certainty.  In many practical problems, data
              are not only uncertain, but also evolve over time.  This research is
              devoted
to models and algorithms that allow data evolution within integer
              programming models.
    This project's approach to data evolution draws upon
              the theory of stochastic programming, which has mainly focused on linear and
              convex optimization models.  Because there are effective algorithms for
              stochastic linear and convex optimization problems, this research is dedicated
              to developing convex approximations for stochastic integer programs.  The
              decision making problems to be  considered  involve a decision process and a
              data evolution process that are interwoven over time. In these models, resource
              commitments and operations are modeled using a mixed integer program, while
              data evolution is captured via a scenario tree.  By combining mixed integer
              programming with stochastic optimization, this project will provide the next
              generation of Operations Research models for decision making under
              uncertainty.

