Title       : CRUI: Biogeochemical and Ecological Processes Within a Reservoir Littoral Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a9978797

Award Number: 9978797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $789764             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard H. Whiteman howard.whiteman@murraystate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Kipphut  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Spencer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bommanna Loganathan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Murray State University
	      328 Wells Hall
	      Murray, KY  42071    270/762-3537

NSF Program : 1091      COLLAB RSCH AT UNDERGRAD INSTI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1091,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal presents a plan for enhancing the undergraduate research
              experience at Murray State University.  The research focus of the proposal is
              interdisciplinary studies of reservoir ecosystems and is a collaborative effort
              between junior and senior faculty from the departments of Biological Sciences,
              Chemistry, and Geosciences.  Specifically, faculty mentors and undergraduate
              participants will conduct research on the effects of human-induced water
              fluctuations on the littoral zone ecosystem of Kentucky Lake, a large
              southeastern reservoir.  Using integrated, collaborative observations and
              mesocosm experiments, we will determine how such fluctuation influences
              ecosystem function across three levels of biological organization.  Because
              only sparse ecosystem research has been conducted on reservoirs, this study
              will provide important new data on an aquatic system that is ubiquitous
              worldwide.  Furthermore, this study will lead to the training of ten
              outstanding undergraduates per year, preparing them for graduate school and
              scientific careers.  It will also lead to improved curricular development at
              Murray State through the introduction of a new interdisciplinary course and
              workshop series.  This proposal builds upon previous efforts in undergraduate
              research and education through Murray State's Center for Reservoir Research,
              and utilizes a new Glasshouse/Mesocosm facility, which was recently awarded to
              Murray State by the NSF.
