Title       : Post-natal Development of the Coronary Arterial Tree
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a9978199

Award Number: 9978199
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212783             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ghassan S. Kassab   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9978199
Kassab
There is no doubt that knowledge of the adaptation mechanisms
              in structure and function during normal growth is important in human health. 
              The objective of this proposal is to gain a better understanding of the
              adaptation mechanisms in the structure, zero-stress state and function of the
              coronary arteries during normal cardiac growth.  The specific aims are: 1) To
              obtain a complete set of morphometric data on the branching pattern and
              vascular geometry of the coronary arterial tree during cardiac growth and to
              demonstrate some of the hemodynamic applications of the morphometric data; 2)
              To determine the changes in the stress-strain relationship of the epicardial
              coronary arteries during cardiac growth and development, with reference to the
              zero-stress state; and 3) To obtain a complete set of morphometric data of the
              micro-structural components of the epicardial coronary arteries during cardiac
              growth and to correlate the structural components to the hemodynamic and
              mechanical data of Specific Aims 1 and 2.  The branching pattern and vascular
              geometry of the coronary arterial trees will be measured with the
              elastomer-casting method.  The order number, diameter, length, and connectivity
              matrix will be measured for all orders of vessels of the right coronary artery,
              left anterior descending and left circumflex arteries.  The vessel wall
              structural remodeling will be studied with light and electron microscopes.  The
              changes in the volume density of arterial components, including intima, smooth
              muscle cells, fibroblasts, collagenous bundles, and elastic laminae will be
              determined.  The remodeling of the zero-stress state (the state of the organ
              when the external loads are removed) of the epicardial coronary arteries will
              be determined by first cutting the arteries into short ring-shaped segments
              perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the blood vessel, and then making a
              radial cut.  This procedure causes the ring to open into a sector whose
              internal and external circumferential lengths will be measured and used as
              reference parameters at the zero-stress for the analysis of arterial mechanics.
               This research will lay a structural and mechanical foundations for the study
              of tissue engineering of the blood vessels during growth and development. 

