Title       : Active Declarative Integration Rules for Developing Distributed Multi-Tiered
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a9978217

Award Number: 9978217
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan D. Urban s.urban@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne W. Dietrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Although there are tools that allow access to information and data from
              distributed sources, there is a strong need to develop a semantic layer on top
              of such tools to deal with the challenging requirements of applications built
              from distributed software components. This research is investigating the design
              of an integration rule language and the development of a middle-tier,
              rule-processing framework for the integration of distributed, black-box
              components. Integration rules are active, specifying how objects react to
              events, and declarative, specifying the conditions under which the defined
              action should be executed. The rules are used within an integration framework
              that encapsulates the processing logic associated with the interconnection of
              distributed components. A user interface allows the user to graphically specify
              the processing logic, which is automatically translated into the appropriate
              integration rules. Integration rules are executed within a rule engine, which
              is designed to build on the recognized strengths of distributed object
              computing with CORBA (Common Object Request Broker Architecture) and the Java
              programming language. The expressiveness and use of integration rules are
              evaluated by case study comparisons of integrating components using imperative
              code versus the use of integration rules. The development of such a
              rule-processing environment has an immediate relevance to the integration of
              distributed applications, such as electronic commerce, engineering design and
              manufacturing, and Web-based applications, in general. This integration
              framework provides a rapid approach to the construction of multi-tiered
              applications that separate processing logic from client and data sources.  
