Title       : X-Ray Studies of Liquids Near Interfaces and in Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9978597

Award Number: 9978597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282309             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pulak Dutta pdutta@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9978597
Dutta	

This is a synchrotron x-ray renewal project to investigate
              the molecular structure of liquids near interfaces. The objective is to study
              how and under what conditions the structures of various simple molecular
              liquids deviate near interfaces and in thin films from the structures of these
              liquids in bulk. While much evidence, generally indirect, suggests that
              molecules layer near interfaces, it is only recently, during previous work on
              this project, that this molecular layering has been directly observed with
              x-ray methods. Thin films of simple organic liquids and water will be studied.
              both on one solid surface and sandwiched between two solid surfaces. Order
              normal to film plane and within the film plane will be probed using synchrotron
              x-rays. The dependence of the observed ordering on the film thickness, the
              nature of the supporting solid surface, and temperature will be investigate in
              detail. The research will provide excellent training for graduate students in
              modern diffraction methods and in an area with both fundamental and applied
              interest.
%%%
The structure of liquids near surfaces is expected to be
              different near air/liquid interfaces or at other liquid interfaces. However,
              direct x-ray structure determination of this interface structure has only
              recently been achieved by this project. This award will allow the project to
              continue. The knowledge gained from this project will help determine why
              liquids behave differently (from the bulk phase) when confined between plates
              or constrained by an interface. This could lead to methods to design specific
              interfacial liquid properties. Such an understanding is important for
              lubrication, filtration, tertiary oil recovery, wetting and spreading processes
              in industry, and many other technologically relevant applications. The research
              will provide excellent training for graduate students in modern diffraction
              methods and in an area with both fundamental and applied interest.

