Title       : CDMS II: A Search for Cold Dark Matter with Cryogenic Detectors at the Soudan
               Mine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a9978911

Award Number: 9978911
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8802704            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Sadoulet sadoulet@cfpa.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1295      PARTICLE ASTROPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
AST 9978911


In the last decade considerable additional evidence
              has been gathered supporting the hypothesis that at least 90% of the mass in
              the universe is dark: it does not emit or absorb any form of electromagnetic
              radiation.  Understanding this dark matter has become one of the more central
              problems in astronomy and cosmology.  A number of observations indicate that
              the predominant form of the dark matter is nonbaryonic, presumably in the form
              of elementary particles produced in the early universe.  Weakly Interactive
              Massive Particles form a particularly interesting generic class of candidates
              as there appears to be a convergence between cosmology and particle physics. 
              The direct observation of the interaction of WIMPs in a terrestrial detector
              would be of tremendous importance to particle physics and cosmology.  The
              observed WIMPs would be particles that reflect physics beyond the Standard
              Model of strong and electroweak interactions, and the identification of these
              WIMPs would solve the central problem of dark matter and help us understand the
              evolution of the early universe and the formation of structure.

Because of a
              long development effort funded both by the National Science Foundation (through
              the Center for Particle Astrophysics) and the Department Of Energy, the sensor
              technology exists to provide a great step forward in this type of search,
              giving the best change for a positive result.  The simultaneous measurement of
              the phonons and the ionization produced by the WIMP interactions provides a
              powerful discrimination against radioactive background, and this technique is
              now being utilized at Stanford, in the Cryogenic Dark Matter Search Experiment
              (CDMS I).

This award, which is being supportred jointly by the Division of
              Astronomical Sciences, the Division of Physics, and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities,  will support construction and operation of a
              second generation experiment (CDMS II) at a deep site in the Soudan mine in
              northern Minnesota.

