Title       : Understanding the Boundary Conditions of the Lake Vostok Environment: A Site
               Survey for Future Work
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a9978236

Award Number: 9978236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin E. Bell robinb@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Studinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9978236
Bell
Abstract

This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs
              under the Life in Extreme Environments (LExEn) Program, supports a geophysical
              study of Lake Vostok, a large lake beneath the East Antarctic Ice Sheet.
              

Subglacial ecosystems, in particular subglacial lake ecosystems are extreme
              oligotrophic environments. These environments, and the ecosystems which may
              exist within them, should provide key insights into a range of fundamental
              questions about the development of Earth and other bodies in the Solar System
              including: 1) the processes associated with rapid evolutionary radiation after
              the extensive Neoproterozoic glaciations; 2) the overall carbon cycle through
              glacial and interglacial periods; and 3) the possible adaptations organisms may
              require to thrive in environments such as on Europa, the ice covered moon of
              Jupiter. Over 70 subglacial lakes have been identified beneath the 3-4
              kilometer thick ice of Antarctica. One lake, Lake Vostok, is sufficiently large
              to be clearly identified from space with satellite altimetry. Lake Vostok is
              similar to Lake Ontario in area but with a much larger volume including
              measured water depths of 600 meters. The overlying ice sheet is acting as a
              conveyer belt continually delivering new water, nutrients, gas hydrates,
              sediments and microbes as the ice sheet flows across the lake. 

The goal of
              this program is to determine the fundamental boundary conditions for this
              subglacial lake as an essential first step toward understanding the physical
              processes within the lake. An aerogeophysical survey over the lake and into the
              surrounding regions will be acquired to meet this goal. This data set includes
              gravity, magnetic, laser altimetry and ice penetrating radar data and will be
              used to compile a basic set of ice surface elevation, subglacial topography,
              gravity and magnetic anomaly maps. 

Potential field methods widely used in
              the oil industry will be modified to estimate the subglacial topography from
              gravity data where the ice penetrating radar will be unable to recover the
              depth of the lake. A similar method can be modified to estimate the thickness
              of the sediments beneath the lake from magnetic data. These methods will be
              tested and applied to subglacial lakes near South Pole prior to the Lake Vostok
              field campaign and will provide valuable comparisons to the planned survey.
              Once the methods have been adjusted for the Lake Vostok application, maps of
              the water cavity and sediment thickness beneath the lake will be
              produced.

These maps will become tools to explore the geologic origin of the
              lake. The two endmember models are, first, that the lake is an active tectonic
              rift such as Lake Baikal and, second, the lake is the result of glacial
              scouring. The distinct characteristics of an extensional rift can be easily
              identified with our aerogeophysical survey. The geological interpretation of
              the airborne geophysical survey will provide the first geological constraints
              of the interior of the East Antarctic continent based on modern data. In
              addition, the underlying geology will influence the ecosystem within the lake.
              

One of the critical issues for the ecosystem within the lake will be the
              flux of nutrients. A preliminary estimation of the regions of freezing and
              melting based on the distance between distinctive internal layers observed on
              the radar data will be made.  These basic boundary conditions will provide
              guidance for a potential international effort aimed at in situ exploration of
              the lake and improve the understanding of East Antarctic geologic
              structures.


