Title       : PEET: Collaborative Research: Monographic Studies of the Hydractinioidea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2002  
File        : a9978086

Award Number: 9978086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Cairns cairns.stephen@nmnh.si.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9978086
Cairns
	Coral reefs are among the most biologically diverse and
              ecologically intricate environments on earth, yet our knowledge of the
              organisms that constitute the reefs and inhabit their niches is fragmentary.
              For one major group of marine organisms often associated with reefs, the
              cnidarian class Hydrozoa, collaborating scientists Stephen Cairns at the
              Smithsonian Institution and Clifford Cunningham at Duke University are
              conducting monographic research while training new experts in hydrozoan
              taxonomy and compiling web accessible databases of information on these
              animals. The focal taxa are the families Campanularidae, Hydractiniidae and
              Stylasteridae (or hydrocorals), three morphologically distinct groups of
              Hydrozoa with worldwide distributions that appear to constitute
              phylogenetically sister taxa, on the basis of recent DNA sequence evidence.
              Although the freshwater Hydra is well-known since Leeuwenhoek's classic
              description, and is extensively used in modern cell biology research, it is
              atypical in lacking the medusa or swimming stage characteristic of most marine
              forms. These forms usually have an attached or polyp stage as well as a
              swimming or pelagic medusa stage as part of the life cycle; so different are
              the two stages in some groups that different nomenclatures have been created
              over the years, often for the same species. One of the goals of the research is
              to reconcile this dual taxonomy, in part by using mitochondrial DNA sequences
              as markers or signatures of species relatedness. With a sound phylogenetic
              classification in place, questions about biogeographic distribution,
              evolutionary origins, and tempo of diversification can be profitably
              pursued.
	The investigators are collaborating with colleagues in Canada (Dale
              Calder at the Royal Ontario Museum) and Italy (Ferdinando Boero at the
              University of Lecce) and others in studying museum specimens, culturing live
              organisms, adding new material from field expeditions, and training new experts
              in the taxonomy of these organisms. Students will participate fully in the
              field expeditions and museum visits as part of their overall training program
              in hydrozoan systematics. Morphological and molecular evidence will be
              integrated into the monographic studies, with new morphological characters from
              electron microscopy of nematocysts and other structures, and new molecular
              evidence from nuclear and mitochondrial ribosomal genes. In particular, Duke
              University is hosting a Hydrozoan Sequencing Facility, which will provide DNA
              sequence data from properly prepared collections, for purposes of identifying
              hydrozoans, placing them with evolutionary relatives, and tracking links
              between polyp and medusa stages in life cycle studies. Duke will also host the
              databasing component of the project, incorporating the new molecular data and
              providing links to Boero's electronic file of 12,000 taxonomic references and
              to other information resources. 


