Title       : Infrastructure to Develop a Human-Environment Regional Observatory (HERO)
               Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a9978052

Award Number: 9978052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Brenton M. Yarnal alibar@essc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark N. Gahegan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. MacEachren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Gregory Knight  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Easterling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1388,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Global environmental change is essentially a human problem.  It results from
              myriad human actions occurring in local places.  At the same time, people
              experience and respond to global environmental changes in localities. 
              Recognition of these facts have led to a proliferation of research centers and
              sites dedicated to studying the local and regional implications of the human
              dimensions of global environmental change (HDGEC).  The local data that are and
              will be generated by these centers, however, tend to be place-specific and are
              difficult to replicate and generalize.  This weakness in the data stems
              directly from a poorly developed scientific infrastructure.  There are no
              common protocols for collecting, reporting, analyzing, storing, and sharing the
              data.  There are no data standards, which are necessary if the data are to be a
              lasting resource.  Moreover, if HDGEC scientists are to be able to take
              advantage of the technological advances that are being made in intelligent data
              retrieval and analysis and in remote collaboration, they must coordinate
              research efforts to make the data amenable to these techniques.  To address
              these problems, this award will support a project to develop infrastructure for
              studying the long-term implications of HDGEC at small regional and local
              scales.  To meet this goal, the five-year project will promote infrastructure
              development by implementing four core activities.  First, it will develop
              protocols for observing, collecting, reporting, storing, and sharing data. 
              Second, it will build an intelligent networking environment for data
              management, Web-based access, and GeoCollaboratory that will help match data
              with research problems and will facilitate collaboration among scientists at
              remote sites.  Third, it will test proof of concept by applying the protocols
              and intelligent networking environment to local HDGEC research problems. 
              Fourth, it will build networks by linking the US regional and local HDGEC
              research sites through this infrastructure.  Protocol development will be
              carried out at four human-environment regional observatories (HEROs).  The
              HEROs, which are located in the Southwest-Mexico border region, the High Plains
              of Kansas, central Pennsylvania, and central Massachusetts, represent a diverse
              set of natural and human environments.  University of Arizona, Kansas State
              University, Pennsylvania State University, and Clark University scientists will
              approach infrastructural development by tackling a broad human-environment
              problem, but in the local context.  The Geographic Visualization Science
              Technology and Applications Center (GeoVISTA) at Penn State will work with the
              National Mapping Division of the United States Geological Survey to develop the
              HERO intelligent networking environment (HEROINE).  HEROINE will emphasize
              geospatial data, scientific research in human-environment interaction, and
              rapid development of distributed databases.  To develop the a GeoCollaboratory,
              HEROINE will develop tools for data retrieval and collaborative query
              specification, geographic visualization (GVis) methods to support joint
              exploration of quantitative and qualitative data, and ways to integrate GVis
              and geocomputational methods, such as spatial statistics, data mining, or
              process models.  The infrastructure developed by the HEROs and HEROINE will be
              tested and refined through iterative collaboration among the HEROs. The four
              HEROs will address one research question to test proof of concept:  How does
              land use affect local sensitivity to climate variation and vulnerability to
              climate change?  The project aims to promote adoption of the infrastructure by
              developing a network of regional and local HDGEC centers.  Two open meetings of
              regional HDGEC investigators and an advanced Web-site are features of the
              network building.  This project will generate significant products for science
              and society.  The protocols and data standards will produce a template
              (meta-protocols) for assembling diverse data for use by other large-scale,
              interdisciplinary projects.  The intelligent networking environment will serve
              as an archetype for bringing scientists together to solve complex
              interdisciplinary problems.  In addition, the project will contribute to the
              overarching theme of human science and policy research throughout the 21st
              century -- the "sustainability transition."  It will preserve precious
              scientific data on human-environment relationships, thereby sustaining our
              historical and natural heritages.  It will answer critical questions about the
              complex relationships among individuals, communities, and their environments
              over time and space, and it will provide a technological means to bring
              scientists, stakeholders, and decision-makers together to address fundamental
              issues linking nature and society.

