Title       : TalkBank: A Multimedia Database of Communicative Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a9978056

Award Number: 9978056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1442660            (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian J. MacWhinney macw@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Liberman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott M. Stevens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard D. Wactlar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              O. Peter Buneman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1388,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
***
9978056


The goal of TalkBank is the creation of a distributed,
              web-based data 
archiving system for transcribed video and audio data on
              communicative 
interactions. These interactions will include mothers talking
              with their 
children, family dinner table talk, classroom interactions, animal
              cries, 
signed language, formal debates, phone calls, talk with foreigners,
              club 
meetings, and dozens of other types of communicative interactions.  The
              data 
will come from speakers of many languages, professions, and ages.  Some
              
speakers will have language disabilities and some will be language
              learners.
The formal specification for data in TalkBank will use an a system
              of 
annotationa graphs called Codon.  Tools will be created for the entry of
              new 
and existing data into the Codon format; transcriptions will be linked to
              
speech and video; and there will be extensive support for collaborative
              
commentary from competing perspectives.

Researchers will be able to locate
              a particular segment of an interaction and 
immediately play back that section
              on their computer monitors. TalkBank will 
facilitate comparisons across
              social groups, languages, and situations.  It 
will also provide tools for
              working in detail on single populations, as well 
as collaborative
              commentaries that test competing interpretations against a 
constant set of
              data.

The initiative establishes an ongoing interaction between computer
              
scientists, linguists, psychologists, sociologists, political scientists,
              
criminologists, educators, ethologists, cinematographers, psychiatrists, and
              
anthropologists.












