Title       : Instrumentation for a Computerized LAN Behavioral Social Science Experimental
               Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9978057

Award Number: 9978057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48212              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rick K. Wilson rkw@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Osherson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mahmoud Amin El-Gamal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Rick Wilson and his collaborators
              will head a consortium of social scientists at Rice University and construct a
              30 station computerized experimental laboratory. Built around a Dell PowerEdge
              6350 server, the laboratory will include 30 Dell OptiPlex GX1work stations with
              17" Ultrascan Monitors. The proposed laboratory will serve the needs of faculty
              in the Political Science, Economics, Psychology Departments as well as the
              Business school. In addition the laboratory will provide the hardware to enable
              the social and behavioral sciences at Rice to coalesce around a common
              methodological approach. To date these disciplines have been separated by
              individual researchers controlling makeshift laboratories that are largely
              incompatible. The benefits to both research and student training will be
              significant. The topics to be investigated include: when is experimental data
              sufficient?; how do probabilistic beliefs form and how do these affect decision
              making?; how does social signaling affect game playing strategy?; what
              qualities characterize an effective leader?: how useful are methods employed by
              novices and experts to assess probability?; how does task feedback influence
              group and individual performance?; how do individuals search for information in
              the decision making process?; how do citizens perceive federal benefits and
              apportion credit for them? The laboratory will be supervised by a faculty
              committee which will allocate time. It will also function as a teaching tool
              and play in integral role in graduate education.
