Title       : A New Approach to Accelerate Frequency-Domain Studies of Complex Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9978747

Award Number: 9978747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. McDaniel jgm@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Principal Investigator's Name: J. Gregory McDaniel

Institution: Boston
              University

Proposal Number: 9978747

Proposal Title: A New Approach to
              Accelerate Frequency-Domain Studies of Complex Structures

Project
              Abstract

Currently, efforts to model the vibrations of complex structures
              are severely limited by the computational expenses incurred in finding either
              the modal properties or the forced responses of the structures.  The proposed
              research could dramatically reduce these expenses, and hence enable more
              complete and accurate vibration studies, by developing a novel means of
              condensing the dynamic equations of motion.  Preliminary estimates indicate
              that, for structures of current interest to industry, the reductions in
              computational times will be several orders of magnitude.  The approach is based
              on the premise that one is typically interested in a structure's dynamic
              response inside a frequency band.  By approximating the effects of modes that
              resonate outside the band, the matrix equation of motion is reduced in rank. In
              the proposed approach, this reduction will be achieved by an innovative
              transformation that uses the forced responses of the structure evaluated at a
              few sampled frequencies in the band.  As the forced responses in the band are
              mostly
comprised of the modes that resonate in the band, this transformation
              naturally retains modes lying in the band.  The method will be developed in the
              context of a carefully selected testbed of industry-relevant structural models,
               ranging from one thousand to one million degrees-of-freedom.  The research
              will be used to enhance undergraduate and graduate education in structural
              vibrations through the creation of a unique interactive software package
              entitled the Virtual Vibrations Laboratory, which will allow students to
              explore fundamental vibration phenomena and vibration control techniques for
              models of real industry-relevant structures.  The explorations will introduce
              students to topics such as active vibration control, mode localization, and
              advanced damping treatments. It is expected that this software package will
              create a new avenue for the involvement of industry in engineering education. 
              



