Title       : Alliance for Graduate Education in Mississippi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a9978889

Award Number: 9978889
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Roosevelt Y. Johnson                    
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Maurice R. Eftink Eftink@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1515      MINORITY GRADUATE EDUC ACTIVIT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1515,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal seeks funds for a comprehensive program for enhancing entry into
              and successful completion of minority students in MSE graduate programs. The
              proposed program will be a Mississippi MGE consortium comprising our four
              PhD-granting institutions (the University of Mississippi as administrative
              lead, Mississippi State University, the University of Southern Mississippi, and
              Jackson State University) in partnership with several state and regional HBCUs
              and small colleges. Our regional scope will build upon a solid history of
              collaboration between the comprehensive and regional institutions. Since the
              state of Mississippi is 36% African-American in population and since there are
              several HBCUs in the state and region, a primary focus will be on the training
              of black graduate students. The state institutions also have a successful
              participation in the NSF Louis Stokes AMP program for the education of
              undergraduate MSE students. We now seek NSF MGE funds to catalyze a
              comprehensive effort to expand our efforts in the graduate MSE training area.
              The four PhD-granting institutions will realign resources and programs and will
              coordinate activities to create a comprehensive approach to outreach,
              recruitment, mentoring, retention, and degree completion activities for
              minority students, with career counseling aimed at encouraging academic
              careers. The ultimate goals of this program are to increase the number of
              students from under-represented minorities who enter MSE graduate programs in
              the MGE consortium institutions, to increase the number of these students who
              successfully complete a PhD degree, to increase the number of these doctoral
              students who choose to enter academia, and to bring about a systemic change in
              attitudes of faculty, administrators, and students with regard to minority
              pipeline issues.
