Title       : Revolutionizing Friction Pile Design Through the Development of a Multi-Friction
               Sleeve Device for Direct In-situ Measurement of Interface Strength
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1999    
File        : a9978630

Award Number: 9978630
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185212             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. David Frost dfrost@ce.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***
9978630
Frost
A review of the technical design methods for a range of
              geotechnical
structures will confirm that, although many of these systems rely
              on the
interface strength between soil and man-made construction materials
              to
provide the necessary load resisting forces, rarely are measurements
              made
to directly determine the interface strength characteristics. 
              Instead,
interface strength parameters are either estimated empirically from
              other
measures of strength by applying various correlation and/or
              correction
factors or they are interpreted through back-analysis of load
              tests.  For
example, many prominent direct CPT pile design methods relate the
              measured
CPT tip resistance to the unit shaft capacity of the pile through one
              or
more correlation factors.  Similar approaches are taken in determining
              the
capacity of tie-back anchor systems, in estimating the friction acting
              on
pipes during micro-tunneling, and in estimating the friction
              between
backfill soils and sheet piles or other retaining structures.  

Why
              have these various design procedures relied on empiricism and
back-analysis
              rather than direct measurement of relevant properties?  The
answer is simply
              that until very recently, while recognized as a
significant factor in the
              strength of interfaces, the technology and
methods to quantitatively evaluate
              the surface roughness of civil
engineering construction materials at relevant
              scales was not available.
Fortunately, driven by the need to quantify surface
              characteristics of
materials in other engineering disciplines, the technology
              and equipment is
now available.  This project seeks to exploit this
              opportunity by applying
this technology to geotechnical interfaces and thereby
              providing the basis
to revolutionize how pile foundations and other earth
              structure systems are
designed and constructed.  

This project is to
              develop and evaluate a multi-friction sleeve attachment
to the cone
              penetrometer (CPT) to permit direct in situ measurement of the
relationship
              between interface strength and surface roughness. Recent
research has
              successfully quantified the relationship between interface
strength and
              surface roughness in the laboratory.  The opportunity now
exists to transfer
              this knowledge to an in-situ test.  Through measurement
of the loads
              transmitted to multiple friction sleeves of increasing
roughness assembled in
              series, the quantitative relationship between
interface friction and surface
              roughness can be measured.  This will result
in the ability to directly
              measure the insitu interface strength, thereby
opening the opportunity to
              revolutionize the design concepts, materials,
methods and processes used in
              foundations, retaining structures, and
micro-tunnels.

The proposal outlines
              a series of tasks ranging from laboratory
experimentation, numerical analysis,
              calibration chamber testing, to
full-scale field testing to ensure that the
              design of the proposed
attachment is based on a solid fundamental
              understanding of the interaction
of the penetrometer with the surrounding
              soil. It is noted that the
proposed approach is not to alter existing cone
              penetrometer design but to
add an attachment that offers new capability for
              site characterization. The
interface friction measurements made with the
              device can be complemented by
either pressuremeter or dilatometer measurements
              so that reliable estimates
of lateral stress conditions are available for the
              pile capacity prediction
procedures to be developed as part of this study.
              
***

