Title       : New Metrics for Characterizing Impulsive Events: Automotive Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1999 
File        : a9978777

Award Number: 9978777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41643              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan G. Haddow haddow@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dave J. Scholl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,1504,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PI:		Alan G. Haddow
Institution:	Michigan State University
Proposal
              #:	9978777
Proposal Title:	New Metrics for Characterizing Impulsive Events:
              Automotive
Applications

ABSTRACT
This GOALI funded project is concerned
              with detecting and meaningfully characterizing and quantifying impulsive events
              that are imbedded in signals. Attention is focused on signals that arise in the
              automotive industry and as such, the work will be undertaken during a prolonged
              faculty visit to Ford Motor Company's Science Research Laboratory. The main
              objective of the work is to improve on the much used spectral-based analysis
              tools (Fourier series, etc) by developing a more appropriate technique that is
              better suited to characterize impulsive events. The new approach, based on
              wavelet analysis, exploits existing techniques used in the field of data
              compression that efficiently choose a best basis for compressing signals. Thus,
              the key aspect of the work is to find appropriate bases functions for
              interrogating the signals with a view to extracting practically useful
              information. Preliminary work will focus on data collected from relatively
              simple laboratory based structures. It will then progress to real data from
              automotive applications. The significance of the work is that modern
              mathematical signal analysis tools will be introduced to an area that is often
              slow to adopt new theoretical techniques. The techniques will be tailored to
              real applications and will have immediate impact to existing problems such as
              engine knock, sound quality, squeak and rattle, crash worthiness design, etc.
              While the emphasis throughout is toward automotive applications, the broader
              application of the proposed work is vast.



