Title       : Dynamic Behavior of Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) in Liquid Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a9978744

Award Number: 9978744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan C. Mantell mante001@maroon.tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen Longmire  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to investigate the motion of simple
              microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) structures immersed in homogeneous
              liquids and solid/liquid suspensions.  The structures will include beams
              designed to move normal to solid substrates and 'shuttle' plates designed to
              slide parallel with the substrates.  The influence of geometry, gap height,
              surface characteristics, and fluid properties on device performance will be
              examined. 'Start-up' motion will be investigated by quantifying 'spring-back'
              behavior in beams and shuttles initially deflected by electrical forces. 
              Normal oscillatory motion will be quantified using laser vibrometry.  Start-up
              and oscillatory sliding motion will be observed and quantified by imaging
              shuttles with a high-frame-rate digital camera.  The mechanical quality factor
              Q and frequency shift will be calculated for the two forms of oscillatory
              motion.  Details of fluid motion will be investigated by visualization and
              image processing techniques.  The experimental results will be compared with
              existing physical models on friction and lubrication, liquid/solid surface
              adhesion, and liquid damping forces to elucidate the dominant physical factors
              responsible for device performance.  The results will also be used to test and
              determine limits in parametric relationships and to suggest design rules for
              the fabrication of reliable and optimal microscale mechanical devices. 
              

This study represents a pioneer investigation of fluid/structure
              interactions for MEMS devices in liquids.  Since such devices are desirable in
              a variety of industries, the experimental data and analysis will be useful to
              engineers in many applications.  The parametric relationships and design rules
              will ultimately allow engineers to optimize manufacturing methods and system
              performance while minimizing costly trial-and-error procedures.

