Title       : FSML: Equipment to Enhance Research and Electronic Data Management at Flathead
               Lake Biological Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9978285

Award Number: 9978285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79364              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack A. Stanford stanford@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              F. R. Hauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Established in 1899, the Flathead Lake Biological Station (FLBS) is a Center of
              Excellence in The University of Montana system.  The FLBS has three resident
              faculty, a 15-member permanent staff and an annual budget of $1 M.  FLBS is
              located on the East Shore of Flathead Lake, some 90 miles north of Missoula,
              Montana, within a remarkable area of the Rocky Mountains known as the Crown of
              the Continent.  The FLBS mission is to  conduct basic research in ecology,
              train quality graduate students for professions in environmental disciplines
              and provide scientific data and information to the professional and general
              public in the form of electronic data bases, white papers, short courses,
              workshops and forums.

The FLBS research program is organized around specific
              hypotheses concerning natural and social aspects of ecosystem function and
              involves 25 collaborators.  There are four long -term core projects: 1)
              biodiversity and bioproduction along biophysical gradients; 2) floodplain
              ecology and river restoration; 3) large lake limnology; and, 4) environmental
              change assessment and ecosystem modeling.  These projects have produced > 100
              juried papers over the last five years and substantially elevated (>50%)
              research funding and use of our facilities by new staff, graduate students and
              visiting scientists.  Moreover, researchers increasingly rely on high volume
              data bases for spatial analysis of ecosystem processes, which has caused a
              pressing need for specific items of equipment.

This project will assist in
              the acquisition of: 1) a total organic carbon analyzer, 2) hardware for a new
              spatial analysis lab, 3) an image analysis system for optical measurements
              (e.g., invertebrates, zooplankton, micro-organisms and organelles); and, 4) a
              local area network server with a high volume back-up device.  These items are
              central to growth of collaborative research and essential for management and
              distribution of the massive electronic data bases rapidly accumulating at
              FLBS.





