Title       : CRUI: Molecular Genetics & Biochemistry to Study Evolutionary, Ecological &
               Behavioral Interactions Between Birds & Feather-Degrading Bacteria &
               Environmental Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a9978805

Award Number: 9978805
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $799337             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward H. Burtt EHBURTT@CC.OWU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Lever  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jann M. Ichida  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio Wesleyan University
	      
	      Delaware, OH  43015    614/369-4431

NSF Program : 1091      COLLAB RSCH AT UNDERGRAD INSTI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1091,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Ohio Wesleyan faculty and students will study the microbial ecosystem within
              avian plumage emphasizing those bacteria that degrade feather keratin. 
              Molecular genetics will be used to study the control of the degradation process
              and biochemistry to study structural adaptations of the enzyme that cleaves the
              keratin molecule.  Microbiologically will study how the diverse microorganisms
              within the plumage interact with feather-degrading bacteria.  Lastly, the
              faculty and students will study how birds regulate this complex, microbial
              ecosystem that threatens their feathers and their survival.  The interrelated
              biochemical, molecular, genetic, microbial, ecological, and evolutionary
              questions necessitate multidisciplinary approach.

Knowledge of the natural
              history of feather-degrading bacteria and their avian hosts, the genetic
              control of enzyme synthesis, and the biochemistry of degradation will enable
              the  suggestion of environmentally safe methods of recovering small proteins
              and amino acids from waste feathers and efficient composting of dead
              poultry.

Seventy-two undergraduates, including 37 freshmen, have designed,
              completed, and reported their own research as partner in the current project. 
              Each summer eight students will be offered research fellowships and one
              research associate position for a secondary science teacher.  There will be an
              offer of four academic-year mentorships annually, which will build a commitment
              to research as student teaches student.

