Title       : Virtual Prototyping for Human-Centric Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a9978603

Award Number: 9978603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430986             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Hollerbach jmh@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elaine Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the simulation of the sense of contact and force
              when interacting with human-centric mechanical CAD designs.  Human-centric CAD
              designs are those whose ultimate purpose is to be used by humans, for example,
              a car's interior design.  The location and feel of surfaces, and the
              accessibility and manipulability of controls, will be prototyped through force
              feedback from a haptic interface, the Sarcos Dextrous Arm Master.  The use of
              the Sarcos Master allows a user to reach and grasp naturally, and to feel both
              external forces of contact and internal forces of grasping.  Utilizing directly
              the underlying complex geometries of the design (trimmed NURBS surfaces),
              surface-to-surface geometrical computations will be developed to model the
              bumping of the arm when reaching and the grasping by the hand of controls.  A
              global minimum distance calculation will identify areas of potential contact,
              and then fast local surface tracing computations will model detailed
              geometrical interaction.  Realistic surface models for friction, texture, and
              softness will be developed based on measurements of real surfaces.  The
              mechanical action of controls such as switches will be similarly
              modeled.

The goal of virtual prototyping is to replace physical mockups with
              computational mockups, thereby greatly decreasing costs and speeding up
              iterations in the design.  When a design's purpose is to be used by a human, it
              is similarly desirable to prototype a human's interaction with the design
              without building a physical prototype.  To date only stereoscopic visual
              displays have been available to examine a design, but a complete evaluation
              should allow designers to reach, touch, grasp, and manipulate virtual objects
              in the design, as if using their own arms against real objects.  The
              determination of how easy it is to reach and manipulate controls in a cluttered
              car interior will lead to more ergonomically satisfactory designs.
