Title       : Gordon Research Conference on Condensed Matter Physics, New London, Connecticut,
               June 12-17, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1999       
File        : a9978196

Award Number: 9978196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlyle B. Storm grc@grc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Grier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9978196
Grier

This award is for support of the 1999 Gordon Research
              Conference on Condensed Matter Physics.  The Gordon Research Conferences have a
              long history of being excellent venues for the communication and interchange of
              ideas in various scientific subject fields.  This conference is no exception to
              this rule.  A broad, interdisciplinary outlook characterizes this conference. 
              Nine sessions are devoted to Quantum Phase Transitions, Electrons in Confined
              Systems, Self-Assembled Devices, Classical Phase Transitions, Vortex Matter in
              Type-II Superconductors, Jamming Self-Assembly in Complex and Biological
              Systems.  The various topics of these sessions are linked by an underlying
              unity in that new theoretical, experimental, and simulation techniques are
              common to them and that similar principle guide the evolution from the
              microscopic to macroscopic processes in all the graduate students participate
              in these conferences, participation in which is limited in number to enable
              close interactions communications by the participants.

This award is for
              support of the 1999 Gordon Research Conference on condensed Matter Physics. 
              The Gordon Research Conferences have a long history of being excellent venues
              for the communication and interchange of ideas a various scientific subject
              fields.  This conference is no exception to this rule.  The  whole field of
              Condensed Matter Physics is a rapidly developing one, and a meeting in the
              setting offered by the Gordon Conferences is ideally suited for the
              participants to review the present state of the field, as well as to do their
              best to provide guidance for future advancements in theory, experiment and
              technology.  A broad, interdisciplinary outlook characterizes this conference. 
              There are nine themes that, although seemingly unrelated, are joined by an
              underlying unity in that similar principles guide the evolution from the
              microscopic to macroscopic processed in all these systems.  Established
              investigators, post doctoral research associates and advanced graduate students
              take part in these conferences, participation in which is limited in number in
              order to permit close interaction and communication by the participants.


