Title       : Models and Algorithms for Quality and Accuracy of Spatial Data in Infrastructure
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a9978592

Award Number: 9978592
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220189             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Rasdorf rasdorf@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hassan A. Karimi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0207000   Transportation                          
              0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
              0512202   Improved Resolution & Sen               
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The nation's civil infrastructure consists of, among other things,
              buildings,
roads, bridges, and utilities. These infrastructure components are
              integrally
linked to our society and our environment. Increasingly, we are
              relying on
computer tools and databases for information about our
              infrastructure to enable
us to better develop, use, and maintain it. On an
              ongoing basis we are creating
infrastructure information management systems
              (IIMS), even though we often do
not refer to them as such. Two key data items
              in any infrastructure information
management system include (1) location of a
              component and (2) the resulting
spatial relationships among components that
              result from their locations.
Additionally, attribute data items describe the
              characteristics of the
components themselves.

A number of computer tools
              have emerged that are useful in the realm of
infrastructure information
              management. Prominent among these are geographic
information systems (GIS) and
              database management systems (DBMS). Historically,
GIS systems have been
              optimized to store, manage, and process graphical spatial
data and DBMS
              systems have been optimized to store and process tabular
attribute data.

To
              gain additional IIMS functionality and to support more useful analysis,
              we
propose to investigate linkages between spatial and attribute information.
              Such
tools or capabilities would improve infrastructurerelated problem
              analysis as
well. The key problem, even with recent DBMS/GIS linkage advances,
              is that
there are no fundamental models and algorithms to give users,
              analysts, and
decision makers information about the quality and accuracy of
              the data being
provided, analyzed, and used. This critical shortcoming is the
              topic of this
proposal.

We propose to develop (1) conceptual models and
              algorithms for assessing and
quantifying positional-data error and (2)
              methodologies for performing
transformations between different location
              referencing systems. We will test
the models, algorithms, and methodologies
              using transportation case studies.

The objectives of this project can be
              summarized as follows:

1. To identify the positional-data quality needs of
              common transportation
applications (application assessment).

2. To identify
              the delivered level of accuracy attainable by various scientific
location
              measurement instruments and technologies (accuracy of technologies).

3. To
              develop models for relating needed and delivered accuracy levels
(relationship
              models).

4. To develop models and algorithms for quantifying and qualifying
              spatial data
accuracy (accuracy models).

5. To develop methodologies for
              assessing the impacts of positional-data
accuracy in translations between
              measurement techniques and spatial referencing
systems
              (translations).

Meeting these objectives will have the following significant
              project outcomes. 
We will better understand the relationship between the data
              accuracy needs of
users and applications on one hand, and data accuracy levels
              of measurement
technologies on the other.  We will be able to reduce the level
              of uncertainty
in transportation (and infrastructure) decision making.  We
              will be able to use
greater accuracy to improve reliability, functionality,
              utility, and safety of
transportation (and infrastructure) systems.  The
              models and algorithms can be
used to develop new tools, or enhancements to
              existing tools, to improve
spatial data representation, understanding,
              analysis, and processing.
