Title       : Physics of Clouds and Precipitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2001       
File        : a9978186

Award Number: 9978186
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364690             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramesh C. Srivastava srivast@geosci.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is a continuation of theoretical and observational investigations
              of certain aspects of cloud and precipitation physics.  It comprises the
              following studies:

1. Evaporation of stratiform rain.  Numerical
              calculations of evaporation will be compared with observations by Doppler
              radar, profiler, radiosondes, and ground-based and airborne measurements of the
              drop-size distribution. 
2. Evolution of drop-size distribution by nucleation,
              condensation, and coalescence.  Special emphasis is on the range of drop sizes
              where the dominant growth process changes from condensation to coalescence.
3.
              The field of supersaturation in a cloud of growing drops.  This will be
              analyzed by solving the diffusion equation in a medium with a continuously
              distributed source of vapor and multiple sinks using numerical and approximate
              analytical methods.
4. Microwave attenuation in rain.  Simultaneous
              observations with two radars operating at attenuating wavelengths will be used
              to estimate the field of attenuation.  A theoretical analysis of the
              Hitschfeld-Bordan approach to attenuation correction will also be carried
              out.
5. Mixing processes in small cumulus clouds.  Experimental data on
              drop-size distributions, water content, temperature, and radar reflectivity
              will be used to study the small-scale mixing that takes place between cloudy
              air and the environment.
6. The genesis of ice crystal habit.  Recent work on
              the physical principles underlying the genesis of dendritic crystal forms will
              be studied for possible application to the cloud physical problem of explaining
              the forms of ice crystals and the dependence of these forms on temperature and
              humidity.

These studies contribute to the fundamental understanding of
              precipitation development and to applications such as the remote measurement of
              rainfall by radar.

