Title       : CRUI: Antibody Catalysts from Immunoglobulin Repertoires of Enhanced Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a9978779

Award Number: 9978779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $850977             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Hansen dehansen@amherst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David I. Ratner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia B. O'Hara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Goldsby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amherst College
	      
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/542-2000

NSF Program : 1091      COLLAB RSCH AT UNDERGRAD INSTI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1091,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              


CRUI: Antibody Catalysts from Immunoglobulin Repertoires of Enhanced
              Diversity

The objective of the proposed work is the exploration of expanded
              antibody repertoires as sources of more efficient antibody catalysts. Although
              catalytic antibodies are readily obtained by immunization of mice with
              transition state analogue haptens, the catalytic efficiencies observed are
              typically far lower than that exhibited by enzymes. To increase the probability
              of obtaining effective antibody catalyst, then, three methods for expanding the
              range of accessible immunoglobulin sequences are proposed: one, the isolation
              of antibody catalysts from murine germinal-center B cells (the locus of somatic
              hypermutation); two, the isolation of antibody catalysts from cattle and
              rabbits, species with germline immunoglobulin repertoires distinct from that of
              the mouse; and three, the creation of single-chain antibody catalyst, which can
              be expressed in bacteria and subjected to in vitro mutagenesis and
              selection.

Ten undergraduate students per year will work on the project in
              collaboration with
four Amherst College Professors--two from the Biology
              Department, and two from
Chemistry. Techniques in the fields of immunology,
              molecular biology, 
synthetic organic chemisty, and fluorescence spectroscopy
              will be employed.   The students will pursue their  research full-time during
              the summer months and will  have the
opportunity to work as research interns
              during the academic year.



