Title       : PARTICIPANT TRAVEL SUPPORT: MOORE 50TH CONFERENCE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9978578

Award Number: 9978578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor Guillemin vwg@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The C.L.E. Moore Instructorship in Mathematics was created fifty years ago as an
              early experiment in postdoctoral training. It succeeded brilliantly and set a
              pattern which has been widely emulated. Indeed, the spectacular growth of
              research in pure and applied mathematics  in the post-sputnik era was a
              development in which alumni of the Moore Instructorship program played a vital
              role. More recently the Instructorship in Applied Mathematics has attracted a
              similarly talented group, and the Instructorship in Pure Mathematics, whose
              recipients were always comparable to the "Moores", and has been used to
              supplement fellowship funds (typically NSF fellowships), has been equally
              successful. Altogether there are some five hundred and forty alumni of these
              three programs scattered across the country (both in academic and non-academic
              mathematics) and involved in a very wide range of research.
   
   MIT will
              host a three day conference this October to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary
              of the creation of the Moore-Applied Instructorship. The organizers have
              invited ALL ex-instructors to this conference (and have asked the NSF to help
              defray the travel costs of younger members of this group.) Our aim is not only
              to celebrate the success of this program in its first fifty years of existence,
              but also to explore the future: Clearly the profession of research mathematics
              is at something of a crossroads today, and we hope to gain insight from this
              talented group into what directions this institution should move in the future
              to contribute to the continuing leadership by the US in the Mathematical
              Sciences.

