Title       : Model Construction and Physical Parameter Identification from Spectral Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9978786

Award Number: 9978786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117906             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yitshak M. Ram ram@me.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Yitshak M. Ram, Louisiana State University,
Proposal Number: 9978786
Model
              Construction and Physical Parameter Identification from Spectral Data
Proposal
              Abstract. 
The inverse problem of reconstructing a model based on spectral
              data is investigated, and methods for constructing low order models for
              vibrating systems are developed. The physical parameters of the systems are
              determined by the derived model. 
The main difficulty in addressing this
              problem is that vibrating structures are distributed parameter systems, whereas
              the descriptive analytical models are finite dimensional. The spectrum of a
              continuous system is inconsistent with that of the associated finite
              dimensional model. In order to overcome the difficulty associated with the
              inconsistency of the spectral data, the distributed parameter system with
              continuous variables is approximated by a continuous system with a finite
              number of physical parameters. As a result a new non-linear eigenvalue problem,
              with transcendental matrix elements, is introduced. 
The inverse problem is
              approached by iterative gradient and Newton's methods, and from a wave
              propagation standpoint. The results are validated by laboratory experiments
              where the density and rigidity functions of non-uniform vibrating rods are
              determined by using data from modal tests. 
The fundamental problem of
              identifying the physical parameters of a system from spectral data has
              theoretical importance and practical applications in many areas of science and
              engineering, e.g. dynamic system control, and sonar and radar detection. The
              new transcendental inverse problem introduced has the potential of bridging the
              gap between the infinite spectrum of distributed parameter systems and the
              finite spectrum of their discrete representative models. Characterization of
              the properties of this eigenvalue problem is thus of great theoretical and
              practical importance.


