Title       : FSML: Facilities Improvement at the Institute of Ecosystem Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1999 
File        : a9978240

Award Number: 9978240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene E. Likens likensg@ecostudies.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Ecosyst Stud
	      Box AB
	      Millbrook, NY  125450129    914/677-5343

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will assist in the construction of an additional laboratory
              building at the Institute of Ecosystem Studies (IES).  The new building will
              address current and future research needs of IES, providing its scientists
              adequate laboratory space and enabling more students, postdocs, and visiting
              scientists to do research at IES.

The current laboratory facilities at the
              Institute of Ecosystem Studies (IES) are inadequate as IES strives to meet the
              increased demands for essentials analyses and for research laboratory space. 
              During the last ten years, the demand for IES's central Analytical Laboratory
              services has ballooned from ~ 10,000 analyses per year to~ 60,000.  At the same
              time, several IES scientists must share existing individual laboratory space,
              limiting the number of students, postdocs, and visiting scientists able to do
              research in their laboratories.

Scientific collaboration, both among IES
              scientists and with scientists at other institutions, is a hallmark of IES. 
              This collaborative philosophy extends into the distribution of PI laboratory
              space and analytical resources.  IES encourages the sharing of resources;
              unnecessary duplication of equipment and space is discouraged.  To that end,
              IES has a central Analytical Laboratory (A.L).  The AL is a resource for IES
              scientific staff, students, visitors, and distant collaborators, providing data
              critical to their scientific research.  AL staff analyzes samples not only from
              sites at IES, but also from sites around the world.

As research programs
              have expanded, IES scientists have increasingly needed to share their PI
              laboratories as well.  While these scientists strive to open their lab space to
              visiting scientists, postdoctoral associates, and graduate and undergraduate
              students, laboratory space is now the limiting factor in IES's ability to meet
              new demands and explore new opportunities.

The new laboratory building will
              provide carefully designed research space and a hospitable, safe, functional,
              and highly efficient workplace for maximum interaction and collaboration.  The 
              new facility will ease unacceptable crowding and  allow IES to accommodate its
              expanding visiting scientist, postdoctoral, and graduate and undergraduate
              student programs.  The design allows for a doubling in size of the laboratory
              building should program needs dictate in the future. 

