Title       : Planning an NTON Network Research Platform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a9978579

Award Number: 9978579
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sidney E. Karin skarin@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Lennon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9216,9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This project will develop a plan to leverage the Nation Transparent Optical
              Network (NTON), jointly funded by DARPA and the private sector, to provide a 20
              Gb/s optical research network platform spanning the West Coast of the US,
              connecting premier university, government and private sector research labs in
              Washington, Oregon and California. The output of this effort will form the
              basis for a proposal to NSF to fund the construction and operation of the NTON
              Research Network Platform.
     Availability of multi-gigabit/second channels
              running over commercially available fiber for thousands of km opens new
              research challenges and opportunities in the construction and operation of
              complex networks. The precursor work at the component and subsystem level is
              completed and pioneer applications have been demonstrated. Additionally, the
              NTON network was shown at SC97 to be accessible from the national research
              networks.  A large scale testbed network is now needed to advance these
              technologies for the competitive benefit of our educational, industrial and
              commercial sectors in the global economy. The test bed will enable the
              evaluation of new network architectures and advanced control and management
              strategies and to support the development of new infrastructures to enable
              distributed applications to operate in ways not
practical with existing
              networks.
     Funding constraints demand maximum leveraging of all available
              public and private resources. Utilizing the unique, NTON provides this
              opportunity. The present NTON is the first multi- wavelength, switched, optical
              network to use the installed commercial fiber base.  Initially deployed around
              San Francisco Bay, the NTON is being extended north to Seattle and south to San
              Diego. Four 2.5Gb/s channels for SONET traffic and 10 Gb/s of unformatted
              transport will be available for research purposes.  The SF Bay ring will be
              upgraded to 8 format free wavelengths - each capable of 2.5 Gb/s transport.
  
                This NSF planning grant will provide funding to determine the appropriate
              family of NSF network research sites to be provided access to the test bed, to
              articulate the types of functional, performance and measurement needs of NSF
              researchers and to specify the NTON extensions needed to meet these
              requirements. The planning will entail three specific activities:
Activity 1)
              Identify and validate the potential NSF user communities and their research
              network needs in
terms of functional and performance requirements to provide a
              definition of what users can expect from the network;
Activity 2) Develop
              preliminary specifications for the additional network architecture,
              including
costing and connection details;
Activity 3) Articulate network
              resource allocation mechanisms to enable a distributed staff of
              professionals,
faculty and students to implement NSF-approved resource
              allocation policies.
     Potential User Communities. The potential user
              communities will be drawn from researchers at NSF-funded colleges and
              universities. This community of users falls into three broad
              groupings:
Network researchers who are interested in developing new network
              technologies, algorithms, protocols and
management strategies; Applications
              and infrastructure developers who share the vision, understanding and patience
              necessary to define, prototype and implement new network
              characteristics;
Applications oriented scientists who are simply interested in
              faster, more economical and more reliable networks.  Examples include
              applications scientists, chemists and atmospheric scientists.
A major
              component of this planning effort will be to ensure that these groups
              communicate openly and clearly throughout the requirements and design process.
              Two workshops are contemplated to encourage this communication.
     Workshops
              Planned.
Application Requirements.  In Activity One, the goal will be to work
              with the above-cited groups to develop a balanced view of the services and
              characteristics of the NTON Research Network Platform.  Key NSF staff and
              members of the NSF research communities will collaborate with other network
              researchers to develop 'strawman' designs for the Research Platform.  These
              will be reviewed, modified and extended at a planned workshop to solicit
              opinions, identify needs and establish priorities.  The result of this activity
              will be a prioritized set of requirements that can be used to guide further
              development of the NTON Research Network Platform.  Network Architecture.  In
              Activity Two, the goal will be to begin with the existing National Transparent
              Optical Network (NTON) architectural model and extend it to include the
              requirements developed in Activity 1.  This will be a high level approximation
              to what will be the final detailed architectural specification of the NTON
              Network Research Platform.  This specification will be reviewed at the second
              workshop.
     Platform Management. Concurrent to Activity 2, Activity 3 will
              be directed toward establishing network resource allocation policies to ensure
              that the network can be efficiently and effectively implemented by the network
              management staff in collaboration with the user communities. A set of
              recommendations will result, detailing the roles and responsibilities of all
              the participants and establishing the rules of governance for the NTON Research
              Network Platform.

