Title       : LExEN: The Chemistry and Biology of Unusual Adaptive Solutes in Archaeoglobus
               Fulgidus and Natronococcus Occultus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a9978250

Award Number: 9978250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372072             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary F. Roberts mary.roberts@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha M. Teeter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Udayan Mohanty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clare M. O'Connor  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1075,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Roberts
9978250
Two archaea, Archaeoglobus fulgidus and Natronococcus
              occultus, grow in extreme environments.  Although both of these grow in
              moderate to high salt media (with N. occultus a true halophile), A. fulgidus is
              a hyperthermophile while N. occultus requires an external pH of 9.5 and is
              classified as a haloalkaliphile.
It has been proposed that organisms that live
              and adapt to hypersaline environments can provide insights
into life on early
              Mars. Halophilic archaea, in particular, may be important models for life on
              early Mars
with sulfate-reducing archaea providing the most realistic models
              for extra-terrestrial environments. This project seeks to understand how both
              A. fulgidus and N. occultus respond to changes in external NaCl, including
              protein and solute (organic osmolyte) synthesis, K+ fluxes, and mechanisms for
              stabilization of intracellular macromolecules. The emphasis is on the biology
              of several unusual chemical compounds used as organic osmolytes, and their very
              specific role in the survival of these cells. Techniques used include in vivo
              NMR spectroscopy, atomic absorption, 35S-uptake and 2D SDS-PAGE, and computer
              simulations of water and the effect osmolytes have on water structure and
              dynamics.  For A. fulgidus an important area to investigate is how growth
              temperature regulates di-inositol-1,1'-phosphate (DIP) synthesis and
              accumulation. This unusual organic solute is only accumulated and used to
              balance external osmotic pressure when the organism is grown above 80 degrees
              C.  Cloning, overexpression, and characterization of enzymes involved in DIP
              synthesis will provide details on the biosynthetic machinery for this solute
              whose accumulation correlates with thermophily in many other archaea as well.
              Where possible overexpressed enzymes will be crystallized for structure
              determination. This goal will be particularly important for the novel A.
              fulgidus inositol-1-phosphate synthase that appears to be a class II aldolase,
              and for the proposed CTP:I-1-P cytidylyltransferase and DIP synthase activities
              (when they are identified and purified from the cells). Monitoring protein and
              message synthesis for these enzymes upon thermal stress should provide further
              insights into the temperature regulation of DIP accumulation. A related
              phosphodiester, di-a-glycerol phosphate, appears to be the major osmolyte at
              lower growth temperatures in A. fulgidus. Nothing is known about the
              biosynthesis of this solute from a-glycerol phosphate (although it is likely an
              activated glycerol phosphate is condensed with glycerol in analogy to the 'DIP
              synthase' reaction).  NMR experiments are planned to elucidate the enzymology
              involved.

