Title       : Statistical Innovations to Neurotoxicity Risk Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1999 
File        : a9978370

Award Number: 9978370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204175             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yiliang Zhu yzhu@hsc.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marie Davidian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1386,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9978370 

Neurotoxic potential of environmental substances is typically
              evaluated through laboratory experiments, in which a small number of subjects
              are randomly assigned to 4-5 exposure groups, and multiple outcomes, including
              continuous, ordinal data, are measured repeatedly.  The factorial designs,
              however, do not always provide sufficient information for characterizing the
              underlying trajectories of neurotoxic effects over time.  Often the lowest dose
              that induces the toxic effects is identified using analysis of variance or
              multiple comparison, and is used to derive a safety standard, without
              accounting for the magnitude of the effects, or the underlying dose-response
              relationship.  Despite the US EPA's recommendation in its latest risk
              assessment guidelines, the use of dose-response modeling and subsequent
              estimation of a benchmark dose, a new approach leading to better safety
              standards have not been produced.  This project proposes to conduct
              dose-time-response modeling of neurobehavioral toxicity using linear/non-linear
              and generalized linear mixed-effects models. Models that characterize transient
              and competing effects are considered.  The use of mixed effects makes it
              possible to quantify risk for targeted individuals or groups.  The project
              attempts to develop semi-parametric estimation methods for fitting mixed
              effects models, exploring the use of GEE-based EM algorithm, for example.  It
              is hoped that such semi-parametric procedures may not only generate more robust
              estimates, but also simplify the computational aspects of mixed-effects models.
               A second technical focus is to develop semi-parametric, bootstrap-enhanced
              calibration methods for estimating benchmark doses.  In the context of
              neurotoxicity risk assessment, benchmark doses lies along a contour line on the
              dose-time-response surface.  The bootstrap calibration methods can overcome the
              limitation associated with small sample size, and illustrate sampling
              uncertainty or variation of the benchmark dose estimates.  A third technical
              challenge is to develop informative and efficient designs beyond the factorial
              ones for neurotoxicity screening experiments in terms of dose-time spacing to
              achieve maximal information recovery on dose-response (e.g. peak effect time),
              and reliable estimation of benchmark doses.  The project utilizes the database
              of the IPCS Collaborative Study and the EPA studies on Neurobehavioral
              Screening Methods.

Neurotoxic effects are recognized as one of the leading
              workplace disorders.  There are currently more than 65,000 chemical substances
              that are used in the USA, yet it is not known how many may be neurotoxic in
              humans.  It is estimated, however, that a large number of the more than 500
              registered active pesticide ingredients affect the nervous system of the
              targeted species to varying degrees.  Of the 588 chemicals listed by the
              American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, 167 affected the
              nervous system or behavior at some exposure level.  As a result of the impact
              of neurotoxicity on public health, there are increasing scientific interests in
              neurotoxic risk to humans, as well as increasing regulatory needs for
              developing better safety standards against environmental exposure.  In summary,
              this project 1) develops effective design protocols for neurotoxicity screening
              tests to improve risk characterization; 2) develops and applies better
              statistical methods to quantify neurobehavioral disorders; and 3) develops and
              tests better procedures for computing regulatory standards for potential
              neurotoxicants.  The methods developed in this project are likely to enhance
              the scientific foundation of risk assessment, and hence to help improve
              environmental regulatory policies.  This project is supported jointly by the
              Statistics Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) in
              MPS.


