Title       : A Novel Manufacturing Process for Transparent Conducting Oxide Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a9978676

Award Number: 9978676
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232809             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin A. Wolden cwolden@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tyrone L. Vincent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Transparent conducting oxide (TCO) materials possess the unusual ability to both
              transmit visible light and to conduct electricity.  This basic electronic
              material finds widespread commercial use as transparent electrodes in flat
              panel displays and solar cell modules. Additional applications of this unique
              material include protective coatings, low-emissivity window glass, and gas
              detection sensors.  This research project is to develop plasma-enhanced
              chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) as an alternative manufacturing approach for
              low temperature TCO synthesis.  PECVD offers several potential advantages over
              current processing technologies.  Foremost is the opportunity to reduce
              deposition temperatures to below 250C. 

Achievement of this goal will create
              opportunities for device fabrication on lightweight, flexible polymer
              substrates.  In order to develop PECVD as a reliable manufacturing technology
              we plan to employ in-situ metrology coupled with nonlinear feedback control.
              Gas composition and film properties will be monitored in real time using
              optical emission spectroscopy and laser reflectometry, respectively.  Control
              designs will be developed through nonlinear system identification and
              semi-global empirical modeling.  A critical element of model development will
              rely on ex-situ evaluation of material properties.  This interdisciplinary
              project involves two departments and is coordinated through the Colorado School
              of Mines' Center for Solar and Electronic Materials.  This research is in close
              collaboration with industry.
	

