Title       : PEET: Monographic research in higher fungi (Agaricales and Aphyllophorales)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9978011

Award Number: 9978011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $547375             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald H. Petersen repete@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen W. Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9978011
Ronald H. Petersen and Karen W. Hughes
In a continuation of their
              highly productive prior grant under the Partnerships for Enhancing Expertise in
              Taxonomy (PEET), focusing on basidiomycete fungi, the researchers will
              emphasize genera and other groups needing attention in the broad context of
              morphological, molecular, and mating system studies. The number of taxa in each
              project is limited so that each group can be examined using a variety of
              techniques. These methods include morphological study; updating of nomenclature
              and typification of species names; mating compatibility tests; molecular
              fingerprinting (using various DNA methods); and phylogeny reconstruction using
              DNA sequence data. Specific projects likely will include: A. Systematic studies
              in Polyporus  ss. str. (trainee Dirk Krueger, with Dr. Leif Ryvarden as PEET
              partner); B. Collybioid fungi of Costa Rica (trainee Juan Luis Mata, with Dr.
              Roy Halling as partner); C. systematic studies in Melanotus (trainee A. David
              Sime; already in progress with Dr. Scott Redhead as partner); D. phylogenetic
              studies in Clavicorona (trainee Edgar Lickey); E. systematic studies in New
              World Lentinus  (unidentified trainee, with advice from Dr. D.N. Pegler); F.
              systematic studies in Baeospora and Strobilurus (unidentified trainee, with
              Redhead as partner); G. descriptive material in Ramaria subgenera Laeticolora
              and Lentoramaria (PI). The PEET partners represent domestic and foreign
              institutions, and all are experts in morphological taxonomy of their respective
              groups.
Large portions of research will be computer-aided, and abstracts of
              projects and publications will be made available as part of current web pages
              maintained at the University of Tennessee. Fungus herbarium and culture
              databases (TENN-Fu; CULTENN) will be mounted as interactive sites for search by
              outside workers. A new database of type collections in the Tennessee Fungal
              Herbarium will be added, along with an extensive collection of photographs
              representing specimens of clavarioid fungi in the herbarium. Student "experts
              in training" will complete monographic research projects as part of their
              graduate degree requirements, with input from PEET partners. Partners will be
              visiting members of their graduate committees and when possible will attend the
              defense of dissertation. All trainees will receive instruction with taxonomic
              tools (i.e. nomenclature, molecular techniques, biogeography), data-handling
              (i.e. DELTA, phenetic analyses, PAUP, GCG, etc.), herbarium management
              (including databasing), and field logistics and techniques.  Incoming students
              without molecular skills will complete a 1-semester lab rotation in the Co-PI's
              lab for training.  Students will also complete coursework in nomenclature,
              molecular systematics and biogeography as a core requirement for their studies.
               Remaining skills are taught on an individual basis by the PIs and PEET
              partners.


