Title       : Development of Coupled Thermal, Mechanical, and Material Transport Models of the
               Friction Stir Welding Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9978611

Award Number: 9978611
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1999   
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339595             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony P. Reynolds reynolds@engr.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jamil A. Khan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaomin Deng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Optimization of and broadening of applications for the friction stir welding
              (FSW) process will be greatly accelerated by the development of flexible and
              accurate process models which can be used to predict the effects of varying FSW
              process parameters on porosity, mechanical properties of the weld, and,
              ultimately, final weld microstructure.  The intent of the research effort
              described herein is to take a large step down the path toward development of
              such models.  A hierarchical approach is proposed in which first, a fluid
              mechanics based model describing the thermal history of material in the weld
              and the material transport in the weld is used to enhance the understanding of
              the physics of friction stir welding.  Next, using the knowledge and experience
              obtained from development of the CFD model, a solid mechanics model will be
              developed.  Both models will be developed in combination with a comprehensive,
              experimental characterization of the friction stir welding process.  At every
              step of the model development, the experimental program will verify assumptions
              and results and conversely, modeling results will suggest critical experiments
              to be performed.  Initial modeling attempts will be as simple as is consonant
              with accurately capturing the physical phenomena. As understanding of the
              process increases, so will the complexity, the fidelity, and utility of the
              models which follow.  The ultimate goal is to create a solid mechanics based
              model which provides a complete description of the thermal, stress/strain, time
              history of all the material in a friction stir weld.  Experimental tasks to be
              undertaken include: (1) Temperature measurement during the friction stir
              welding process.   A digital IR camera will measure surface temperatures while
              embedded thermocouples measure subsurface temperatures. (2) Measurement of
              energy input to the weld by the friction stir-welding machine (via conversion
              of electrical energy to mechanical).  (3) Determination of material transport
              in the weld by mapping the movement of marker materials via destructive post
              weld examination.  (4)	Post-weld microstructural evaluation.  (5) Mechanical
              testing of weldments and fractographic examination.  Each of these experimental
              tasks will either help to establish proper boundary conditions for the proposed
              models or will aid in verification of the models or both.  Details of the
              experimental program may be amended as needed to fully support the model
              development.  Critical tasks for the modeling efforts include:  (1)
              Determination of an appropriate model geometry that captures the essence of the
              physical process without unduly complicating the analysis.  (2) Deriving
              appropriate thermal and mechanical boundary conditions from experimental data
              that are compatible with the chosen model geometry.  (3) Selection of an
              appropriate material constitutive law for characterizing the behavior of the
              material in the weld zone.  (4) Incorporating the constitutive law into
              computational fluid/therma/solid analysis packages chosen for the model.

If
              all of the pieces outlined above come together, the result will be a predictive
              model which can be used to guide friction stir welding process parameter
              optimization and give guidance in the development of process modifications
              which can broaden the application of FSW.




