Title       : CRUI: Teeth as Chemical Records of Chronological Changes in Diet and Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a9978793

Award Number: 9978793
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $827197             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan H. Goodman agoodman@hampshire.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Reid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Debra L. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dulasiri D. Amarasiriwardena  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampshire College
	      West Street
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/549-4600

NSF Program : 1091      COLLAB RSCH AT UNDERGRAD INSTI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1091,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              CRUI:  Teeth as Chemical Records of Chronological Changes in Diet and
              Environment




Abstract


	The theme of this collaborative study is a 
              fostering of better understanding of
variations in trace element
              concentrations in human teeth and the processes that govern their incorporation
              into enamel and dentine. A central goal is to test the degree to which
              elemental concentrations in enamel and dentine reflect diet, nutrition and
              environmental exposure.
	This research is made possible by recent developments
              in analytical chemistry. Specifically, the development of laser
              ablation-inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy ( LA-ICP-MS ) makes
              possible an interdisciplinary collaboration that brings together complementary
              expertise and a research collection of over 400 teeth from persons residing in
              communities in Mexico and Egypt. The teeth are key resources because dietary
              intakes and other key factors were thoroughly documented during their
              calcification.
	The distribution of a suite of elements in enamel and dentine
              ( including iron,zinc,
lead, and strontium ) will be studied to determine
              elemental variation within these two relatively stable populations and between
              simultaneously developing dental tissues. The major thrust of this project is
              to determine the impact of three factors - diet, environment, and physiology -
              on tissue concentrations of the aformentioned elements. This study can provide
              a better understanding of tooth chemistry which could be applied to a wide
              range of concerns that may be biological, anthropological or environmental in
              nature. 


