Title       : Investigations of Novel Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1999   
File        : a9978477

Award Number: 9978477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1999  
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy M. Swager tswager@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project entitled Investigations of Novel Liquid Crystals focuses on the
              investigation of novel liquid crystal structure types and design principles
              based upon complementary shapes and frustration.  Two major new directions of
              research will be pursued.  Bent-rod mesogens will be studied as a result of
              their potential to display ferroelectric and biaxial phases.  Preliminary
              results suggest that achiral tetracatenar bent-rod liquid crystals may display
              biaxial nematic and ferroelectric (banana type) phases.  Based on these results
               systematic studies of a large number of derivatives will be undertaken.  Other
              systematic mesogen designs will focus on producing liquid crystal phases with
              greater thermodynamic stability and frustration.  The former will be important
              for applications and the latter will be explored as a route to re-entrance
              behavior.  In cases of re-entrant nematics, the high antiferroelectric
              correlations are proposed as a potential means to generate a biaxial nematic
              phase.  Another initiative will focus on chiral columnar phases.  This effort
              builds on key results demonstrating that fluxional octahedral metallomesogenic
              liquid crystals can spontaneously resolve into helical columnar phases with net
              chirality in the mesogenic cores.  This effect is highly dependent on the
              symmetry of the mesophase and is favored in columnar hexagonal phases.  It is
              also proposed that mixtures of materials with opposite chirality may assemble
              into  well-defined hexagonal columnar superlattices.  Polymerization of the
              major component of these superlattices is proposed as a route to novel porous
              chiral materials.
%%%
The liquid crystals developed will have electro-optical
              properties.  Such materials are of growing importance in information processing
              and transmission technologies (optical computation and fiber optics).  The
              design of helical columnar liquid crystals that can be transformed into porous
              materials has the potential for the formation of new generation of
              enantioselective and separation materials.  Such processes will impact a broad
              range of societal needs including the production of synthetic intermediates for
              the formation of drugs, polymers, artificial flavors, and other materials.


