Title       : LExEn: Genetic and Physiological Analysis of the Determinants of Halophillism in
               Halomonas Elongata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1999 
File        : a9978253

Award Number: 9978253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laszlo N. Csonka   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1075,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              It is generally accepted that life on Earth originated in sea water. Although
              primordial cells arose in an environment in which Na + is the most abundant
              cation, organisms have evolved to maintain the cytoplasmic concentration of Na
              + much lower than the external Na + concentration. The potential energy
              generated by unequal distribution of Na + across the cytoplasmic membrane is
              used to drive diverse processes, such as nutrient uptake, cell motility, and
              the electrical activity of neurons. NaCl at high concentrations is toxic to
              most organisms, and therefore, high salinity is one example of an extreme
              environment.  There are a limited number of organisms which require high
              concentrations of NaCl that would be inhibitory to most other organisms.
              Species which are dependent on high concentrations of NaCl are called
              halophiles.  Although it is generally believed that halophiles require elevated
              concentrations of Na + to drive nutrient uptake, this has not been proven
              conclusively. One of the most halophilic eubacteria is Halomonas elongata,
              which requires at least 0.5 M NaCl. The research project is testing the
              hypotheses that H. elongata requires high concentrations of Na + because some
              of its energy-dependent reactions, such as transport of nutrients or the
              synthesis of ATP, are driven by a Na + gradient. This organism is uniquely
              suitable for the analysis of the determinants of halophilism because it can
              grow in a simple defined salts medium and, as a member of the g-division of the
              Proteobacteria (which includes E. coli), it is amenable to genetic analysis. 
              This research has the following specific aims: 1) Determine the Na+ requirement
              of the transport system for glycine betaine in Halomonas elongata.  This
              transporter is chosen for analysis because it has already been expressed in
              functional form in E. coli, making it possible to test whether its activity has
              similar requirements for Na + in the non-halophilic background of E. coli as in
              the halophilic background of H. elongata.  2)  Determine whether the transport
              systems for glucose and amino acids have high Na + requirement in H. elongata.
              3)  Clone the gene for the glucose transporter of H. elongata and carry out
              comparative studies of the Na + requirement of the product of this gene in H.
              elongata and in E. coli.   These studies have the practical benefit that they
              will contribute to the development of H. elongata and other halophiles for the
              use of detoxification of environmental  pollutants in highly saline areas.

