Title       : FSML: Improvement in the Ranomafana National Park Research Station in Madagascar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1999 
File        : a9978270

Award Number: 9978270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107878             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia C. Wright Patricia.Wright@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Annual use of the Ranomafana National Park Research Station (RNPRS) in
              Madagascar has grown from 58 to 213 international scientists in the past five
              years.  However, the facilities are too small for these usage levels, provide
              inadequate laboratory facilities for modern scientific research techniques, and
              have no direct communication with the international community.  This project
              will improve the ability of the research station to meet the present and future
              needs of scientists who study this Madagascar rain forest.  The project will
              upgrade the existing facilities.  It will provide a dining and lecture hall, a
              gatehouse, a generator shed, a bridge to research areas, as well as various
              basic equipment.  This proposed upgrade is the result of a 2-year planning
              process.

Ranomafana National Park Research Station is located in Ranomafana
              National Park (RNP), which covers 43,500 ha. of rain forest in southeast
              Madagascar.  The station is operated by the Institute for the Conservation of
              Tropical Environments (ICTE), affiliated with the State University of New York
              at Stoney Brook.  Over 125 faculty-level researchers and over twice that number
              of students, most from US universities, have conducted research at RNP since
              the station was built in 1989.  The RNPrS is the most important center for rain
              forest research and training in Madagascar and the only research station with
              more than one permanent building.

Madagascar is one of the world's top ten
              biodiversity hot spots, containing a disproportionately high number of the
              world's plant and animal species for its area (Myers 1986, Mittermeier 1988). 
              Most of Madagascar's species are endemic because the island has been separated
              from the mainland for well over a hundred million years and species have
              evolved in isolation (Krause, Hartman, and Wells 1997).  The rain forest
              habitat of Madagascar is severely threatened by human activities (logging,
              slash and burn agriculture, hunting) resulting in the disappearance of 79% of
              the original rain forest habitat.  High species diversity, long  isolation,
              high endemicity, and severe threat make Madagascar rain forests a focus of
              intense scientific and conservation interest.  For these same reasons, the rain
              forest at RNP serves as an excellent comparison to some of the better-studied
              rain forest sited in the Neotropics, Africa, and Asia.                         
                                                                                             
                                              

