Title       : RUI: Quantum Micromagnetism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a9978882

Award Number: 9978882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 15,  1999   
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene M. Chudnovsky chudnov@lehman.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY H H Lehman College
	      250 Bedford Park Blvd West
	      Bronx, NY  10468    718/960-8107

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9978882
Chudnovsky
This is an RUI award to support theoretical research on
              micromagnetism in quantum and disordered systems.  In particular, two projects
              will be undertaken:

(1) Macroscopic quantum tunneling of magnetization in
              solids.  This research will follow up on the PI's suggestion that there are two
              kinds of crossover on temperature from quantum to thermal decay of a metastable
              magnetic state.  This work has induced significant recent activity on computing
              crossover diagrams for spin Hamiltonians of different symmetry.  Experimental
              evidence of the first-order crossover has been found in Mn-12.  The vicinity of
              the crossover from tunneling to thermal activation will be worked out, with
              account of the tunneling prefactor and dissipation, by mapping the spin problem
              onto a particle problem and including the interaction with the environment via
              the Caldeira-Leggett method.  The PI will also attempt to develop an equivalent
              of the Caldeira-Leggett approach for the Landau-Lifshitz equation for the
              magnetic moment.  The study of two kinds of crossover between quantum and
              thermal behavior will be extended to problems of quantum depinning of domain
              walls and quantum nucleation of magnetic domains.

(2) Research will also
              continue on spin tunneling in high-spin molecular clusters, Mn-12 and Fe-8, and
              on the possibility of resonant spin tunneling and its experimental detection in
              single-domain  magnetic particles.  For the molecular clusters, the emphasis
              will be on the theory of thermally assisted resonant and non-resonant
              tunneling, quantum avalanches, the possibility of quantum coherence and
              Berry-phase oscillations.  Such oscillations have been recently reported by
              Wernsdorfer and Sessoli in Fe-8.  The effect of dissipation on these
              oscillations will be studied.  The continuous and discrete-level models will be
              developed to explain quantitatively the quantum-classical crossover diagrams in
              Mn-12 and Fe-8.  The PI will also study the possibility of the laser effect on
              spin levels, triggered by the external magnetic field.  For single domain
              particles the question is whether one can detect quantization of spin levels in
              a many-particle system with a certain size distribution.  The field dependence
              of the relaxation and of the blocking temperature will be computed, with
              account of level quantization, for ferro-and antiferromagnetic
              particles.
%%%
 This is an RUI award to support theoretical research on
              micromagnetism in quantum and disordered systems.  In particular, two projects
              will be undertaken: (1) research will be done on macroscopic quantum tunneling
              of magnetization in solids, and (2) research will be done on spin tunneling in
              high-spin molecular clusters and on the possibility of resonant spin tunneling
              in single-domain magnetic particles.  Generally, this work investigates the
              physics of systems in which quantum effects manifest themselves at the
              macroscopic length scales.
***


