Title       : Continental and Analytical Aspects of Logical Empiricism: Historical and
               Contemporary Perspectives Conference, Italy, November 2-5, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9978815

Award Number: 9978815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8100               (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Lennox jglennox@vms.cis.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 99-78815 - James G. Lennox (University of Pittsburgh) -- "Continental and
              Analytical Aspects of Logical Empiricism:   Historical and Contemporary
              Perspectives"


"Continental and Analytical Aspects of Logical Empiricism:
              Historical and Contemporary Perspectives," an international conference being
              held in Florence, Italy November 2-5, 1999, will focus on the historical
              influences on the philosophical movement that included the Vienna Circle,
              Logical Positivism and Logical Empiricism. The conference will be organized by
              Alessandro Pagnini, Director of the Florentine Center of the History and
              Philosophy of Science (Centro Fiorentino di Storia e Filosofia della Scienza)
              and Paolo Parrini, Professor of Philosophy at the University of Florence. They
              are inviting historians of philosophy of science who have done research on this
              subject in the Archives for Scientific Philosophy of the Center for Philosophy
              of Science, housed at the University of Pittsburgh's Hillman Library.
              Understandably, the Center for Philosophy of Science was invited to collaborate
              in this effort.

In addition to the central organizational roles played by
              the Centro Fiorentino and the Pittsburgh Center, there will be participation
              from the Institute Vienna Circle, Vienna, Austria, and the Zentrum Philosophic
              und Wissenschaftstheorie, Konstanz, Germany.

Philosophy of science from the
              early 1920s to the mid-1950s was dominated by philosophers from Austria and
              Germany, a number of who were members of the Vienna Circle. The approach to
              philosophy of science that these philosophers originated came to be known as
              logical empiricism. We are now four decades away from this period of dominance,
              and the rise of this movement has become a central subject of historical
              investigation. Among the surprising results that careful historical research
              has turned up is the extent of the fundamental differences and disagreements
              that characterized the philosophers involved, and the wide variety of
              philosophical influences on the various members of this group. Indeed,
              philosophers that are currently thought of as central to diametrically opposed
              philosophical schools -- Continental Philosophy with its traditions of
              Neo-Kantianism, Phenomenology, Existentialism, Structuralism and Deconstruction
              and Analytic Philosophy with its emphasis on linguistic and conceptual analysis
              and mathematical logic -- are found both influencing, and being influenced by,
              Logical Empiricism.  It is these historical connections and interactions that
              the participants in this conference are to explore.


