Title       : Microfracture and Repeated Plastic Deformation in Unsaturated Soils as
               Influenced by Surficial Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9978672

Award Number: 9978672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252028             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Lytton r-lytton@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth R. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***
9978672
Lytton
This project is to determine how empirical strength and
              plastic deformation
properties of unsaturated soils are related to more
              fundamental physical,
chemical, and thermodynamic properties of the soil
              particles, water, and salts
dissolved in the water.   The more fundamental
              properties referred to are the
Helmholtz surface energies, wetting and
              dewetting angles, solute
concentrations, particle size gradations of the soil
              particles, and the
volumetric concentrations of soil, water, and air.  These
              are expected to
underlie the fracture and healing properties of the
              unsaturated soil and
explain the logarithmic work hardening, yield, and
              plastic potential
characteristics of the soil under repeated loading.  To the
              knowledge of the
research team, there has been little done in the past to make
              use of the
connection, which has been recently established in polymers,
              between the
viscoelastic characteristics of a soil, the Helmholtz surface
              energies, and the
rate of change of dissipated "pseudo-strain" energy in the
              fracture of that
soil.  In addition, it has recently been discovered that
              under repeated
loading, the rate of change of dissipated pseudo-strain energy
              explains the
plastic work hardening of a composite material like an
              unsaturated soil.  It is
the purpose of this proposed project to explore these
              connections in
fine-grained unsaturated soil to see if the same connections
              can be made.  It
is also proposed here to determine the effect of the osmotic
              water potential on
the fracture and plasticity properties of a soil.  The
              osmotic potential is
related to the concentration of organic or inorganic
              salts dissolved in the
pore water.  A major effect of the concentration of
              solute in pore water is to
alter the wetting or dewetting angle.  It is known
              that some salts will
increase and other salts will decrease the wetting angle
              and thus will have a
distinctive effect upon the strength of the soil.

What
              makes the measurement of these properties possible is the recent
acquisition
              at Texas A&M of a German-built Universal sorption apparatus and the
recent
              construction of a triaxial unsaturated soil stress path cell with
unusually
              broad capabilities.  The first equipment makes it possible to measure
all of
              the components of the Helmholtz surface energies: the Lifshitzvan der
Waals
              apolar components and the Lewis acid and base polar components.  The
second
              item of equipment makes it possible to make carefully controlled tests
on
              unsaturated soils while measuring all components of mechanical stress
              and
strain and all components of the water potential over larger ranges than
              have
been achieved with similar equipment in the past.  The final unique
              capability
that fits these two test apparati together is the ability recently
              developed at
Texas A&M to analyze the test data to determine the dissipated
              pseudo-strain
energy with each load cycle.
***
