Title       : The National FMRI Data Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a9978116

Award Number: 9978116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4682260            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Gazzaniga gazzaniga@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Javed A. Aslam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel N. Rockmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1388,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a multidisciplinary project to create a National Functional Magnetic
              Resonance Imaging (fMRI) Data Center, the ultimate goal of which is to help
              speed the progress in understanding cognitive processes and the neural
              substrates that underlie them.

Brain imaging is a non-invasive technique
              that has the potential to distinguish between competing explanations of
              processes, to locate the neural activity associated with a particular behavior,
              and to identify some of the causes of human disorders such as dyslexia and
              ADHD. One particularly promising form of brain imaging is fMRI. However, two
              significant impediments prevent fMRI's full potential from being realized: the
              high cost of doing fMRI and the lack of a common data standard.

The
              objective of the National fMRI Data Center at Dartmouth College is to create an
              environment that will unleash fMRI's full potential. The Center will achieve
              this ambitious goal by (a) providing access to a common data set that everyone
              can use to develop and evaluate methods, confirm hypotheses, and perform
              meta-analyses, and (b) increasing the number of cognitive neuroscientists that
              can examine, consider, analyze and assess the brain imaging data that has
              already been collected and published.

The Center will be built by a
              multidisciplinary team, with expertise in many fields, including Cognitive
              Neuroscience, Psychology, Mathematics, Computer Science and Medical Physics.
              The team will create a Web-accessible fMRI database that has data mining
              capabilities and the means to deliver the requested data to the user (via Web,
              CD or digital tape), and will coordinate and provide educational resources for
              all members of the academic and professional communities.

Initially, the
              Center will receive all data from those researchers whose articles involving
              imaging are published in Science, Neuron, Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
              and Journal of Neuroscience. The Center will process the data (e.g., mapping
              all anatomical and functional images on to a common data space such as the
              Talairach-Tournoux atlas) and index it. Having data mining capabilities will
              give researchers an unprecedented opportunity to expand knowledge of the brain.
              Searches over multiple studies will be possible.

In addition to providing
              public access to fMRI data, the Center will play an important educational role.
              Spanning the entire academic spectrum, from neuroimaging courses on the
              undergraduate and graduate level to a workshop offering professional training
              to promising young scholars, the Center will help train new generations of
              neuroimaging scientists.


