Title       : Minority Graduate Education: Fast-Track to the Professoriate (FTP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a9978897

Award Number: 9978897
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Roosevelt Y. Johnson                    
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Parker whparker@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph J. Cicerone  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1515      MINORITY GRADUATE EDUC ACTIVIT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Southern California program Fast Track to the Professoriate (FTP) is
              designed to produce a paradigm shift in the way minority science and
              engineering graduate students are recruited, trained and incentivized for
              careers in the professoriate. The FTP program intends to create a model for
              minority support that rewards student success while maximally leveraging the
              investment of Federal, State, University and private funds, Active recruiting
              partnerships with CAMP, McNair, and California State University are hallmarks
              of this program. FTP has been designed to identify, recruit, and support a
              cadre of students who have a demonstrated commitment to academic careers. The
              program provides amplification mechanisms for training, orientation and support
              during periods at which graduate students often lose focus. A key component of
              FTP will be the Competitive Edge program, beginning the summer before incoming
              students' first fall quarter of enrollment. Competitive Edge emphasizes not
              only the acquisition of resource information, critical for success in an
              academic career, but also serves to promote the formation of community and a
              mutual support cohort in which students can help one another during their
              graduate careers and beyond. Acquisition pedagogical skills is facilitated
              early in the students' graduate careers. Pre-professoriate graduate students
              who successfully complete early academic milestones are rewarded with
              attractive, flexible funding packages that give them the freedom to enter
              research and postdoctoral positions of their own choosing. These flexible
              funding packages contain two key reward mechanisms: (1) the Research
              Assistantship Fellowship (RAF), which allows a pre-funded student to
              independently select research projects of interest, and (2) the Portable
              Pedagogical Post-doc (PPP), which is awarded following the Ph.D. and provides
              the student a full year of funding at a teaching or research university. These
              same mechanisms serve a dual role as incentives for researchers and
              institutions to welcome successful FTP students to their programs. The
              five-year project will carefully document successes and failures and widely
              disseminate strategies that can serve as a model for creating similar programs
              elsewhere.

