Title       : Feedback and Dynamics of Evolving Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a9978902

Award Number: 9978902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sidney Redner redner@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9978902
Redner
This theoretical grant supports investigations of the
              non-equilibrium processes of depth filtration, coarsening in spatially
              modulated magnetic and alloy systems, and the cooling of inelastic gases.  The
              primary goal of the research is to develop a comprehensive quantitative 
              understanding of these processes.  This will be accomplished by introducing
              simplifying models which both capture the essence of these processes and
              provide a convenient calculational approach to connect microscopic parameters
              with macroscopic observables.  A related goal will be to elucidate the role of
              strong feedback between the time evolution and the material properties of these
              systems.  

In depth filtration, a fluid carrying suspended solid particles
              is cleaned as it traverses a porous medium by the deposition of the suspended
              particles in the pore space.  This modification of the pore space geometry
              leads to gradual degradation and clogging at the filter.  This research will
              build on earlier work which suggested that this clogging is a self-generated
              power-law gradient percolation phenomenon, and will investigate: (a) the time
              evolution of the overall clogging process; (b) the slow constriction  of a
              medium by fine particle filtration; and (c) the behavior of the permeability
              near the clogging threshold.

In another project the coarsening of magnetic
              systems with competing ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic interactions will be
              studied.  The existence of competing interactions leads to very different
              low-energy excitations compared to a purely ferromagnetic system, and this has
              profound consequences on dynamical behavior.  Preliminary work on the
              one-dimensional Ising chain with competing interactions revealed rich
              coarsening behavior which can be viewed as the kinetics of a complex, but
              easily visualized, set of multispecies annihilation reactions.  A geometrical
              approach in this spirit will be developed to treat the dynamical behavior of
              higher-dimensional systems with the goal of uncovering new types to coarsening
              kinetics.

Finally, the cooling and spatial organization of monodisperse and
              polydisperse inelastic gases will be investigated.  For a monodisperse gas, the
              average energy decays in time as one over time-squared in an intermediate time
              regime, after which large-scale spatial clumping sets in: this leads to a still
              slower decay of the energy.  The hypothesis that this inelastic gas is in the
              same universality class as the completely inelastic, agglomerating gas will be
              tested by the development of bounds which are based on the relation between
              these two systems.  The role of strong mass dispersity on the cooling rate will
              also be investigated, where the violent rebound of the lightest particles in
              the collision events with heavy particles is anticipated to give unusual
              dynamical behavior.
%%%
This theoretical grant supports investigations of the
              non-equilibrium processes of depth filtration, coarsening in spatially
              modulated magnetic and alloy systems, and the cooling of inelastic gases.  The
              primary goal of the research is to develop a comprehensive quantitative 
              understanding of these processes.  This will be accomplished by introducing
              simplifying models which both capture the essence of these processes and
              provide a convenient calculational approach to connect microscopic parameters
              with macroscopic observables.  A related goal will be to elucidate the role of
              strong feedback between the time evolution and the material properties of these
              systems.  The research addresses fundamental issues which may have application
              to a number of non-equilibrium processes. 
***

