Title       : Investigating Multi-Modality Tutoring: Toward Computer-Based Written English
               Support for Deaf Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a9978021

Award Number: 9978021
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $447224             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen F. McCoy mccoy@cis.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Pennington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 6846      UNIVERSAL ACCESS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project continues and expands upon the PIs' prior work on a writing tutor
              designed to aid deaf students in acquiring written English, in which natural
              language processing techniques are combined with an understanding of how the
              structure of sign language (both its visual elements and its semantics) may
              affect written English to help identify English writing errors and to improve
              corrective feedback.  In the current proposal, the PIs plan to investigate the
              integration of an animated signing agent into the tutoring system framework
              laid out in their earlier research.   To this end, they will examine and
              develop tutoring strategies that incorporate the use of a visual signed
              modality.   Although they are not proposing to develop the animated sign agent
              itself (that being the work of others), they are interested in determining how
              the addition of such an agent might affect the tutoring capabilities of the
              system.   Important issues involve capturing the structure of tutoring
              dialogues, as well as making principled choices between the textual and signed
              modalities within a dialogue.   Strategies for delivering a mixed-modal
              tutorial dialogue will also be considered, e.g. for situations where some of
              the tutoring will be signed but may need to refer to either static text on the
              screen or to textually delivered tutorial material.   In addition, the PIs
              propose an ongoing series of exploratory and evaluation studies to determine
              which modalities should be incorporated and how they should be presented. 
              Through this process, the PIs expect to discover which individual aspects of
              the project need improvement before they are integrated into the overall
              system.   The immediate impact will be in the area of natural language
              generation and, in particular, multi-modal generation.   Understanding of how
              to integrate information from various modalities in a tutoring context will be
              enhanced.  In the long term, it is hoped that development of the PIs' writing
              tutor will positively impact the literacy skills of people who are
              deaf.




