Title       : PEET: Crustacean Systematics: Monographic Research in the Leptostraca,
               Conchostraca, and Brachyura
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a9978193

Award Number: 9978193
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $749463             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel W. Martin jmartin@nhm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David K. Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L A Cty Museum Nat Hist F
	      900 Exposition Boulevard
	      Los Angeles, CA  900074057    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9978193 
Martin and Jacobs

Although third in number of species (behind
              insects and molluscs), crustaceans
are the most morphologically diverse group
              of animals on earth.  The Natural
History Museum of Los Angeles County (LACM)
              contains the country's second
largest collection of crustaceans and is a
              logical staging area for broad-based training in crustacean monography and
              systematics.  Area universities such as UCLA offer exceptional opportunities
              for the integration of museum-based monographic and taxonomic research with
              modern systematic and molecular laboratory training and coursework.  This
              project supports student training and monographic and systematic research in
              three broad areas of crustacean diversity where current world expertise is
              lacking:  (1) the order Leptostraca; (2) the branchiopod order Conchostraca
              (Spinicaudata); and (3) the infraorder Decapoda (superfamily Xanthoidea).  The
              Leptostraca contains small (6-15 mm) marine detritivores and scavengers of
              tremendous ecological importance and phylogenetic significance.  The
              Conchostraca (clam shrimp) are members of the class Branchiopoda, an ancient
              and presumed primitive lineage extending back to the middle Cambrian; all are
              restricted to freshwater ephemeral pond habitats and are thus species of
              special conservation concern.  Among the decapod crustaceans, few groups are as
              troublesome as the former family Xanthidae, an enormous assemblage of
              brachyuran (true) crabs that contains some 130 genera and well over 2,000
              species.  Our work will be restricted initially to the "Carpiliid" line, most
              members of which are small to large crabs found on or near tropical reefs.  We
              will train three doctoral students over a 5-year period as graduate students of
              UCLA, working jointly with LACM curatorial staff.  Morphological systematic and
              monographic research overseen by Martin at LACM will be complemented by
              molecular genetic studies guided by Jacobs at UCLA.  Trainees will become well
              versed in database management and web site
development via formal coursework
              at UCLA and through the construction of their own monograph web pages; each
              student will oversee the creation of a
relational database that will be posted
              on the web. 


