Title       : PEET: Phylogenetic Systematics of Dorid Nudibranchs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a9978155

Award Number: 9978155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $741595             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrence M. Gosliner tgosliner@calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Angel Valdes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      Golden Gate Park
	      San Francisco, CA  941184599    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Gosliner 9978155
Sea slugs (nudibranchs) are colorful marine snails most
              commonly found in tropical oceans.  Most of these animals have lost the
              protective shell found in other types of snails.  In order to defend
              themselves, sea slugs produce toxic chemicals that have applications in
              medicine.  Although sea slugs are important for understanding a variety of
              biological processes, classification and geographical ranges of most species
              remain poorly known.  In fact, many of the 6,000 species of sea slugs are still
              undescribed. 
Most of the major groups of sea slugs were described during the
              latter part of the 19th century and the majority have not been re-examined
              since.  Very little information is available on the evolution of sea slugs and
              most of the subgroups of these snails are based on subjective comparisons
              rather than on scientific evolutionary studies.   The focus of this PEET
              project will be to describe new species and determine natural groups of sea
              slugs based on evolutionary studies of anatomy.  Since many groups of sea slugs
              have evolved similar external appearances, molecular studies will be used to
              supplement the anatomical information.  The information contained in the
              molecules of DNA may provide evidence for the evolution of patterns within the
              sea slugs.   
Our strategy of bringing together data from a variety of sources
              provides a model for the study of animals with high degrees of superficial
              similarities between what are actually different lineages.  In this way, the
              project will provide not only advances in problems specific to sea slug
              biology, but to the study of the myriad pathways by which clearly unrelated
              organisms can arrive at similar solutions to adaptive circumstances. 
This
              study will involve training of postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate
              students to conduct modern systematic research on sea slugs.  Students will be
              involved in all aspects of the proposed research, including field collections,
              species descriptions, morphological and molecular data collection and
              evolutionary analysis.   The products from the project will include several
              publications and a Web page that will provide color images showing variation in
              living animals, gene sequences, detailed maps, bibliographies, and other data. 
               

