Title       : Passive Vibration Suppression Using Nonlinear Electro-Mechanical Coupling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2000 
File        : a9978825

Award Number: 9978825
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235647             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tony J. Anderson tandersn@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan D. Blotter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              PI's:  	Tony Anderson		University of Idaho
	Michael Anderson		University of
              Idaho

	Jonathan Blotter		Idaho State University

Proposal
              Number:	9978825

Proposal Title:	Passive Vibration Suppression using
              Nonlinear Electro-
Mechanical Coupling


Abstract

The objective of this
              work is to develop a new class of passive vibration and acoustic suppression
              systems. Fundamentally, our approach is to couple the energy of two mechanical
              systems using reversible piezoelectric transducers connected with a passive
              electric circuit. The coupling is designed in such a way to use existing energy
              to cancel or reduce unwanted vibrations and/or sound radiation.  Two
              arrangements are being considered: transfer of vibration energy from one
              structure to another, and transfer of vibration energy from one mode to another
              on a single structure.  The first case employs a linear connecting circuit,
              while the latter employs a nonlinear connecting circuit to couple the energy.
              Mathematical models and solutions for four test cases are being developed and
              compared with experimental results.  Holographic full-field measurements are
              used to determine the effectiveness of the method.  This general approach is an
              improvement over a passive shunt technique in that the typically heavy
              electrical shunt is replaced with an existing mechanical component. It also has
              the advantage over active control techniques in that an external power source
              is not required.  The primary impact of this work is that a new approach to the
              control of vibrations and acoustic radiation from structures will be developed.
              Reductions in system weight, cost, and complexity compared to current methods
              can be realized.


