Title       : Fundamental Studies on Field Activated Sintering for Advanced Materials
               Manufacture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2001       
File        : a9978699

Award Number: 9978699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293457             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanna R. Groza jrgroza@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Antonios Zavaliangos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to address the scientific and engineering
              fundamentals for a new generation of field activated sintering technique (FAST)
              for multi-scale powders and exploit the benefits of electrical field to develop
              a commercially viable manufacturing process.  Previous research has
              demonstrated that the FAST process is able to consolidate difficult to sinter
              powders and achieve full densification with minimal grain growth on a limited
              scale.  This method can reduce the number of processing steps, eliminate the
              need for sintering aids, and can be scaled up. However, there is a lack of
              basic understanding, and thus the control of field effects.  Therefore, the
              proposed work is aimed at advancing the scientific base of the new technology
              by modeling field effects in sintering coupled with a thorough understanding of
              processing-microstructure-property relationship.  The specific research will
              comprise: (1) development of constitutive models to quantify the conduction of
              electrical current through sintering compacts; (2) extension of classical
              models for neck growth and density evolution to account for the coupling
              between electrical field, temperature and pressure; (3) optimization of field
              processing conditions to provide particular manufacturing benefits - reduced
              number of manufacturing steps, flexibility in powder handling, scale up
              capability, and (4) application of FAST for processing advanced materials (e.
              g., nanocrystalline).  

It is anticipated that the results of this research
              program will not only enhance the scientific foundation of field assisted
              sintering phenomena but also provide quantitative insights into the relevant
              mechanisms for developing cost effective, large scale FAST manufacturing
              processes for the U.S. industry.  Educational opportunities for graduate and
              undergraduate students include coursework and lab modules for netshape
              processing of sintered product with this new technology at the two institutions
              involved. 


