Title       : Fire Hazard Estimation Using Point Process Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9978318

Award Number: 9978318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186701             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederic R. Schoenberg frederic@stat.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1386,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The intent of the proposed research is to investigate the estimation of fire
              hazard in the Los Angeles basin using techniques from multivariate point
              process analysis.  The strategy is to model fire occurrence as a marked
              spatial-temporal point process whose conditional rate depends not only on the
              record of previous fires but on other covariates as well.  These covariates
              include local environmental factors such as temperature, altitude, humidity,
              precipitation, vegetation, and soil characteristics.  An important component of
              this research is the assessment of various different models via likelihood
              analysis (based on past data) and the evaluation of forecasting performance
              (employing data obtained after the models are fitted).  Using the model, which
              performs best, the investigators intend to construct quantitative predictions
              of local fire hazard accompanied by estimates of uncertainties in these
              predictions.  They also plan to integrate these predicted hazards to form
              detailed, regularly-updated, maps of the risk of fire within the Los Angeles
              basin and to make these hazard maps and corresponding numerical local hazard
              estimates available to fellow scientists and to the public by posting the
              results, with appropriate explanations, on the World Wide Web.  The
              investigators' methodology is of interest to scientists studying various other
              fields besides fire hazard in Los Angeles. Of statistical interest is the use
              of modern techniques in point process theory such as the application of
              multi-dimensional branching, Markovian, and multi-stage point process models
              and the use of the multi-dimensional random time change theorem in assessing
              such models.  In addition, the methods used in the analysis is applicable not
              only in obtaining estimates of fire hazard in other regions, but also in
              quantifying similar types of dangerous occurrences, including floods, storms,
              hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, volcanoes, tsunamis, disease epidemics,
              etc.

Some of the most devastating natural disasters in the history of the
              United
States have been caused by wildfires.  However, the threat of fire has
              been examined with insufficient scientific scrutiny and mathematical precision
              to date. The immediate practical goal of this proposed research is to obtain
              and disseminate detailed local estimates of the hazard from wildfires in Los
              Angeles County. The basic strategy is to exploit local trends in fire
              occurrence and relationships between the incidence of fires and other
              environmental factors.  The resulting fire hazard estimates, as well as the
              relationships discovered between fire incidence and other variables, are needed
              in urban and in the study of how best to mitigate the potentially disastrous
              effects of fires in and near urban areas.  Of particular concern is the effect
              of public policies such as aggressive fire suppression and prescribed burning
              on fire occurrence rate and overall fire hazard.

This project is jointly
              supported by the Statistics Program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences
              and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS.

