Title       : LExEn: Response of Photosynthetic Microbes of the Salt Plains National Wildlife
               Refuge to Dynamic Extreme Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a9978203

Award Number: 9978203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247866             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Henley henley@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1075,9104,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Henley

Extreme environments are often defined as those chronically exhibiting
              an arbitrarily high or low level of a particular physical or chemical factor.
              Extremophilic organisms tolerant of such conditions have yielded valuable
              insight into the functioning of organisms inhabiting more typical conditions,
              including crop plants.  Few studies have addressed multiple variable stress
              factors likely to be even more adverse to life.  Evaporitic salt flats, such as
              at the Salt Plains National Wildlife Refuge in Oklahoma, represent such a
              dynamically stressful habitat: direct sunlight, up to 20-25 degree C daily
              (60-70 degree C annual) surface temperature range, episodically varying
              interstitial salinities from near 0 to over 300 g/L, and potentially wide daily
              fluctuation in pH, redox potential, and dissolved gases and nutrients.  Thus,
              the mostly undescribed photosynthetic and heterotrophic microbes in this
              habitat may provide unique insights into the evolution of life beyond the
              limits of tolerance for virtually all species on Earth.  The hypothesis upon
              which this project is based is that interacting stress factors determine
              survival, productivity and competitive outcomes in hypersaline photoautotrophs,
              and that halophiles are tolerant of wide fluctuations in physicochemical
              conditions in addition to steady-state extreme conditions.  Objectives of this
              project are: (1) isolation and physiological characterization of salt flat
              cyanobacteria and algae; (2) temporal and spatial characterization of
              chlorophyll biomass in relation to the dynamic salt flat physical/chemical
              conditions (aided by a nearby Oklahoma Mesonet climatological station); (3) in
              situ manipulations of physical and chemical conditions to identify limiting and
              stress factors; and (4) laboratory culture experiments to test specific a
              priori hypotheses and others inspired by objectives 1-3. Comparisons will be
              made of the physiological responses to temperature, nutrients, visible and
              ultraviolet irradiance, and constant versus variable salinity.  Laboratory
              analytical techniques, will include (1) fluorescence versus temperature curves
              to rapidly screen for minimum lethal high temperature; (2) spectroscopic and/or
              antibody probing for the presence of flavodoxin, a protein specifically induced
              under iron stress; (3) photosynthesis and respiration rate measurements (O2
              exchange); and (4) chlorophyll fluorescence analysis to diagnose acute and
              chronic stress effects on the photosynthetic apparatus.  The results of this
              study will be of interest to evolutionary biologists and plant and microbial
              physiologists.

