Title       : Arctic and Alpine Treelines in Alaska: Controls on Performance of White Spruce -
               Implications for Global Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a9978143

Award Number: 9978143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $792474             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bjartmar Sveinbjornsson afbs@uaa.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger W. Ruess  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Anchorage
	      3211 Providence Drive
	      Anchorage, AK  995084614    907/786-1410

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9978143
Sveinbjornsson

The location of arctic and alpine treelines, while
              partly historic, is primarily a reflection of conditions where environmental
              variables limit tree function, particularly material accumulation. In order to
              be able to predict treeline movements in response to global changes in climate
              and atmospheric CO2 concentrations (and the consequences of these movements in
              turn on global change), it is essential to understand the most important
              environmental factors and plant processes presently limiting tree species
              performance at treelines.
		
White spruce is the dominant treeline tree
              species in Alaska. Its growth, reproductive effort, and reproductive success is
              lowered at the treeline as compared to the adjacent forest. In spite of
              dramatically reduced soil nitrogen mineralization at the treeline as compared
              to the forest below in the Chugach Mountains, south-central Alaska, nitrogen
              fertilizer application stimulates white spruce growth only to a small degree,
              and the effect is no greater at the treeline than inside the forest. Thus it
              appears that white spruce is not differentially nitrogen limited at the
              treeline. Rather the treeline white spruce appears to be carbon limited based
              on current findings of less growth, greater premature needle mortality, reduced
              mycorrhizal infection levels, and increased root respiration. The PIs for this
              project predict increased root mortality at the treeline, which they suggest
              exacerbate the carbon drain by premature needle loss. They expect that
              increased wind, low soil temperatures, and greater soil movement cause the
              increase in observed and predicted tissue turnover.  In this project they will
              evaluate an alternate material limitation reducing growth, i.e. nutrient
              limitation, possibly a phosphorus deficiency at the Chugach treeline and
              phosphorus and/or a nitrogen deficiency elsewhere. Supporting a nutrient
              limitation are trends of increased needle retention along an elevational
              gradient within the forest, high nutrient concentrations in treeline needles
              and fine roots, and an elevationally increasing soil nitrogen limitation in
              treeline mountain birch in Scandinavia. 

This project will test the nutrient
              limitation hypothesis by studying geographically distinct arctic and alpine
              white spruce treelines and adjacent forest sites in Alaska. The proposed sites
              have been selected to represent climatic and geographical extremes. At each
              location the project will study three treeline sites and three forest sites at
              which vegetation composition, past tree growth, and accumulated needle loss
              will be measured. At each site seedlings will be planted with and without
              shelter and with and without fertilizer application. Tree and seedling growth,
              needle and fine root turnover, tree seed production, seed germination, and
              seedling establishment will be monitored at each site.  Climatic and soil
              nutrient conditions will also be monitored at each site. The microclimatic
              study will indicate the relative importance of different climatic parameters on
              tissue loss and tissue growth. 
	
In order to evaluate whether rising
              atmospheric CO2 concentration will allow the white spruce seedlings to
              compensate for tissue loss they suffer at the treeline, they will be exposed to
              different atmospheric CO2 levels (ambient and 1.5 times) and different degree
              of needle and/or root pruning (intact and 30% removal).  By including two
              nutrient levels (treeline soil with or without fertilizer) to the treatments,
              it will be possible to further refine the carbon versus nutrient assessment. 
              Shoot and root growth will be measured as well as photosynthesis and water
              relations. Soils and tissues of trees and seedlings from the field and the
              growth chamber will be sampled for chemical analysis (roots for mycorrhizal
              infection levels also) in order to test the hypothetical growth reduction
              mechanisms. 

Together, the field and laboratory studies will allow an
              evaluation of the importance of premature tissue turnover and material
              limitation on tree performance. That knowledge, in conjunction with an
              understanding of the relationship between tree species growth and reproductive
              effort and success, will lay the foundation for a realistic prediction of
              treeline response to global change.

