Title       : Vortex Structure, Inverse Cascades, and Turbulent Bursts in Rotating, Stratified
               Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9978842

Award Number: 9978842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: C. F. Chen                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip S. Marcus phil@barkley.me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Three-dimensional simulations of fluid turbulence in rotating and stratified
              flows will be carried out using spectral methods using new efficient basis
              functions.  The calculations will increase our understanding and ability to
              model and calculate turbulence in anisotropy and inhomogeneous settings that
              are commonly found in geophysical and astrophysical flows and is many
              engineering applications.  Rotation and stratification tend to make the fluid
              act nearly 2-dimensional (2D) at some locations, at some length scales, and/or
              for some intervals of time.  It is commonly thought that when and where the
              flows behave as if they were fully 3D, energy is transferred ("forward
              cascades") from large to small scales, and small-scale turbulence acts
              primarily as a passive "sponge" dissipating energy.  When and where the flows
              behave as if it were 2D, energy inverse cascades from small to large scales. 
              In these cases the small-scale turbulence is much more complex and difficult to
              model, and its effects on the large-scales are more profound.  A mathematical
              model of the inverse cascade will be developed and scaling laws for the
              strengths and widths of planetary jet streams will be developed and compared
              against simulations, experiments and observations.  Asymptotics, and
              mathematical models for the turbulence will permit construction of new
              sub-grid-scale turbulence models to be used in large-eddy numerical
              simulations.  The simulations will be compared to laboratory experiments and
              observations and observations of geophysical and astrophysical flows.

The
              specific features of this investigation place it outside of the norm for most
              studies of turbulent/vortical motions.  It is expected that the distinct
              results to be obtained will not only serve to illuminate the "2-D" turbulence
              problem but also the more general turbulent flow processes by noting the
              similarities/differences between the two.

