Title       : Modeling Pronunciation Variation for Universal Access to Speech Understanding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a9978025

Award Number: 9978025
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $503956             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel S. Jurafsky jurafsky@colorado..edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Bell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne H. Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 6846      UNIVERSAL ACCESS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In order for speech-based interfaces to be universally accessible - that is,
              available to all citizens in all situations - they must deal successfully with
              massive variability in pronunciation, as studies have shown that this is by far
              the single largest source of error in machine speech recognition.  This project
              will address that issue by building dynamic pronunciation models which use
              context to predict the most likely pronunciations of a word in a particular
              utterance.  The PIs' previous work has established that speakers are more
              likely to delete certain sounds (e.g., the final "t" in "about") in a variety
              of situations:  if the next word starts with certain consonants;   if they are
              speaking quickly;  if the word is unsurprising (has a high trigram
              probability);  if they are young and male;   if the word is not followed by a
              pause or a word-repetition;  or if they are speakers of certain dialects.  They
              have further shown how confidence metrics can be used to identify inaccurate
              dictionary pronunciations based on actual pronunciations in speech. This
              project will extend and combine both of these lines of research, by using
              phonetic-confidence models to identify words with incorrect pronunciations that
              contribute to word-error, and then building statistical (decision-tree) models
              of pronunciation variation for these words.  The PIs' model provides a general
              engine which they will apply to several specific classes of pronunciation
              variation,  including dialect and speaker type, embedded in the Sphinx-II
              speech recognizer.  The application of computational models to the study of
              pronunciation variation is an important new research area in linguistics and
              cognitive modeling, with implications for and potential benefits to many areas
              of science and pedagogy, including universal access.
