Title       : Mining Databases Across Multiple Tables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2001   
File        : a9978510

Award Number: 9978510
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nandit R. Soparkar soparkar@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               Current mining technology typically applies to centrally stored data (i.e., in
              one single repository, with central administration, etc.). However, real-life
              datasets are often decentralized (i.e., consisting of several tables, perhaps
              obtained via normalization or partitioning / allocation, stored in several
              repositories). The goal of this research project is to develop mining
              techniques for decentralized data. The key idea is that in contrast to
              traditional techniques (where the data is joined first to form a single table),
              the decentralized approach concurrently generates partial results on the
              separate tables, and thereafter, the foreign key relationships are utilized to
              merge these results. A similar approach is examined for classification in
              decentralized datasets, and the techniques chosen are those most amenable to
              decentralization, or as indicated by the applications. Efficiency analyses is
              used to assess the techniques, and empirically validated on available synthetic
              and real datasets. The effect of different database design choices on the
              decentralized mining algorithms is also considered. Systematic techniques are
              developed to use, together with the catalog statistics, the details of database
              design (e.g., normalization, and partitioning/allocation information) to
              optimize for efficient execution. Furthermore, the techniques can be applied to
              mining distributed relational metadata for public information repositories;
              e.g., it can help simple web searching as well as allow programming advanced
              applications, such as information mining, for the datasets referenced -
              initially for those by students, and thereafter, users of any Web-based
              datasets. This research also benefits educational activities and provides
              research experience for graduate students involved in project.
