Title       : UCSD Minority Access to Math Engineering and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a9978892

Award Number: 9978892
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Roosevelt Y. Johnson                    
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Attiyeh rattiyeh@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Conn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin Goldberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1515      MINORITY GRADUATE EDUC ACTIVIT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1515,9152,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The University of California, San Diego (UCSD) proposes to address the
              underrepresentation of minorities among science, engineering and mathematics
              doctorates through its Minority Access to Science, Engineering and Math (MASEM)
              program. By partnering with six Southern California institutions that have
              significant enrollments of minority students, UCSD plans to create a pipeline
              of minority students from the undergraduate level through graduate programs at
              UCSD to placement in academic positions at the postdoctoral level. This program
              will provide services for students at the undergraduate level, the graduate
              level and beyond.

The partner institutions are members of the California
              State University system, including Dominguez Hills (Los Angeles), Fullerton,
              Long Beach, Los Angeles, Northridge and San Diego. Five of these schools are
              members of the Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities (HACU). With
              strong enrollments of Hispanic and African American students, these
              institutions will collaborate with UCSD to provide their undergraduates with
              opportunities for graduate school exploration and preparation.

'Me UCSD
              MASEM program will have one major goal: to increase the number of
              underrepresented students who complete doctoral degrees at UCSD in science,
              engineering and disciplines and enter the professoriate in these fields.

To
              achieve this goal, the program has established five major objectives:
1 ) To
              develop and implement successful outreach and recruitment activities to
              increase applications from
underrepresented students to UCSD doctoral programs
              in the SEM disciplines by 10% each year and enrollment of new students by 15%
              each year;
	a) Baseline underrepresented minority SEM applications for Fall
              1998: 118
	b) Baseline new underrepresented minority SEM students for Fall
              1998: 12
2) To provide graduate preparation opportunities for undergraduates
              at partner institutions;
3) To create supportive environments for UCSD
              underrepresented graduate students in SEM fields at both the
     
              institutional and departmental levels to maintain current degree completion
              rate of 78% and to enhance
      students' satisfaction with their graduate
              experience;
4) To develop student interest in, and successful preparation for,
              academic careers;
5) To facilitate the development of cross-institutional
              faculty connections between UCSD and CSU partner
      campuses.

An
              advisory board of graduate students and faculty will guide and evaluate the
              program. This board will meet biannually to monitor the progress of the program
              and to make recommendations for adjustments as needed.

At the undergraduate
              level students will obtain information and training in research skills, written
              and oral communication, PhD career opportunities, and applying to and choosing
              a graduate program. In addition, students will benefit from faculty mentoring
              at partner institutions and UCSD, and will participate in a summer research
              internship.

Graduate students in the program will enjoy peer and faculty
              mentoring, a complete financial support package, preferred housing, and
              networking opportunities.  A summer transition program including laboratory
              rotations and community building events will assist the students with
              integration into the San Diego and campus communities.  On-going professional
              workshops and seminars offered by a number of campus service offices will be
              available specifically for graduate students in the MASEM program.

Faculty
              involved with the program will have an opportunity to interact with colleagues
              and students at the participating institutions in a number of ways. Faculty at
              CSU and UCSD will co-mentor undergraduate students who conduct research in the
              summer research internship program. They will collaboratively teach an
              introduction to research course; and they will participate in faculty exchanges
              at both UCSD and the CSU partner campuses. These interactions will strengthen
              cross-institutional relationships to create and sustain a fruitful pipeline of
              students.

All levels of service will be supported by electronic means.
              Workshop and seminar materials will be available online for students.
              Discussion groups and individual research web pages will be encouraged and
              supported technically. These electronic resources will provide easy access to
              important information from remote locations.

