Title       : Probabilistic Modeling and Computational Methods in Environmental Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1999  
File        : a9978321

Award Number: 9978321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Levine   (Principal Investigator current)
              Naoki Saito  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David F. Layton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9978321

This project considers the development and application of statistical
              methods in two scientific areas:  1) image analysis of geophysical data and 2)
              modeling of stated preference ratings data.  The recurring theme is to study
              the probabilistic model underlying each data structure.  The probabilistic
              modeling of images is based on the statistical structure of features in order
              to compress, reconstruct/synthesize, and statistically analyze the images.  The
              models are derived from the statistical dependencies between the basis
              coordinates of transformed images.  In particular, the proposed task is to
              develop a computationally efficient independent component analysis in an
              attempt to transform images into a set of independent components modeled by
              Gaussian processes.  If the dependent coordinate systems follow an ICA
              decomposition, the statistical dependency between basis coordinates will be
              modeled through Markovian processes.  As part of the study, validation measures
              are constructed to evaluate the image syntheses and reconstructions based on
              the probability models.  These measures are developed from the Edgeworth
              expansion of the Kullback-Leibler information statistic and differential
              entropy.  The study of stated preference ratings data considers probabilistic
              models for inferring the probabilistic structure of censored rankings
              underlying nominal ratings data.  The hierarchical Bayesian models developed
              will require computationally efficient Markov chain Monte Carlo routines
              incorporating Gibbs sampling and Metropolis-Hastings steps for fitting the
              models and drawing appropriate inferences.

The project aims at developing
              computationally efficient statistical tools for probabilistic modeling of
              geophysical images and stated preference ratings data.  The image analysis
              methodologies are motivated by two specific geophysical problems to which the
              methods developed will be applied:  1) meteorological forecast verification and
              2) geological classification.  The goal for forecast verification is to develop
              automated, computationally efficient routines to compare meteorological
              forecasts and observations at different geographical scales towards an
              evaluation of climatological forecast models.  The goal for geological
              classification is to develop automated, computationally efficient routines to
              classify sediments and rock formations based on computer learning and
              extraction of features from training data sets.  Each of these
              two
Applications will incorporate methods developed by the project in feature
              extraction, compression, reconstruction/synthesis, and statistical modeling. 
              Methodologies for handling stated preference ratings data are motivated by two
              problems in program valuation to which the methods developed will be applied:
              1) rating programs for mitigating impacts of global climate change and 2)
              rating programs for improving fish populations in Washington State.  In each
              application, the goal is the valuation of environmental programs through the
              consideration of many underlying attributes such as cost, species impact, and
              environmental impact, to name a few.  The statistical analysis will incorporate
              the probabilistic and econometric models and inferential tools developed by the
              project to study program ratings and preferences elicited from participants in
              the two studies.  This project is jointly supported by the Statistics Program
              in the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities (OMA) in MPS.



