Title       : GOALI: Fatigue damage behavior of chemically treated bioprosthetic heart valve
               tissues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a9978858

Award Number: 9978858
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197342             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Sacks msacks@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Scott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Slaughter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,5345,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9978858
Sacks
Approximately 60,000 mechanical prosthetic or bioprosthetic
              heart valves (BHV) are annually implanted in the United States. BHV have
              excellent hemodynamics and generally do not require the anti-coagulation
              therapy necessary for mechanical heart valves.  Our long-term goal is the
              development of rigorous engineering principals for improving replacement heart
              valves. However, BHV continue to fail 8-10 years after implantation from
              calcification and mechanical damage. Many studies have demonstrated that
              maintaining tissue structural integrity is a prime factor in extending
              durability.  Nevertheless, while much research has focused on chemical
              treatment technologies to reduce mineralization, little work has been done on
              understanding the mechanisms underlying non-calcific mechanical damage.

The
              goal of this research will be to develop a better understanding of the
              mechanical fatigue damage behavior of bioprosthetic heart valve biomaterials. 
              We will utilize a rigorous experimental testing protocol to evaluate of the
              onset, mode, and progression of chemically treated BHV tissue damage under
              cyclic loading conditions.  Based on this data, we will develop a fatigue
              damage model to clarify and relate the relative impact of different structural
              changes, such as fiber debonding and fiber weakening, to changes in macro-level
              tissue mechanical properties. The fatigue damage model will ultimately serve as
              a guide for the development of key experiments for fatigue damage assessment of
              novel chemical treatment technologies.  This will aid in the rational
              development, as opposed to the current ad-hoc approach, of novel chemically
              modified collagenous biomaterials for more durable cardiac valve bioprostheses.
               

During each year, one graduate student will spend four months at Baxter
              engaging in direct industrial collaboration with Baxter scientists. The goal of
              this interaction to gain insight on how the results of this study can be
              applied to BHV biomaterial development. Specifically, this student will 1) gain
              insight as to what critical fatigue damage issues need to be addressed by the
              heart valve industry, 2) begin utilization of our results toward solving these
              issues, and 3) improve Baxter's general core competence in biomechanical
              testing of BHV soft tissues. Next, a Baxter research scientist will spend
              approximately one month during each project year to visit our labs to consult
              with our team.  This scientist will work closely to advise the
              theoretical/modeling work and provide guidance on how results can contribute
              most effectively to product improvements.  In addition, during these visits
              this scientist will give lectures to engineering students on challenges facing
              the biomedical device industry.

