Title       : Constructing Probability Models for Large Corpora of Well-Informed but
               Probabilistically Incoherent Judgments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a9978135

Award Number: 9978135
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $593953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Osherson osherson@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Moshe Y. Vardi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Hartley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine B. Ensor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1387,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This interdisciplinary team (Psychology, Computational and Applied Mathematics,
              Statistics, Economics, Computer Science) has a goal of overcoming the
              weaknesses in inference engines in expert systems, decision support systems or
              in knowledge discovery systems that often work in environments with uncertain
              characteristics. The current techniques rely on Baysian theory and do not
              perform well in situations in which conditional independence cannot be
              guaranteed, or the probabilities provided by experts may not be sound. Since
              inferences based on probability calculations offer the best guarantee of
              sensible assessments of chance, efficient schemes have been developed for
              computing probabilities over complex event spaces. Underlying all such
              algorithms is a "probability model," i.e., a representation of the chances of
              various combinations of events. In turn, probability models are constructed
              from an initial set of facts about uncertainty in the environment. These facts
              can sometimes be extracted from databases, using relative frequency as
              probability. Often, however, the needed probabilities must be obtained from an
              expert, who responds intuitively. Reliance upon experts raises the specter of
              incoherence, i.e., judgments that cannot be reconciled with any probability
              model at all. Indeed, maintaining coherence across a large set of judgments is
              both computationally and psychologically taxing, and seldom achieved.
              Incoherent judgment on the part of a single judge is compounded when it is
              desired to integrate the opinions of several judges. To exploit potentially
              incoherent and inconsistent judgments, special optimization algorithms are used
              to construct a compact probability model that best approximates all the
              judgments in play. The algorithms are tested by applying them to a body of
              expert opinion in some complex domain. Development of the algorithms will
              facilitate the automatic construction of artificial expert systems. Whenever a
              body of expert judgment can be assembled, the algorithms can be applied in view
              of creating a compact representation of the collective wisdom of the judges.
              The results of the theoretical research on the probability models will be
              applied to the analysis of air quality policy in Houston. A large probabilistic
              database will be established by culling measurements from air quality control
              stations around the city, expert judgements in environmental science and
              medicine, and the output of econometric and environmental models of the region.
              The project has the potential to have a significant intellectual impact in
              probability, applied learning, and datamining research communities and also
              provide a useful tool to environmental researchers and Houston
              decision-makers.

http://www.ruf.rice.edu>/~osherson



