Title       : Structure-Optimized Speech Recognition with Deterministic Annealing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2001      
File        : a9978001

Award Number: 9978001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380574             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Rose rose@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Research in statistical speech recognition will be conducted along two central
              lines.  One research direction is concerned with the development of approaches
              to determine the optimal structure and complexity of the recognizer given
              limited training data, where optimality is with respect to expected performance
              outside the training set. The underlying framework is a structural complexity
              parameter space where points correspond to types of recognition systems, and
              optimal trajectories represent judicious trading of increase in system
              complexity for improved performance on the training set.  A number of
              orthogonal means for performing such tradeoffs will be developed.  The optimal
              point (system) on the trajectory will be determined by development of
              appropriate cross-validation techniques that estimate performance outside the
              training set.  The complementary research direction involves the optimization
              technique used in the system design, which determines its ultimate performance.
               The deterministic annealing approach will be extended and developed as a
              powerful optimization tool for speech recognition and, in particular, for
              optimization operations within the above structural parameter space so as to
              directly minimize the expected rate of misclassification outside the training
              set.   The project is expected to result in powerful speech recognizer design
              techniques and thereby potentially extend the accessibility of computers to the
              public, and enhance the feasibility of numerous applications, ranging from
              voice-activated devices to automated telephony services.
