Title       : Quantitative Damage Assessment of Concrete by Diffuse Ultrasonic Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a9978707

Award Number: 9978707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208872             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Turner jaturner@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0512204   Nondestructive Measurement              
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
Damage to concrete structures is caused by overloading, fatigue
              damage,
thermal damage, or a combination of these and other factors. The
              repair of
damaged concrete structures costs federal, state, and local
              governments
billions of dollars annually. Quantitative assessment of damage
              using
nondestructive methods is essential for determining the
              structural
integrity of structures and for predicting the remaining usable
              life. The
proposed research will address these needs through the study of
              ultrasound
propagation in concrete at frequencies higher than those typically
              used for
concrete inspection. The combined experimental and theoretical study
              will
provide insight into the propagation, scattering, and dissipation
              of
ultrasound. The influence of overloading, fatigue damage, thermal
              damage,
and structural reinforcement on diffuse ultrasound propagation will
              also be
investigated. The proposed high frequency (> 100 kHz) approach will
              improve
the detection of smallscale damage by using wavelengths that are
              shorter
than those most widely used. The objectives of the proposed research
              during
the threeyear period are to:

(1) Develop a model describing the
              propagation, scattering, and dissipation
of ultrasound through both undamaged
              and damaged concrete,
(2) Corroborate the developed model experimentally,
              and
(3) Examine the effects of overload damage, mechanical fatigue damage,
              and
thermal cycling damage on diffuse ultrasound propagation.

Objectives
              (1) and (2) will be achieved using analysis techniques already
developed to
              describe wave propagation through heterogeneous media. Similar
diffuse-field
              techniques have been particularly successful for
characterizing
              polycrystalline microstructures and geophysical media.
Concrete inspection
              research has not yet benefited from these new
techniques. Objectives (2) and
              (3) will be achieved using both contact
transducer techniques and ultrasonic
              immersion tank methods which have been
developed for the study of diffuse
              ultrasound propagation.

The scientific merit of the proposed research lies
              in: (i) the statistical
wave propagation approach used, (ii) the highfrequency
              diffuse ultrasonic
methods employed, and (iii) the combination of theoretical
              and experimental
research which will provide experimental corroboration of the
              developed
theories. It is anticipated that the research will lead to new
              techniques
for assessing damage in concrete structures. The proposed research
              also
will have significant impact on the educational training of graduate
              and
undergraduate students in nondestructive evaluation techniques applied
              to
essential infrastructure materials. 
