Title       : Modeling, Identification and Validation of Uncertain Linear and Nonlinear
               Feedback Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9978562

Award Number: 9978562
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198142             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy Smith roy@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed work is to develop an integrated suite of tools
              and approached for the modeling of uncertain systems for feedback control
              design purposes.  Our modeling framework is based upon robust control theory,
              which is supported by several sophisticated control design methods.  These
              models are in effect set descriptions, where the sets are generated by unknown
              but bounded dynamic perturbations within the model.  The models allow the
              designer to capture the variety of uncertain behaviors that a physical system
              will generate.  Although this a powerful and flexible modeling framework, the
              tools available for modeling physical systems are limited.
Our prior work on
              model validation for robust control models from the basis for the work proposed
              here.  This approach has led to tools which allow the designer to
              experimentally quantify the difference between a physical system and the
              closest member of a robust control model set.  
The current work looks at
              extending these approaches to alternative experimentally scenarios.  One
              direction will be the use of correlated swept-sine experiments; a procedure
              frequently used in industrial practice.  A second direction will be the
              consideration of noise and perturbations from different signal classes; for
              example stochastic noise and gain bounded perturbations.  Such models agree
              more closely with typical physical systems, and will make these methods
              applicable to a wider range of industrial processes.  
We also propose to
              develop a robust control modeling framework which will handle certain classes
              of nonlinear systems.  The project will consider two industrially motivated
              examples from these classes: rotating stall in jet engine compressors; and
              thermo-acoustic interactions in combustors. The methods will be applied to
              simplified simulation versions of these problems.  The combination of nonlinear
              behaviors and dynamic perturbations opens up an area of nonlinear robustness
              analysis which will also be addressed. 
Three experiments are available and
              will be used in support of this research:  (1) A metalorganic chemical vapor
              deposition (MOCVD) reactor, used for epitaxial crystal growth of blue LEDs and
              blue laser diodes. (2) A magnetically levitated bearing system, developed as a
              prototype for an artificial heart pump (left ventricular assist device). (3) A
              rapid thermal processing system, which models the dynamics of typical
              processing steps in the semiconductor and film processing industries. 
Each of
              these experiments exhibits common practical difficulties which are not yet well
              handled by theoretical modeling and identification methods, making them ideal
              testbeds for the work proposed.


