Title       : LExEN: Life in Acid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2000      
File        : a9978205

Award Number: 9978205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jillian F. Banfield   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian G. Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles W. Kaspar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1075,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9978205
Banfield

Unusual microorganisms thrive in hot, extremely acidic
              solutions associated with weathered pyrite-rich rocks. Prior work has
              documented a dynamic archaeal, bacterial, and eukaryotic community in 30 - 50
              degrees C, pH 0 - 1.0 solutions.  Reduced iron and sulfur from pyrite are key
              microbial energy sources. Microbes that catalyze the oxidation of Fe2+
              dramatically impact sulfuric acid generation rates. Populations of lithotrophs
              and heterotrophs vary with temperature, solution composition, pH, and location.
              This project will explore how these populations change with changes in
              geochemical conditions and determine the specific acid and ionic strength
              resistance and energy generation mechanisms that allow microbial communities to
              exist in extremely acidic environments.  In general, little is known about the
              identity and survival strategies of the majority of members of extremely
              acidiphilic microbial communities.  A novel mesothermophilic iron-oxidizing
              archaea (Ferromonas acidiphilium) has been isolated from a field site at Iron
              Mountain, CA. Additional species will be isolated from samples known to contain
              the little studied Acidomicrobium ferrooxidans and previously recognized and
              new relatives of  "Leptospirillum ferrooxidans".  Isolates will be used in
              biochemical investigations. Many organisms from this site have not been
              identified; these will be the focus of further sequencing and isolation
              efforts. It is anticipated that cells will employ passive pH resistance
              mechanisms (involving cell membrane constituents, possibly in conjunction with
              S-layers).  Thus, the dependence of cell wall composition (i.e., fatty acids
              and/or proteins) on growth conditions will be explored, and thereby possible 
              resistance mechanisms  evaluated.  Prior work indicates that cytochromes other
              than rusticyanin (used by Thiobacillus ferrooxidans) are important for iron
              oxidation by bacterial and archaeal species. Relevant cytochromes will be
              identified in order to evaluate the diversity of energy generation mechanisms
              that underpin the ecosystem.
