Title       : LEXEN: Strategies of Long-Term Procaryote Survival in Ancient Permafrost Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1999 
File        : a9978271

Award Number: 9978271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419418             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Tiedje tiedjej@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Lubman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John J. McGrath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sophia Kathariou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to investigate the nature of adaptations associated
              with soil microbes living in polar soils.  Viable microorganisms have been
              recovered from Siberian Arctic permafrost soil samples having survived for 2 -
              3 million years, at low temperatures, and low water activity.  Recent results
              suggest that some of these microbes that have survived are capable of
              biological activity and growth at subzero temperatures and may be active within
              the frozen permafrost in some instances.  Microbial survival would be expected
              to accommodate even more stringent requirements in Antarctic permafrost: 
              survival for longer periods-up to 10 million years, at lower temperatures, and
              low water activity.  Using archival samples, the investigators will determine
              whether the microbes in Arctic and Antarctic permafrost are metabolically
              active in situ.  It is hypothesized that unique organisms are selected under
              three stresses characteristic of the extreme environment of permafrost (severe
              cold, low water activity, and age) by molecular and physical adaptations. 
              Compatible solutes and gene/protein  expression induced by chilling and
              freezing will be measured for the purpose of elucidating and comparing the
              adaptive physiologies of microbes from Arctic and Antarctic permafrost. 
              Adaptations will be correlated with freeze tolerance, protection against damage
              during prolonged frozen storage and metabolic activity at the lower limits of
              temperature and water activity.  Differential scanning calorimetry will be
              applied as a means of determining whether intracellular microbial solutions
              remain unfrozen, crystallize, or vitrify under permafrost conditions.

