Title       : Reconstruction of Multi-Dimensional Convective Heat TransferCoefficient
               Distributions Using an Inverse BEM-Based Problem Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9978558

Award Number: 9978558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110584             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alain J. Kassab kassab@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jayanta S. Kapat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT


Proposal Number: CTS 9978558

Principal Investigator:  A. Kassab
              and J. Kapat

This award is to support a theoretical and experimental program
              to develop, implement, and verify a 3-D Boundary Element Method (BEM)-based
              inverse algorithm for accurate retrieval of 3-D heat transfer coefficient
              distributions using either transient or steady state surface temperature
              measurements as input. The design and analysis of thermal systems and
              components exposed to convective heat transfer relies on heat transfer
              coefficients (h) which are usually determined from experiments. Traditionally,
              precise surface temperature measurements have been used as input to a
              one-dimensional model for a semi-infinite medium subjected to an impulsive
              convective boundary condition to extract the values of h. The shortcomings of
              this approach have long been recognized in the heat transfer community: (1) in
              many practical applications the heat transfer is actually two- or
              three-dimensional, (2) impulsive boundary conditions are difficult to achieve
              in the laboratory, (3) transient experiments have been performed to evaluate h
              for steady state processes for which h is invariant, and thus this method is
              difficult to use in a time-dependent process where h varies as a function of
              time. The proposed method requires only a boundary discretization and includes
              a new regularization technique to provide robustness to input errors and
              minimizes the errors due to these three effects. 

A portion of the requested
              resources will be used to set up a benchmark experiment to validate the method
              proposed herein. In the experiment, a Thermochromic Liquid Crystal (TLC)
              thermography technique will be used to obtain the surface temperature
              distribution over a backward facing step model of various aspect ratios. Once
              validated the proposed method can potentially replace conventional transient
              methods that rely on the one-dimensional model.


This grant will impact
              undergraduate education at the University of Central Florida (UCF) by enlisting
              students in the capstone Senior Design course into experimental aspects of the
              work as well as graduate education by introducing inverse methods in graduate
              heat transfer courses, such as heat conduction and intermediate heat transfer.
              Additionally, successful completion of the work under this proposal will lead
              to establishment of proven experimental facilities in TLC thermography at the
              UCF Energy Systems Laboratory, further the development of the thermal systems
              infrastructure, and complement existing research efforts in turbomachinery heat
              transfer at UCF. 



