Title       : Maskless Solid Freeform Fabrication of Dense Metal Micro- and Meso-Scale
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a9978577

Award Number: 9978577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel T. Schwartz dts@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Ganter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Duane W. Storti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Motivated by a desire for flexible manufacturing of functional small-scale 3-D
              devices, a program of research aimed at creating an automated, freeform
              micro/meso-scale fabrication system is described. The system is founded on the
              use of state-of-the art electrochemical microfabrication techniques combined
              with solid modeling and layered fabrication technologies.  Each layer of the
              build is comprised of regions containing material to be retained and
              sacrificial material.  Selective electrodeposition of alloys of varying
              composition provides a basis for selecting between which region will be
              retained and which will be sacrificed upon a final etch step.  Thus, the
              proposed system shares some similarities to existing layered manufacturing
              systems, in that, it fills areas devoid of build material with sacrificial
              material so that no support structures are needed. This research project will
              address the scientific and engineering challenges inherent in realizing a
              microfabrication system that does not rely on physical mask sets, but offers
              flexible fabrication of fully dense micro-scale metal parts, production of
              parts with 3-D freeform surfaces, using metals with structural, magnetic, and
              inert functionality.  This can provide the direct fabrication of assemblies and
              compliant mechanism. 

The first generation system will by 100 um, but the
              technology is scalable.  The specific aims of the research include: (1) the
              design and microfabrication of a software reconfigurable deposition head, (2)
              process characterization and path planning that takes advantage of the unique
              properties of the head, (3) development of a suite of materials suitable for
              used with the new fabrication system, and (4) fabrication of new classes of
              meso/micro-devices. 

