Title       : Dynamics of Vortices and Interfaces in Condensed Matter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2001    
File        : a9978547

Award Number: 9978547
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 15,  1999   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan T. Dorsey dorsey@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9978547
Dorsey
This award supports research and education on vortices and
              interfaces in high temperature superconductors and quantum Hall effect systems.
               The PI seeks to elucidate how these defects move and fluctuate in response to
              external forces, such as transport currents and thermal gradients,  and how
              moving defects arise from and interact with microscopic degrees of freedom.
              There are two thrusts to the proposed work.  In the first, Ginzburg-Landau
              theory and its generalizations will be used to study the melting of the vortex
              lattice and the dynamics of a single vortex in a 'd-wave' superconductor.  Some
              aspects of psuedogap formation in the cuprate superconductors will be studied
              using a model in which quasiparticles interact with phase fluctuations (in the
              form of thermally activated vortex-antivortex pairs). The second thrust
              involves the study of interface dynamics in high temperature superconductors
              and quantum Hall systems.  Magnetic flux often enters a thin superconducting
              film in the form of magnetic dendrites, in which there is a sharp boundary
              between a vortex liquid phase and either the Meissner phase or vortex phase
              with opposing magnetization.  The PI plans to study the role of thermal effects
              in producing instabilities of the interface separating the two phases. 
              Motivated by the surprising resistivity anomaly in two-dimensional quantum Hall
              systems in higher Landau levels, the PI plans to develop an electron "smectic"
              model for the two-dimensional electron gas in moderate magnetic fields using
              the PI's contour dynamics formalism for shape fluctuations in two-dimensional
              electron liquids.   An aim of this approach is a qualitative understanding of
              the possible low-temperature phases of this model. 

This award supports
              research and education in fundamental problems in two areas of theoretical
              condensed matter physics: vortices in the high temperature superconductors and
              interfaces in quantum Hall liquids.  The former are important in understanding
              dissipation mechanisms in the superconducting state. The latter seeks to
              explore the possibility that a novel anisotropic many-electron state occurs in
              a two-dimensional gas of electrons in a high magnetic field. This spatially
              inhomogeneous quantum Hall state or 'striped phase' might spontaneously occur
              in an electron gas at an interface between two semiconducting materials like
              GaAs and GaAlAs with a large applied magnetic field.


