Title       : Digital Field Instrumentation for Archaeological Excavation and Mapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9978006

Award Number: 9978006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58576              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Aldenderfer aldenderfer@alishaw.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Mark Aldenderfer will
              develop a multiuse system which will allow archaeologists to electronically
              record a variety of data types in the field and then manipulate, analyze,
              store, share and publish them without reliance on traditional pen and paper
              technology. The essential parts of the system consist of a Leica TCR 1107 total
              station for mapping and survey, software for mapping integration, a Fujitsu
              2300 computer with penMap software, Nikon CoolPix 950 digital cameras, field
              station laptop computers as well as printers and related peripherals. Although
              many archaeologists currently employ information technology (IT) tools, basic
              field data collection which is essential to archaeological research, remains
              firmly in the pre-digital, paper based era. There is good reason for this -
              paper recordkeeping has withstood the test of time, is reliable, costs
              relatively little and is easy to use. It can also withstand the environmental
              extremes in which archaeologists often work. However the limitations are also
              increasingly clear and these involve difficulties in data integration,
              dissemination, publishing and archiving. IT tools have the potential to
              revolutionize these archaeological practices. Dr. Aldenderfer will construct a
              system which takes disparate types of data - field forms, photographs,
              archaeological sections and quantitative and qualitative information which
              results from artifact analysis - and combine them so that they can be used as
              an analytic whole. He will attempt to develop standards for data recording as
              well as an easily replicable system amenable to widespread use and will make
              the information available via the worldwide web. He currently conducts research
              in Peru and Tibet, and through application in two very different archaeological
              contexts it should be possible to develop a versatile system. 

This award
              will meet several goals. It will provide Dr. Aldenderfer with recording and
              analysis instrumentation which will facilitate his currently funded NSF
              supported research. It will also help him to develop a system of more general
              value and amenable to widespread archaeological use.

