Title       : Center for Spatially Integrated Social Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a9978058

Award Number: 9978058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4293501            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Goodchild good@ncgia.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Appelbaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1388,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over recent decades, major advances in three sets of technologies (geographic
              information systems, the Global Positioning System, and remote sensing) have
              provided dramatic new insights into patterns, processes, and changes on the
              Earth's surface.  Although many disciplines have adopted these technologies and
              use them successfully for a variety of inquiries, fewer social and behavioral
              scientists have begun to use them on a significant scale.  To accelerate the
              adoption and use of these technologies, a national center based at the
              University of California-Santa Barbara will focus on the methods, tools,
              techniques, software, data access, and other services needed to promote and
              facilitate a novel and integrating spatially enabled approach to the social and
              behavioral sciences.  The center will build on the efforts of the National
              Center for Geographic Information and Analysis, engaging in six core programs
              that are targeted across the full spectrum from inductive, exploratory science
              to theory-based, confirmatory science.  Center activities will include:  (1)
              Development of a collection of learning resources covering core concepts,
              examples, references to be made available via the World Wide Web.  (2) Conduct
              of intensive national workshops to introduce social and behavioral scientists
              to the methods and tools of spatially enabled social science.  (3) Sponsorship
              of best-practice examples of the use of spatial approaches in the social and
              behavioral sciences.  (4) Development of services to facilitate place-based
              searches for information resources on the World Wide Web and in digital
              libraries.  (5) Further development and dissemination of a powerful and
              easy-to-use suite of software tools for analysis in the presence of spatial
              effects, in collaboration with industrial partners.  (6) Initiation of an open
              virtual community to share software tools, modeled on the highly successful
              communities defined by Linux and GRASS.  Through these and other related
              activities, many individuals and groups working in the social and behavioral
              sciences will find their capabilities to use new technologies greatly enhanced.
               Among major research areas that will benefit as a result of these efforts are
              human-environmental interactions, urban studies, social and economic
              inequality, social and business networks, health and disease, criminal justice,
              and community-based grassroots organizations.


