Title       : Decision-Making in the Context of Commitments to Team Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a9978343

Award Number: 9978343
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Grosz grosz@eecs.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to provide the scientific basis for more complete theories of
              collaboration and to develop mechanisms for constructing collaboration-capable
              software agents.  It is an inter-institutional collaborative research project
              of Harvard University and the University of Maryland.  The research focuses on
              problems of constructing agents able to manage their plans and intentions in
              multi-agent contexts and to make decisions in the context of team
              activities.

The proposed research comprises three activities:  empirical
              investigations of different policies governing commitment to group activities
              and their influence on individual and group behavior and outcomes; development
              of a formal theory that may be used to address abstractly questions of
              intention reconciliation and to identify stable strategies and effective
              policies for it; and construction of more sophisticated collaboration-capable
              software agents.  Four strands of previous research support this effort:
              specification of a formal model of collaboration, construction of prototype
              collaboration-capable systems, specification of models of negotiation, and
              development of a simulation framework for empirically investigating
              decision-making in the context of group activities.

The project contributes
              to fundamental research in collaboration, to the development of
              collaboration-capable software agents and collaborative human-computer
              interface systems, and to the training of undergraduate and graduate
              students.


