Title       : The Effect of Particle Cementation on the Mechanical Properties of Granular
               Materials: A Fundamental Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a9978662

Award Number: 9978662
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229339             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan F. Rauch arauch@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon E. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CMS-9978662
The Effect of Particle Cementation on the Mechanical
              Properties of Granular
Materials:  A Fundamental Study
Rauch, Alan F. and Jon
              E. Olson
The University of Texas at Austin

The objective of the proposed
              study is to develop methodology for predicting
strength and failure of weakly
              cemented sand and gravel from small-strain
stiffness as measured with the
              velocity of stress waves. The project will be
especially concerned with weakly
              cemented sand and gravel, and phenomena such
as soil liquefaction in
              earthquakes and sand production in petroleum wells,
where correlation of wave
              velocities to strength would be useful. The objective
will be approached
              through the development of an improved, fundamental
understanding of how
              particle cementation can be determined from wave
velocities and static moduli,
              and how this characterization of cement can be
related to engineering behavior
              such as aggregate strength, liquefaction
potential, and sand production.  A
              concurrent numerical and experimental
investigation is planned. Experiments on
              cylindrical test specimens will be
conducted in a triaxial test apparatus,
              while the numerical work will involve
Discrete Element Method (DEM)
              simulations. Experimental data permit immediate
calibration and verification
              of analytic results, while numerical simulations
can be helpful in identifying
              underlying mechanisms responsible for observed
behavior and in designing
              useful laboratory tests. DEM simulations will be used
to compute bulk material
              strength and elastic wave velocities as a function of
particle size
              distributions, intergranular cement and material porosity. 
Behavior observed
              from these simulations will be used to devise appropriate
experimental tests
              and test conditions that are most likely to produce
meaningful data.  Samples
              for experimental testing will include naturally
occurring granular material of
              varying degrees of cementation and strength, as
well as artificially created
              samples.  

