Title       : Analysis of Momentum Exchange in Spacecraft Attitude Dynamics and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9978745

Award Number: 9978745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147957             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher D. Hall chall@aoe.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Analysis of Momentum Exchange in Spacecraft Attitude Dynamics and
              Control
Christopher D. Hall
Aerospace and Ocean Engineering
Virginia
              Polytechnic Institute and State University

Abstract
The principal goal of
              this research is to develop a complete understanding of the dynamics and
              control of momentum exchange in spacecraft. While these problems have received
              significant attention in the literature, many of the results have been
              developed for linearized equations of motion. Recent global analysis of
              nonlinear equations of motion has led to significant new results, and suggests
              new lines of research for previously intractable problems. 

The equations of
              motion describing these systems are expressed in noncanonical Hamiltonian form,
              with several perturbing torques considered. One objective is to characterize
              completely the relative equilibrium motions of spacecraft with internal energy
              dissipation, with special attention to those asymptotically stable equilibria
              corresponding to a stationary platform. This will be applied to the nonlinear
              control of rotational maneuvers, including optimal control maneuvers and
              sub-optimal stationary-platform maneuvers. Stationary-platform maneuvers are
              based on a simple feedback law, and have the useful property that the platform
              angular velocities remain small throughout any maneuver.

Global analysis of
              other problems, such as escape from resonance trap states, resonance capture
              avoidance, dual-spin turn, and flat spin recovery will complete the basic
              understanding of momentum exchange in gyrostats.  This will require extensions
              of standard tools in perturbation and bifurcation theory, and will yield
              results with definite applications to spacecraft design. Additional
              investigations will analyze the effects of various realistic perturbations,
              where improved understanding will lead to improved designs of attitude control
              systems.

A unique element of the research is the investigation of the
              historical development of momentum exchange in spacecraft. We will characterize
              the relationship between the academic developments as reported in research
              literature and the developments that have taken place in the satellite
              industry. This effort will identify the critical events in the development of
              this technology, including both elegant mathematical results and catastrophic
              attitude control system failures. 
 

