Title       : Changes in Problem Representation as a Mechanism of Knowledge Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1999 
File        : a9978429

Award Number: 9978429
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane Scott-Jones                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha W. Alibali   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the keys to understanding development is understanding how children's
              knowledge changes over time. Thus, an important challenge for developmental
              research is to specify the mechanisms of knowledge change. This research
              focuses on one potential mechanism of change in the development of mathematical
              knowledge: namely, changes in how children represent problems. I define problem
              representation as the creation of an internal, mental copy of particular
              features of a problem. I argue that representation is an important link between
              children's knowledge about mathematical concepts and their knowledge about
              strategies for solving mathematical problems. The proposed research tests this
              claim among children learning the concept of mathematical equivalence, which is
              the notion that the two sides of an equation represent the same quantity.
              Children's knowledge of this concept is tested using equations of the form
              3+4+5=_+5. The proposed studies address two main questions about changes in
              problem representation as a mechanism of knowledge change. First, how do
              changes in problem representation influence children's knowledge? The proposed
              studies test the hypothesis that changes in children's problem representations
              can lead to changes in their understanding of problem-solving strategies, and
              to changes in their knowledge of related concepts. Second, what makes
              representations change? The proposed studies explore three types of factors
              that may contribute to changes in representation: (a) gains in conceptual
              knowledge, (b) learning new problem-solving strategies, and (c) gaining
              experience within a problem domain. This research will shed light on the
              importance of representation in mathematical learning, and on factors that lead
              to and influence representation change. My overarching goal is to construct a
              well-specified theoretical model of how changes in problem representation
              function as a mechanism of cognitive change.

