Title       : GOALI: The Design of an Intelligent Control System for Appliances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1999  
File        : a9978757

Award Number: 9978757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160904             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosalyn S. Hobson rshobson@vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy S. Matt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Klenke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael T. Gaston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award provides
              funding for the development of a novel design for adaptable intelligent
              appliance controllers.  The controllers will be used in large white appliances
              which include refrigerators, washers, dryers, ovens, and dishwashers.  This
              project will address two objectives in the development of intelligent
              appliances for the household.  The first objective is the development of a
              generic smart control module, which can be used in a variety of appliances. 
              This module will be able to adapt to its environment through the use of
              intelligent systems including fuzzy logic and artificial neural networks.  The
              second objective is the creation of the development environment for the
              customization of the generic appliance controllers, which enables designing for
              reuse, reducing development time, and designing for an international
              marketplace.  The project tasks will include standardization of the hardware
              components and designs, the development of a generic embedded operating system
              and the development of re-usable embedded control objects and software for the
              smart module.  Once the standards are established and the base smart control
              module designed, the development environment will be designed.  The development
              environment will give the user the ability to design the logic, develop the
              host software, develop the network communications, and establish the data
              acquisition protocol.  The development environment will also allow for
              integration testing and developing security systems.

If successful, the
              results of this research will be a novel design environment for adaptable
              intelligent appliance controllers in which the user will be able to personalize
              the generic smart control module to perform according to his or her needs. This
              design environment will be the key to a product development system that will
              reduce the time-to-market, eliminate excess requirement cycles, lower system
              development cost, and improve overall product quality.
