Title       : PEET: A Unified Approach to Systematics of Basal Streptophytes (Charophycean
               Green Algae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2002     
File        : a9978117

Award Number: 9978117
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $747168             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Delwiche cd105@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. McCourt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9978117 Delwiche

The Charophyceae are a class of green algae that are thought
              to be very
closely related to land plants.  Because of this close relationship
              to land
plants, an understanding of the relationships and diversity of form
              within
the Charophyceae is important to the understanding of the origin and
              early
evolution of land plants.  Knowledge of these algae provides
              the
information needed to identify appropriate model systems for the study
              of
fundamental plant properties and guides the study of these algae and
              of
freshwater environments in general.  Despite the evolutionary importance
              of
charophycean algae, their classification within a single group has
              been
recognized only recently, and the group has never been examined in a
              single
taxonomic study.  This project is intended to provide a single,
              unified
taxonomic treatment of the Charophyceae, and to train students in
              taxonomic
methods and in the biological diversity of the group.  There are
              five
orders within the Charophyceae, and each has a distinctive set of
              taxonomic
problems.  The Coleochaetales are microscopic, but structurally
              complex
algae that have never received detailed taxonomic study, and have no
              known
fossil record. In this group a complete taxonomic treatment is
              required.
The Charales are large in size, are comparable in complexity to
              the
Coleochaetales, and have an extensive fossil record.  This group
              has
received detailed taxonomic treatment, but the classification needs to
              be
updated with information from modern phylogenetic methods. 
              The
Zygnematales are a large group of common and environmentally
              important
filamentous algae.  This group is in need of a uniform taxonomic
              treatment
among all of the genera in the order. Finally, the Klebsormidiales
              and
Chlorokybales are poorly understood filamentous or packet-forming
              algae
that are very difficult to identify in nature.  Modern methods will be
              used
to survey natural diversity within these groups and identify
              previously
unknown members of the group.  The project will provide training to
              one
visiting scholar, approximately five graduate students, and
              ten
undergraduates.  Information from the study will be made available via
              the
world wide web, by publication of scholarly articles and taxonomic
              guides,
and will be placed in archival storage.


