Title       : Dynamic Employer-Household Data and the Social Data Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  2002    
File        : a9978093

Award Number: 9978093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4084704            (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Abowd   (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia I. Lane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Haltiwanger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1388,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        The maturation of the information age has created new challenges.
              Governments, faced with rapidly changing economies and societies are forced to
              make far-reaching economic and social policy decisions. These decisions,
              however, are based on limited static, and expensive survey data. At the same
              time, large administrative data sets are available that are derived from data
              collected from households, business establishments and governmental entities.
              These data, which could describe the dynamic interactions of workers,
              businesses, government and society, are not fully used in the United States,
              not simply because the unique advantages of these data have not been clear, but
              also because key issues of conf dentiality and access have not been fully
              addressed. This outcome has come at substantial cost. Linked data, if used
              wisely, have a great deal of scientific importance and can enhance our basic
              social data infrastructure in a number of ways. They can also be used to reduce
              respondent burden, increase data quality, and enhance the information available
              to the federal, state and local agencies which rely on Census Bureau data for
              decision making. In addition, these data can provide a valuable tool to the
              research community.
          This research proposal will create three
              prototype data sets based upon the Census Bureau's demographic and economic
              products and using link information that permits the data sets to be
              longitudinal in both the household/individual and firm/establishment
              dimensions. The Principal Investigators, the Census Bureau, and other external
              researchers will use these data to examine the value of the claims made above.
              These data sets, while of immense use in their own right, will also advance
              knowledge in two additional ways. First, by creating the data and developing
              the access modality, the research team will explicitly address a series of
              confidentiality and access/availability issues, using internal Census Bureau
              expertise and that of external researchers at Comell University, the Urban
              Institute, the University of Maryland and NCSA. Second, the project will
              advance the knowledge of both linkage technology and the statistical properties
              of linked data so that researchers in all disciplines can use these techniques.
              The proposal delineates an extensive collaboration with the Census Bureau,
              which is indeed a major sponsor of the project, in addition to three European
              statistical agencies. The infrastructure project expects to involve additional
              government and private sector partners, particularly as the confidentiality
              issues are more fully addressed.
          An innovative set of access support
              tools that combine a complete simulated environment (at the Comell University
              support site) with the latest in web-based collaboration tools (from the NCSA
              at the University of Illinois) will be developed. These tools will be
              integrated with videoJcomputer teleconferencing access to the Census Bureau and
              Cornell sites. Under carefully specified access rules that encompass
              established confidentiality and disclosure review procedures, the Census Bureau
              will support external research access to the linked data, using the web-based
              support tools and the video teleconferencing facilities. This external research
              access will go beyond "state of the art" and its enhancement is another major
              activity covered in the proposal.
          The Cornell University component
              also includes the support of a restricted-access data site that will house
              confidential linked data from the national statistical agencies of other
              countries. Linked French data from INSEE have already been approved for this
              site. Statistics Sweden has expressed a willingness to complete an agreement
              that would allow linked Swedish data. The DIW in Germany will release a linked
              version of the GSOEP to the site, if it is funded. Efforts continue to
              negotiate restricted access agreements with other national agencies. The
              restricted access data site provides linked data analysis tools and a
              supercomputer facility for use with these data.
          The new knowledge
              that can be generated from these data is potentially far reaching. The
              prototype American data sets provide the capacity to address fundamental
              questions in social and economic behavior. The restricted-access data from
              other countries provides a laboratory in which to test the generality of
              results found for a particular country. All of the data advances in the
              proposal provide the opportunity to discover technological advances in
              confidentiality protection while enabling new partnerships to be formed across
              disciplines that focus on understanding social and economic systems,
              organizations and institutions.
          Additional information concerning
              this proposal is available at
              http://old-instructl.cit.cornell.edu:8000/nsf-infrastructure/


