Title       : Hydraulic Servo-Mechanisms with Nonlinear Mechanical Loads: Robust Performance
               with Analysis and Control of Bifurcation Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1999 
File        : a9978704

Award Number: 9978704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169963             (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Thompson david.thompson@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              David F. Thompson, University of Cincinnati
Proposal No. 9978704
Hydraulic
              Servo-Mechanisms with Nonlinear Mechanical Loads: Robust Performance with
              Analysis and Control of Bifurcation Behavior

Motion and force control
              systems involving hydraulic servo-mechanisms (such as a piston-and-rod
              actuator) represent vitally important components of the nation's manufacturing,
              transportation, and civil infrastructures.  However, the advantages afforded by
              hydraulic actuation are accompanied by a penalty in the form of significant
              nonlinear dynamics; this behavior is often further complicated by coupled
              mechanical system nonlinearities.  Recent studies by other investigators have
              focused primarily upon the application of nonlinear control techniques (e.g.,
              adaptive control, variable-structure control).  The paradigm which is developed
              in this project is to characterize the nature and degree to which conventional
              linear feedback controllers are effective in achieving nonlinear robust
              stability of hydraulic servo-mechanisms, with specific nonlinear structural
              loads, and under specific operating conditions.  The research plan is
              summarized as follows: (1.) Develop feedback designs for linear robust
              performance and robust stability with and without feedback linearization of the
              inner loop hydraulic servo-mechanism characteristics;  (2.) Check for nonlinear
              robust stability, primarily through bifurcation analysis;  
(3.) Check actual
              performance of the nonlinear system (via simulation and experimental methods); 
              (4.) For specific applications and operating conditions, define the acceptable
              ranges/limits over which the aforementioned approach is valid.  The expected
              impact and significance of the project lies in the development of better
              techniques for the design of simple, low-order controllers which would yield
              well-defined nonlinear stability margins and higher bandwidths than would be
              achievable through adaptive control or similar techniques.  Potential
              applications of this work would lie the control of automotive and aerospace
              power transmission elements such as brakes and clutches, machine tools, and
              hardware-in-the-loop control of structural test specimens.




