Title       : The Structure and Content of Diagrams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9978004

Award Number: 9978004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Futrelle futrelle@ccs.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Diagrams are used everywhere to illustrate complex relations, present data,
              document designs, and otherwise provide schematic views of information.  In the
              near future, virtually every important document will be available in electronic
              (digital) form.  Whereas many automated techniques have been developed to
              index, retrieve, summarize and translate electronic documents based on their
              textual content, few comparable techniques are known for similarly exploiting
              the diagrams in such documents.   Building on his prior research, the PI will
              develop a new class of automated tools for vector (not bitmap) diagrams that
              analyze the graphical elements and the text associated with them to create rich
              descriptions of diagram syntax and semantics.  These tools will allow
              collections of diagrams to be intelligently indexed and queried, and will form
              the basis for future systems that can compare, merge, summarize, and otherwise
              manipulate diagrammatic information in useful ways.  Two dimensional diagrams
              such as data graphs, block diagrams, gene diagrams, technical drawings, maps,
              and others used in science, engineering, education, and industry will be
              studied.  The research will lead to enhanced understanding of the syntax and
              semantics of diagrams, and to efficient systems for extracting syntactic and
              semantic information from vector diagrams;   it will thus provide a firm
              foundation for the integration of diagrams on an equal footing with text in
              future information systems and digital libraries.
