Title       : Nanostructure of Medical and Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) Devices Using
               Ultrafast Lasers and Liquid Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2000       
File        : a9978633

Award Number: 9978633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336236             (Estimated)
Investigator: Palaniappa A. Molian molian@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to combine ultrafast lasers and nonlinear
              optics to enable precise fabrication of structural materials at the nanoscale,
              with little or no collateral thermal damage. Nanofabrication that takes
              advantage of emerging ultrafast laser technology has potential applications in
              medical and MEMS device manufacturing, which includes nanostructuring of
              angioplasty catheters, removal of sacrificial layers in MEMS, and fabrication
              of Rockwell hardness diamond indenters. Research into the transmission of the
              short-pulsed beam through nonlinear optics will investigate the self-focusing
              capabilities that can lead to extremely non-concial small-sized beams that are
              expected to be as energetic as the original beam. Fundamental understanding of
              the interaction of this beam with structural materials will allow controlled
              ablation of material at the nanometer scale. Nanometric cutting is expected to
              be facilitated by the resultant moving foci along the optical axis from the
              pulsed beam, offering the possibility of creating taper-free features by
              ablating material within a nanometer focal region. The objective is to obtain
              precise fabrication capabilities with little or no collateral thermal damage by
              limiting heat conduction or mass flow by the scale of the ablation.

This
              project has the potential to extend the fabrication technology through the
              microscale to the mesoscale and will be performed in collaboration with
              Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and Clark-MXR, Inc, pioneers of the
              ultrafast laser technology for microfabrication. The project will offer
              exciting opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to learn and
              integrate issues related to precision manufacturing and laser physics. The
              research instrumentation will facilitate new experimental capabilities not
              currently available at the university. 



