Title       : Infrastructure for Basic Research in the Social Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9978092

Award Number: 9978092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269750             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Alt jalt@latte.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1388,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The proposed pilot program involves planning conferences and oversight
              activities leading to the selection and implementation of multidisciplinary
              projects capable of developing theoretical microfoundations and strengthening
              empirical methods in the social sciences.  The program seeks support for a
              series of multidisciplinary collaborative research projects to be organized at
              the Center for Basic Research in the Social Sciences (C-BRSS) at Harvard
              University.  Basic research is inherently interdisciplinary and implies
              quanitification and the fostering of mathematical techniques in social
              analysis.  Two examples of exciting developments not widely known to social
              scientists, or at least not widely used in their research, are provided.  One
              develops microfoundations by drawing together scholars from evolutionary
              approaches, cognitive science, experimental social science, and rational
              choice.  The other combines innovators, methodologists, and substantive
              researchers in developing neural network methods.

	Both projects exemplify
              the interdisciplinary cooperation and collaboration that will emerge from the
              unique proposed program of project design, selection, and management.  The
              proposed program builds on our significant experience in working with scholars
              in different fields.  A feature of the program is the design of
              multidisciplinary projects spanning a period of selection and planning, the
              actual execution of research, ongoing evaluation, and follow-up dissemination
              and eventual publication.  Another is the explicit process by which proposal
              selection and evaluation of areas of investigation and project participants
              occur.  The process if open and fair, making the project and its results
              accessible, accountable, and available to the broader scholarly community. 
              There are clear procedures for evaluating the success of projects based on
              observable producitivty.  Projects benefit from the presence of a strong
              supportive intellectual environment for participants.  C-BRSS provides a site
              and the technological foundation for a unique combination of in-residence and
              virtual collaboration.  Finally, but by no means least important, C-BRSS can
              draw on a unique financial arrangement with the university for matching support
              in order to contribute significant cost sharing to the program.  

