Title       : Bistable Micro Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a9978737

Award Number: 9978737
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry L. Howell lhowell@et.byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Larry L. Howell, Brigham Young University 
Proposal Number 9978737 
Bistable
              Micro Mechanisms 
Abstract: 
Many critical applications in
              microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) require that certain components be
              capable of being in two or more distinct and predictable positions. Examples
              include electrical relays and switches, microfluidic valves, microfluidic
              pumps, hydraulic spool valves, micro positioning of optical arrays, and
              mechanical switches for fiber optic circuits or other applications. Currently,
              most devices used in such applications have the rest position at one state such
              that power must be continuously supplied to the device to maintain the second
              position. The high energy requirements of these methods limit their
              practicality for large autonomous MEMS devices and arrays. Bistable devices
              offer an innovative alternative because they have two stable equilibrium
              positions. Energy input to the system is required only during the transition
              from one stable equilibrium position to the other. This is important for both
              autonomous systems that must carry their own power supply and for devices where
              heat must be minimized. Other major advantages of bistable mechanisms include
              the ability to maintain state for extended periods regardless of the status of
              the input power source (this is important for nonvolatile memory and other
              applications), and increased accuracy and precision in positioning of micro
              devices. Compliant mechanism theory offers the means to design successful
              bistable mechanisms at the micro level. Many MEMS already use flexures and
              other simple compliant components, but compliant mechanism theory makes
              possible much more complex mechanical motion. Because motion and energy storage
              are integrated in compliant mechanisms, they are ideal for bistable devices.
              The proposed approach includes the following: bistable configuration
              identification; modeling, analysis, and design; actuation; fabrication and
              testing. 



