Title       : Algorithms and Geometry Representations for Interactive Visualization and
               Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9978147

Award Number: 9978147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298085             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denis Zorin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth H. Perlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As the amount of data processed by a computer system increases, new, more
              complex and flexible algorithms and data representations are required. At the
              same time, new visualization and interaction techniques are required to help
              the user access, understand, and manipulate the data. The ability to steer a
              computation and modify the models during the course of a simulation is required
              in order to use those simulations as an exploration tool.  All this means that
              traditionally separate tasks, including model construction, numerical
              simulation and visualization, should be tightly integrated.  There is a need
              for new data representations that are scalable, robust, and adaptive to
              accommodating a variety of computational and visualization algorithms.

This
              project will explore combined representations of 2D and 3D geometry. The
              immediate goal is to find adequate representations for computationally
              challenging fluid flow simulations with dynamic boundaries. These
              representations will enable hierarchical solvers to compute successive
              approximations to the flow, interactive visualization of the 3D fluid, and
              interactive steering of the computational parameters (e.g. precision) and
              physical parameters (e.g. boundary conditions) of the simulations. The project
              will test the viability of these representations in an interactive system for
              fluid flow simulations.

