Title       : Coalescence and Phase Separation During Spinodal Decomposition of Solvent
               Mixtures Far From the Critical Point
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2000  
File        : a9978781

Award Number: 9978781
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reuel Shinnar shinnar@che-mail.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Mauri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9978781
R. Mauri
CUNY City College

In the previous stages of
              this work we have studied the phase transition occurring when a mixture of
              partially miscible liquids is deeply quenched across its miscibility curve
              [2][4].  This study was motivated by a previous NSF-funded investigation, where
              solvents [1][3].  One of the main results of this work was the discovery that,
              following phase transition, coalescence and phase segregation are very rapid,
              even when emulsifiers and surface-active compounds are dissolved within the
              mixture.

Like most transport processes, phase separation is driven by two
              basic demising process is retarded by either using high-viscosity systems, such
              as polymer melts and alloys, or by quenching the liquid mixtures only by few
              millikelvins below their miscibility curve [6]-[9].  In these cases, right
              after the temperature of the system has crossed that of the miscibility curve,
              the mixture phase separates by forming well-defined patches, whose typical size
              grows wit time as t1/3 [6]-[10].  On the other hand, low-viscosity, deeply
              quenched liquid mixtures separates by convection, due to the influence of an
              attractive force, which tends to minimize the interfacial area.  In our recent
              studies on spinodal decomposition, we showed that convection leads to the
              information of rapidly coalescing drops, whose typical size grows linearly in
              time.  In addition, our results have shown that surface tension-driven
              attractive forces are far larger that repulsive electrostatic forces, thus
              explaining why the phase separation of low-viscosity liquid mixtures occurs
              rapidly, irrespectively of the presence of emulsifiers.

While our
              investigation has produced novel and unexpected results, much work is required
              to achieve our ultimate goal and model the flow of liquid mixtures during phase
              transition in the presence of surface-active compounds.  The following proposal
              is intended to address some of these problems.  In particular, we want to focus
              on the following four areas of research.

1. The role of emulsion-forming and
              coalescence-hindering compounds and impurities during phase segregation and
              spinodal decomposition of partially miscible liquid mixtures.  As we saw, one
              of the main advantages of using partially miscible solvents in extraction
              processes is that phase segregation is unaffected by the presence of
              emulsifiers.  In this research we intend to better understand this phenomenon,
              stressing the limitations under which is ceases to occur.
2. The role of
              viscosity during phase separation.  Since we know that phase separation in
              low-viscosity fluid mixtures (with Peclet numbers larger than 10,000) is very
              different than in high-viscosity's (with Peclet numbers smaller than 10), we
              propose to study the dynamics of macroscopically quiescent phase separating
              liquid mixtures with intermediate viscosity, i.e. with Peclet numbers ranging
              from 10 to 10,000.
3. The role of shear on spinodal decomposition.  This
              investigation is motivated by the fact that in practical extraction processes a
              rapid cooling requires mixing, which in turn may cause emulsification.  This
              process can be modeled in a Couette apparatus, where the fluid mixture
              undergoes constant shear.
4. Extension of our theoretical model to simulate
              the effects studied in the previous 3 points.

