Title       : PEET: Monographic and Phylogenetic Research on Leafhoppers and Treehoppers
               (Insecta: Hemiptera: Membracoidea)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2002   
File        : a9978026

Award Number: 9978026
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $684951             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher H. Dietrich dietrich@mail.inhs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lewis L. Deitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9978026
Dietrich and Deitz
	This Partnership for Enhancing Expertise in
              Taxonomy (PEET) award supports a team approach to taxonomic monography, student
              training, and databasing directed toward the Membracoidea group of insects,
              with about 25,000 published species names and estimates up to 250,000 of the
              actual number of species worldwide. These are the leafhoppers and treehoppers,
              insects with piercing and sucking mouthparts that feed on plant sap; many of
              these are pests in agricultural and agro-forestry systems or serve as vectors
              of plant disease. Despite their great diversity and ecological significance,
              the taxonomy, classification, and understanding of phylogenetic relationships
              in this large group of insects are in need of study, and the number of trained
              specialists is small. This PEET project addresses that need with a program of
              research and training, including morphological and molecular (DNA sequencing)
              methods, field expeditions to collect new material, study of existing museum
              collections, and databasing of information on the taxonomy, phylogeny,
              geographic distribution, and host affiliations of these insects. The team is
              led by Christopher Dietrich of the Illinois Natural History Survey and Lewis
              Deitz of North Carolina State University and includes colleagues at the
              USDA-Smithsonian (Stuart McKamey) and elsewhere. 
	Pioneering work on the
              molecular phylogenetics of membracoid insects by the investigators has helped
              delimit lineages which can serve as challenging but manageable thesis topics
              for graduate students' research in modern taxonomic monography. Study of
              extensive museum holdings will be supplemented with field expeditions to
              regions in Southeast Asia and in Mexico and Central America, where the
              diversity is poorly represented in existing collections. Morphological and
              molecular characters will be integrated as part of monographic and revisionary
              analyses, with attention to synthesizing information from the older literature
              and resolving nomenclatural problems at species, genus, and family ranks. An
              extensive program of databasing builds upon computer resources and
              digital-library expertise at North Carolina State University, which will
              include an ambitious web-searchable inventory of taxonomic literature on
              membracoid insects numbering in the thousands of documents.

