Title       : L.U.C.I.D.: Lectures Using Common Internet Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1999    
File        : a9978303

Award Number: 9978303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. McPherron rmcpherr@igpp.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond J. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9978303
McPherron

The project will make teaching materials more readily
              accessible to instructors of space science at the undergraduate and graduate
              college level.  Space science is the study of the interaction of the Sun with
              planetary magnetospheres, ionosphere's and atmospheres.  It is a difficult
              subject characterized by large, complex, time varying three-dimensional systems
              that are difficult to visualize.  Much of its subject matter is concerned with
              the interaction of neutral gases made up of charged particles (plasmas) with
              electric and magnetic field generated by the Sun, planets, and by the particles
              themselves.  There are only a few textbooks available for this field, and
              specialists write these books for advanced students.  Because of a limited
              market there are almost no teaching aids available to the instructor.  To
              prepare lectures, study units, and student exercises a teacher must have
              intimate familiarity with the scientific literature to find and interpret
              images, data plots, drawings, and data files.  Outside of major research
              universities there are few teachers with these skills.  Even at these
              institutions it is a difficult and time consuming task to convert the materials
              into lecture slides and student study units.  The primary goal is to simplify
              this task by assembling a large indexed collection of teaching materials that
              can be placed on a CD-ROM.  The material will be organized in such a way that
              it can be viewed with a standard Internet browser on a personal computer.  No
              remote server or Internet connection will be required.  The materials will be
              formatted as HTML documents that contain images, movies, glossary references,
              citations, and links to other documents.  The CD-ROM will not be a book or a
              study program but will instead be hierarchical database from which an
              instructor can develop lectures or study units to be distributed to students. 
              Initially the materials will be derived from the lectures prepared by the two
              investigators.  They plan a "shareware" approach in which they trade organized
              materials with colleagues in return for raw materials or finished documents to
              add to the database.  To facilitate this they will develop a set of guidelines,
              HTML templates, and a JavaScript library that will allow anyone to convert
              existing work processor documents and slide presentations to appropriate
              formats for entry into the database.  These will be examined, modified if
              necessary and added at appropriate points in the database.  The CD-ROM will
              also include a Java based program for selecting and assembling lectures or
              study units.  This program will enable the user to submit a query that selects
              all documents that contain the terms of the query.  The selected documents will
              be displayed as thumbnails that may be opened if necessary to study detailed
              contents.  Selected documents are added to a shopping cart and the selection
              process is repeated until all documents relevant to a particular lesson plan
              have been chosen.  At this point the user may rearrange the documents into any
              order that satisfies his needs.  Then a packaging program allows the user to
              prune links that go beyond the boundaries of the lesson plan.  The program next
              revises hypertext links referenced in the selected documents so they are
              accessible to the lesson plan.  Finally it creates a lesson plan glossary and
              reference list.  The entire package is written into a directory structure that
              may be downloaded to a student or teacher's computer.  At this point an
              instructor familiar with HTML may modify the package by adding URLs to the
              ASCII file containing the lesson plan sequence.  These may point to new
              documents added by the instructor or to Internet locations outside the user's
              computer.  Buttons and arrows within the document pages allow the user to step
              through the lesson plan in the sequence chosen by the instructor.  Branches to
              hyperlinks are supported provided the instructor did not prune them.  The final
              product will be a CD-ROM containing both the space science database and the
              programs necessary to create stand-alone study units.

