Title       : SGER: Atomic-Scale Electronic Properties of Carbon Nanotubes by Transmission
               Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1999       
File        : a9978835

Award Number: 9978835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99932              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mehmet Sarikaya sarikaya@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry R. Dalton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George F. Bertsch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This a Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) project from an
              interdisciplinary group composed of a materials scientist, a theoretical
              physicist and a synthetic chemist. The objective is to develop a versatile
              electron energy loss (EELS) spectroscopy technique using a transmission
              electron microscope to probe electronic response of a single carbon nanotube at
              the atomic scale and to explain this response based on a theoretical model of
              electron beam - nanotube interaction. The virtue of the approach is that it is
              non-contact, and may allow a fruitful alternative to the currently difficult
              and rate-limiting approach of attaching physical contacts to the carbon
              nanotubes in order to obtain transport properties. The project offers an
              excellent educational opportunity for a post-doctoral associate.
%%%
This a
              Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) project from an interdisciplinary
              group composed of a materials scientist, a theoretical physicist and a
              synthetic chemist. The group wishes to develop a non-contact method of
              characterizing the electronic transport properties of carbon nanostructures. If
              successful, the method could allow a fruitful alternative to the currently
              difficult and rate-limiting approach of attaching physical contacts to the
              carbon nanotubes in order to obtain transport properties. This would facilitate
              the functional design of nanoelectronics based on carbon nanostructures. The
              project offers an excellent educational opportunity for a post-doctoral
              associate.
***


