Title       : Nanomechanics and Interphase Chemistry of Interfacial Fracture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9978678

Award Number: 9978678
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $442078             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robb M. Winter robb.winter@sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth M. Liechti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9978678
Winter
The primary goal of this collaborative project between the
              South Dakota School of Mines and the University of Texas at Austin is to
              determine, with exquisite spatial resolution, the fundamental governing
              relations between interphase chemistry and fracture mechanics in composite
              polymer-substrate systems.  This program will provide new understanding of the
              chemical nature and mechanical behavior of the interphase regions of selected
              composite materials prior to, during and following the passage of an
              interfacial crack.  The new and substantive science/basic engineering that will
              emerge includes:
	i)	Measurement of nanomechanical properties (stress-strain
              behavior) of the polymeric interphase region, cohesive zone/crack tip region,
              and pre- and post-fracture.
	ii)	Intense and sophisticated spectroscopic,
              nanoscopic and fracture analysis of systems with controlled adhesive and
              cohesive properties.
	iii)	Direct linkage of interphase properties to
              traction-separation laws obtained from cohesive zone models.

Using
              complementary experimental and analysis tools, we will relate interphase
              chemistry and morphology and mechanical properties to traction-separation laws
              extracted from fracture experiments and finite element analysis.  To accomplish
              the objectives we will apply a novel mixed-mode fracture technique, infrared
              (IR) and Raman spectroscopies, interfacial and atomic force microscopies, and
              monochromatic X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and time of flight
              secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToFSIMS).

To facilitate interdisciplinary
              training, students will spend at least one month each year in the non-home
              institution laboratory and will discuss and debate results and plans regularly
              using video conferencing.  Under-represented minorities will be encouraged to
              participate in this research enterprise.

