Title       : Self-Assembly or Inorganic/Organic Multilayer Thin Films: Novel Chemical Systems
               for Self-Assembly and Incorporation of Nonlinear Optical Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a9978556

Award Number: 9978556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine J. Page cpage@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award to Professor Catherine J. Page at the University of Oregon is
              supported by the Advanced Materials and Processing Program in the Chemistry
              Division.The focus of the research is the design, synthesis and
              characterization of self-assembled organic-inorganic multilayer thin films
              incorporating nonlinear optical and magnetic properties.  The multilayers will
              be prepared from transition and rare earth metal salts and bisphosphonates,
              bisisocyanides, aminophosphonates, isocyanoalkylphosphonates and variants
              containing nonlinear optical chromophores.  A feature of the research will be
              the layer by layer characterization of the films by grazing angle x-ray
              diffraction, ellipsometry, FTIR, XPS, solid state NMR and various microscopies
              including, scanning and tunneling electron microscopy and atomic force
              microscopy. 
Structural order within the multilayers  and film growth kinetics
              will be determined by in-situ second harmonic generation measurements. When
              paramagnetic metal salts are used as film formers, magnetic properties will be
              measured by SQUID magnetometry. In addition to studying the axial metal ligand
              interactions responsible for the structural integrity of the films, the role of
              the supporting ligands equatorial to the plane of the metal ions will also be
              explored.

Understanding the formation and structure of self-assembled
              monolayers on surfaces relates to materials properties such as wettability,
              corrosion resistance and chemical response as in sensors. The multilayer
              systems studied in this research will impact nonlinear optical devices, stable
              charge-separated assemblies and chemical specific sensors.


