Title       : Constraining the Timing and Nature of Life's Emergence in Extrema: the Geology
               and Geochemistry of Akilia Island, West Greenland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9978241

Award Number: 9978241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167396             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Mojzsis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig E. Manning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              T. Mark Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Stephen J. Mojzsis, T. Mark Harrison, Craig E. Manning


The emergence of
              the first life on Earth can be viewed as having occurred in the context of an
              extreme environment at the global scale.  A detailed program of fieldwork and
              geochronological studies coupled with stable isotopic (C, N, S) investigations
              is used to explore the oldest known marine sedimentary rocks, from southern
              West Greenland, that contain a record of these earliest times.  These rocks are
              between 3.7 and 3.9 billion years old.  A two-pronged approach is taken to
              study the sedimentary record of Earth's earliest extreme environments.  First,
              P. Is.' are revealing the geological context and history of the rocks related
              to petrogenesis and subsequent protracted metamorphism from field studies,
              metamorphic petrologic observations, and U-Pb zircon geochronological
              investigations.  Second, their study searches for isotopic tracers in the form
              of C, N, and S fractionations induced by life and preserved in the oldest
              sediments.  P.Is.' view is that these two approaches together will lead the
              advance in understanding the extremes of early environments for life on Earth. 
              This research is utilizing new ultra-high resolution mass spectrometric
              techniques (MC-SIMS, C-GC-IRMS, LEC-SMS) developed by UCLA and project
              collaborators to make these measurements.  With this work, the number of
              biogeochemical tools will increase in power and diversity for detecting
              potential evidence for early life and the timing of its appearance, in older
              rocks from Earth when they are found, and eventually in samples from other
              worlds, like Mars, and Europa.


