Title       : Conference on Assessment Issues/NSF "Foundations" Monograph on Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a9978416

Award Number: 9978416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379566             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Klein sklein@rand.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rand Corporation
	      1700 Main Street
	      Santa Monica, CA  904072138    310/393-0411

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9978416
KLEIN

The project will implement a conference and produce a
              monograph on assessment issues aimed at local, state and national assessment
              practitioners, principal investigators from NSF systemic projects, and
              researchers in the field.  Together, the conference and monograph will assist
              policymakers to develop viable and appropriate large-scale assessment systems.
              The last conference on assessment was held four years ago, and the field has
              undergone some significant changes in that time.  

Sessions will address the
              current state of the art in research and implementation, including:  criteria
              for evaluating the costs of different assessment measures and policies; finds
              on the selection of appropriate instruments; uses of test results; and
              practical considerations in implementing large-scale assessments (including the
              use of performance measures).  Participants will also have an opportunity to
              hear from developers and to see demonstrations of more than a dozen commercial
              and non-commercial assessment instruments.  There will also be small workshops
              on test design and scoring and reporting results.

Rather than prepare a
              proceedings from the meeting, RAND will prepare a monograph devoted to
              assessment issues.  This can be widely distributed to principal investigators
              and others interested in assessment issues.  The monograph will follow the
              format of the Foundations series -- that is, it will be written for a general
              audience.  Possible topics include criteria for evaluating measures and testing
              strategies and policies, research findings on designing assessments, lessons
              from the field in conducting large-scale assessments, the use of computer-based
              assessments, and an annotated bibliography of further readings.

