Title       : Modeling Viscoelastic Damping in Civil Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  2000    
File        : a9978752

Award Number: 9978752
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199718             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Inman  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric M. Austin   (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Modeling Viscoelastic Damping in CiAl Structures
Co-Pi's Daniel J. Inman and
              Eric M. Austin

The goal of this research is to examine the nature of
              viscoelastic damping mechanisms in structures and structural components at all
              levels from basic constitutive relations to final usage in finite element
              codes. Many finite element codes incorporate simple forms of damping matrices,
              but as the performance demands of civil structures increases, the importance of
              more accurate damping matrices increases dramatically.

Viscoelastic damping
              mechanisms are difficult quantities to model, yet the damping these mechanisms
              produce determines the major features of the time response of a system due to
              wind, traffic, or earthquake loads, and thus it is often a key design issue.
              Finite element codes are the chief tools for predicting vibration response, yet
              the least developed part of finite element methodology is how damping is
              incorporated into dynamic finite element models. Most current commercial codes
              readily available to practicing engineers include damping only in an ad hoc,
              nonphysical way. Here it. is proposed to investigate three promising
              methodologies that will allow damping to be included in finite element codes
              that is both physically based yet computationally compatible with existing
              finite element practice.

The primary goal of this research is to explore a
              new approach to incorporating the effects of viscoelasticity into standard
              finite element models for time-domain analyses. This observer-based approach is
              intended to be an alternative to the internal-variable methods that have
              appeared in recent years. The basic concept is that internal variables used to
              model time-domain viscoelastic behavior are similar to unmeasurable states, and
              this research is aimed at bringing decades of controls research to bear on this
              problem.

I
  

