Title       : C-RUI: A Multi-Disciplinary Approach to the Ecological and Evolutionary
               Interactions Between Food-Hoarding Animals and the Oaks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a9978807

Award Number: 9978807
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $833731             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Steele msteele@wilkes.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter D. Smallwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Terzaghi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wilkes Univ
	      184 South River Street
	      Wilkes-Barre, PA  18766    717/824-4651

NSF Program : 1091      COLLAB RSCH AT UNDERGRAD INSTI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1091,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This multidisciplinary investigation, designed specifically for collaborative
              research among undergraduates, will employ a range of experimental approaches
              to determine how behavioral decisions of food-hoarding animals influence the
              dispersal, establishment, survival, eco-physiology, and genetics of oaks over a
              broad geographic area.  Previous research by two of the PI's indicates that
              caching decisions of mammals results in the selective consumption of acorns of
              the white oak group (WO) and dispersal, hoarding, and frequent survival of
              those of the RO group (RO).  This study will rely on five approaches to examine
              the broad evidence for, and implications of, this differential dispersal
              hypothesis.  These are 1. behavioral experiments to further examine patterns of
              oak dispersal; 2. seed dispersal experiments to determine factors controlling
              seedling establishment; 3. a broad-scale biogeographic comparison of seedling
              distributions; 4. an eco-physiological comparison of RO and WO seedlings in the
              field and lab; and 5. a molecular (PCR) analysis to document comparative
              genetics and seedling shadows of oak.  The collaboration will bring together
              15-20 undergraduates per year from biology, chemistry and environmental
              sciences from two undergraduate institutions.  The study will employ a team
              approach to research (across universities) and a vertical training/learning
              environment in order to maximize student experience in all aspects of the
              scientific process, including presentations at conferences and publications. 
              The program will include development of a new course in plant-animal
              interactions and an annual project conference aimed at promoting student
              learning.
