Title       : Collaborative Research: Small-Area Estimation - A Growing Problem for the Next
               Millennium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1999 
File        : a9978101

Award Number: 9978101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54134              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiming Jiang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1614,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Large scale sample surveys are usually designed to produce reliable estimates of
              various characteristics of interest for large geographic areas.  However, for
              effective planning of health, social, and other services, there is a growing
              demand to produce similar estimates for smaller geographic areas and
              subpopulations, commonly referred to as small-areas (or small-domains).  The
              accuracy of small-area statistics is especially crucial when data are used to
              apportion government funds among various groups.

This project focuses on
              development of new robust small-area estimation methods and the associated
              model diagnostics.  The estimation methods will be developed under general
              multi-level models which will be useful in solving a variety of small-area
              estimation problems.  To address an important and yet largely neglected aspect
              of model validation and model selection associated with multi-level models, a
              test using a sample splitting technique is proposed.  Splitting the sample into
              an estimation set and a validation set can also be used for assessing the
              actual power of the model.  This area of research will continue to grow as
              social scientists find the need to use complex multi-level models to solve
              their problems.

The research is an outgrowth of the investigators'
              experiences with small-area estimation problems encountered by various federal,
              state, and private agencies.  Importantly, this project will address a crucial
              practical problem underlying the work of many governmental and private
              institutions throughout the world.  Further, this research on small-area
              estimation also will contribute significantly to the literature on survey
              sampling, generalized linear mixed models, empirical best prediction theory,
              linear empirical Bayes, variance component estimation, resampling methods,
              model diagnostics, higher order asymptotics, and statistical computing. 
              Because of the interests of different types of researchers (e.g., survey
              samplers, main stream statisticians, social scientists), small-area estimation
              will remain one of the most intriguing problems in survey sampling as we
              advance into the next millennium.

