Title       : Collaborative Research for a Geoscience Education Digital Library (GDL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a9978338

Award Number: 9978338
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1271114            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary R. Marlino marlino@ucar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UCAR
	      PO Box 3000
	      Boulder, CO  803073000    303/497-1000

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,9178,9179,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9978338
Marlino

This project seeks to develop a Geoscience Digital Library
              (GDL) to support undergraduate education and curricular innovation.  The goal
              of the GDL is to help faculty find, evaluate, use, and create resources that
              support active learning in undergraduate Earth System science.  The immediate
              two-year objective is to: (1) implement a usable version of the library
              organized around a set of service desks and, (2) establish a sustainable and
              active community infrastructure which will support, populate, use, and govern
              the library.  The project will lay the foundation for a comprehensive
              geoscience digital library linked to other libraries worldwide.  The GDL will
              be built by a unique collaboration among University Corporation for Atmospheric
              Research, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology, Keck Geology
              Consortium, Earth systems Science Program of the Universities Space Research
              Association, Center for Lifelong Learning and Design of the University of
              Colorado, and University of California, Santa Barbara.  This team provides the
              expertise and leadership required to respond to a series of community calls for
              an electronic repository of high-quality educational materials.  Together, they
              will develop, evaluate, and disseminate this library as a national educational
              resource.  The GDL addresses several needs articulated in the national reports
              on geoscience education.  One of the primary strengths of the team is its
              cross-disciplinary nature that supports the emerging Earth systems science
              approach.  The library will promote equal access to quality educational
              materials for all students and faculties, including those students in
              institutions that serve traditionally under-represented populations.  The
              distribution of "best practices" and contemporary pedagogical approaches will
              be facilitated.  The strengths and productivity of several communities that
              have not been linked in this manner before will be leveraged.  Finally, GDL
              will provide access to new materials, such a large data sets that have been
              previously unavailable to many outside the research-rich institutions. 
              Contents of the library will be a collection of URL's and metadata that
              identify large data sets, curricular materials, collections, images, and
              abstracts.  The project will employ open architecture standards and be based on
              the current state of research and development in the digital library community.
               Mechanisms will be put in place to insure scalability, re-usability, and
              sustainability.  The library will be dynamic in the sense that faculty will
              contribute holdings, evaluate those holdings, and be supported in the process
              of materials development for future holdings.  Resource evaluation materials
              will be developed, and a community-led discourse process will be established to
              enable the creation of standardized taxonomies and vocabularies.  An Advisory
              Board will provide guidance and oversight, and linkages will be made with other
              groups interested in digital libraries.  Finally, a comprehensive documentation
              and evaluation process for the project will be instituted.  Advances
              anticipated from the project are in both the educational and digital library
              arenas.  Through increased access to quality materials, the project will foster
              the integration of research into undergraduate education.  New levels of
              community discussion will result in innovative approaches to Earth systems
              science that foster student-centered and active learning techniques. 
              Traditionally under-served populations will have improved access to the tools
              and methods of scientific inquiry.  For the digital library community, the GDL
              will implement innovative approaches to classification and demonstrate
              methodologies and tools that support the community process of federated
              digital-library development.  The award is made jointly by the Division of
              Undergraduate Education of the Directorate for Education and Human Resources
              and the Directorate for Geosciences.

