Title       : GOALI: Measurement of Liquid Phase Sintering Stresses to Model Warpage During
               Densification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a9978720

Award Number: 9978720
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246483             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Roger Cannon cannon@alumina.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vimal Pujari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research program involves a collaborative effort between Rutgers University
              and their industrial partner Saint Gobain Industrial Ceramics (Norton Advanced
              Ceramics Co.) to study dimensional control of silicon nitride in manufacturing
              parts such as roller bearings and valves.  Even a small amount of warpage from
              the sintering process may prevent the part from being economically manufactured
              due to the added cost of grinding with the finishing diamond wheels.  A major
              cause of warpage can be attributed to temperature gradients in the sintering
              furnace.  Finite element  (FE) techniques will model the sintering process to
              determine the strain tensor of distortion during sintering in a temperature
              gradient.  The fundamental knowledge gained in such a study would provide
              better control of furnace heating rates, hold temperatures, pressurizing rates,
              fixturing and placement of parts during manufacturing.  All the input
              parameters for the FE technique will be measured but much of the research will
              focus on measuring the sintering stresses necessary for the FE analysis.

              
Sintering stresses  and creep rates in silicon nitride will be measured in
              experimental studies conducted between 1500C and 1950C.  Knowledge regarding
              the sintering stresses in liquid phase sintering systems and the effect of the
              a to b phase transformation on sintering stress will be enhanced by these
              studies of silicon nitride.  As a model material the sintering stress of
              alumina/anorthite glass will also be measured to better understand parameters
              affecting sintering stresses in liquid phase sintered systems. The successful
              completion of this project may lead to significant cost savings for other
              industrial high-performance ceramic components.


