Title       : Linking Neighborhood Character and Resources to Adolescent Achievement
               Orientation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9978490

Award Number: 9978490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret B. Spencer marges@gse.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There is general agreement that the contexts in which children and adolescents
              develop and learn are important. Studies of neighborhood influences suggest
              that neighborhoods influence individuals at a variety of levels. However, as
              traditionally measured, the effects of neighborhoods are smaller than family
              characteristics such as socioeconomic status (e.g., poverty) and total years of
              education completed by parents. Some researchers suggest that an understanding
              of the full impact of neighborhoods is still to be determined (Turner et al,
              1997, p.2). The proposed research takes the perspective that to understand the
              factors affecting the development of competence and well-being in urban youth
              requires an understanding of the influence of both neighborhood and societal
              contexts as well as the responses or coping strategies of young people. This is
              critical to our understanding of why some urban youth respond to or cope with
              neighborhood risks and difficulties in ways which result in positive outcomes
              and competence; whereas, other young people, who live in identical contexts,
              cope with situational challenges in ways which produce less than desirable
              achievement and life course successes.

The project uses a particular
              theory-driven approach, the Phenomenological Variant of Ecological systems
              theory (PVEST) (Spencer, 1995, 1999) to explore seven levels of adolescents'
              environments and relates them to their coping methods, identity formation and
              school achievement. The ecology or environment-associated perspective is linked
              to culture, is sensitive to adolescents' unique coping and identity processes,
              and helps to interpret different youth outcomes.

Specifically the study will
              examine the relationship between student characteristics and seven levels of
              their environment. The approximate 1500 urban boys and girls (Hispanics,
              African Americans, Asian American and EuroAmerican), who comprise this study
              sample, attend 41 Philadelphia public schools and represent either a high
              achieving (A/B grades) or marginally (C/D grades) performing achievement group.
              They will be followed throughout their high school years beginning in either
              the 9th, 10th,  or 11th grade and followed into post-secondary schooling
              (college) options or the world of work

