Title       : Efficient Query Processing for Data Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a9978567

Award Number: 9978567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alon Y. Halevy alon@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This goal of this research project is to develop efficient query optimization
              and query execution methods for data integration systems. Data integration
              systems provide uniform access to a multitude of autonomous data sources within
              an enterprise or on the World-Wide Web. Unlike in traditional database
              applications, a query execution engine for data integration must be able to
              cope with limited availability of statistics on the underlying data and with
              unexpected network delays during query execution. The approach consists of
              developing an adaptive query execution engine for data integration. Two kinds
              of adaptivity are considered: (1) interleaving of query optimization and
              execution, and (2) developing novel query execution operators that are tailored
              to data integration. In the first part, algorithms for determining appropriate
              points at which to suspend query optimization are considered. For the second
              part, novel join implementations are considered (e.g., the double-pipelined
              join), as well as operators that are needed only in the data integration
              context (e.g., dynamic collectors performing unions over large collections of
              sources). In addition, issues involving the integration of semi-structured data
              (e.g., XML) are also addressed. The results of the research include the
              implemented Tukwila data integration system, which will be made available to
              other researchers in the field. The impact of the research will be to remove
              the performance bottleneck that hinders fielding data integration systems in
              the WWW and enterprise contexts. We will be able to process data integration
              queries involving 10's of MB of data coming from external sources in real
              time.
http://data.cs.washington.edu/integration/tukwila

