Title       : Wearable Low Vision Aids based upon Retinal Light Scanning Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a9978888

Award Number: 9978888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299695             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric J. Seibel eseibel@hitl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Furness  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9978888
Seibel
The problem of applying advanced electronic imaging and
              computer display technologies to aid persons with visual disabilities has
              resulted in bulky and obtrusive eyewear that has been shown in the marketplace
              not to be worth the high price.  Nonetheless, with US citizens both living and
              staying active longer, there is even greater need for effective, wearable, and
              desirable low vision aids.  There are 14 million Americans that are hampered in
              their daily lives by partial loss of visual acuity and/or insufficient visual
              field (National Advisory Eye Council 1998), and that number is expected to rise
              much faster than the rate of population growth. A new approach is being
              undertaken in this study, hinging upon a new display technology, called retinal
              light scanning.  By scanning a low power beam of light from a laser or
              light-emitting diode directly into the eye, a bright image is generated as the
              beam is modulated in power and scanned across the retina.  This 'laser light
              show on the retina' provides not only brighter display illumination than
              standard displays, but the narrow beam provides unprecedented depth of focus. 
              Reading speed studies conducted in our laboratory have shown that retinal light
              scanning has great potential for transferring images to the retina with minimal
              distortion.  In concert with the recent development of retinal light scanning,
              technological improvements have been made in micro-cameras, wearable computers,
              real-time image processing, and spectacle-mounted hardware.  Our approach is to
              reduce the size and cost associated with retinal light scanning which will be
              redesigned specifically as a wearable low vision aid.  We will incorporate the
              latest advancements by our collaborators in the areas of cameras, wearable
              computers, and image processing.  These technologies will be integrated into
              prototype vision aids that will be a testbed for our newest theories of
              human-computer interface science, such as spectacles that have an augmented
              central view from retinal light scanning while allowing natural viewing of the
              surroundings to maintain situational awareness.  In collaboration with the
              Department of Services for the Blind in Seattle, WA and the Schepens Eye
              Research Institute in Boston, MA, we will test the prototype low vision aids
              and their performance in the hands of low vision volunteers doing everyday
              tasks.  Thus, we believe the same problems that have led to a lack of
              acceptance of previous high-tech vision aids can be overcome by using retinal
              light scanning technology as a basis for our research effort.  From our
              experience, the goals of designing and testing novel vision aids for the
              partially sighted in our community is highly motivating and rewarding work for
              both undergraduate and graduate science and engineering students.


