Title       : Research Initiation Award: Computer-Aided Fixturing in Computer-Integrated
               Manufacturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1995      
File        : a9309342

Award Number: 9309342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89978              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yiming Rong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This research stresses the flexible fixturing problem with a              
              main goal of developing a computer-aided fixturing system for                  
              modular fixture applications in CIMS.  The research includes three             
              aspects:  computer-aided fixture design, computer-aided fixture                
              design evaluation and computer-aided fixturing management.  Methods            
              used are unique and practical.  In fixture design, this research               
              studies how to acquire and utilize previous design experience and              
              how to practically generate a fixture design.  A locating method               
              dominated fixuring requirement analysis and fixture structure                  
              analysis are performed as the basis of the fixture design.  In                 
              fixture design evaluation, criteria are explored for automated                 
              fixture design verification.  In fixturing management, fixture                 
              station management and communication with other manufacturing                  
              departments are studied.  Therefore, fixturing activity can be                 
              integrated with CAD/CAPP/CAM and production control systems.                   
                   This  project provides an engineering tool for using computer             
              technology to design, verify, and manage modular fixtures.  The                
              application of the research results may contribute to:  (1) making             
              FMS truly flexible and CIMS practically feasible; (2) significantly            
              reducing fixture design and fabrication time and cost in small and             
              batch production; (3) improving quality of fixture design with the             
              utilization of previous design experience, fixturing analysis, and             
              fixture design evaluations; and (4) providing a practical tool for             
              industry to deal with complex fixturing problems by using computer             
              technology.
