Title       : Political Economy and the Dynamics of Party Support in Contemporary Britain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9309018

Award Number: 9309018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9734               (Estimated)
Investigator: Marianne C. Stewart   (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold Clarke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul F. Whiteley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              During the past two decades, shifting intellectual currents and                
              real-world developments have stimulated strong interest in the                 
              impact of objective economic conditions, such as unemployment and              
              inflation, and subjective economic perceptions on public support               
              for political parties and their leaders in representative                      
              democracies.  To date, however, fundamental questions remain                   
              unanswered, and theoretical controversies and empirical                        
              disagreements continue over economic influences on party support.              
              This project addresses important debates by testing multivariate               
              models using monthly time series data to be gathered in Great                  
              Britain in the 1992-1997 period.                                               
                                                                                             
              Principal theoretical controversies involve whether citizens'                  
              party-support decisions are based on:  1) evaluations of personal              
              or national economic conditions and, relatedly, attributions of                
              government responsibility for such conditions; 2) past or future-              
              oriented economic judgments and, relatedly, willingness to reward              
              or punish governing parties for good/improving or bad/deteriorating            
              economic performance, respectively, or to support a party based on             
              perceptions of different issue priorities; 3) "cold calculations"              
              or emotional reactions to economic information.  Also important is             
              the extent to which party identification as a component of party               
              support is driven by ongoing economic performance evaluations.                 
                                                                                             
              This project addresses such theoretical concerns and data                      
              limitations.  Regarding the former, the advantages of studying                 
              British party support during a five-year period are: 1) economic               
              effects on party support should be substantial - the economy is a              
              matter of longstanding public concern; 2) social-class differences             
              may characterize responses to economic conditions and their impact             
              on party support; 3) the multiparty system facilitates studying how            
              party-system context influences the political economy and dynamics             
              of support for opposition as well as governing parties; 4)                     
              economics is not all a changing mix of political events, some being            
              part of the ongoing political process and others being                         
              unanticipated by politicians and public alike, should influence                
              short-term movements in party support, including party                         
              identification.                                                                
                                                                                             
              The research uses data from existing questions about relevant                  
              economic and political variables, together with data from new                  
              questions added to monthly surveys (May 1992-April 1997) conducted             
              by the British Gallup organization.  By adding questions to                    
              existing ones in 60 surveys, this cost-effective project can                   
              produce the key variables and sufficient time point needed for                 
              aggregate-time series analyses of party support during the maximum             
              constitutional term of the current British parliament.  The                    
              research promises to substantially enhance our understanding of the            
              key issues of the research.
