Title       : Temporal Processes in Language Use
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1995       
File        : a9309612

Award Number: 9309612
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert H. Clark herb@psych.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Wasow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9309612  Clark    Language use in everyday discourse is a joint activity. 
              Speakers and their addressees coordinate closely with each other as speakers
              try to attend to, identify, understand, and take up what they say.  This
              project is about one level of that process:  how speakers formulate and present
              utterances for their addressees in real time.  The problem is that time moves
              inexorably onward, and speakers often cannot formulate their utterances in the
              time available.  This lads to disfluences (pauses, uh, self-corrections,
              repeats, restarts, etc.).  It also leads to the ordering of phrases based on
              how heavy, or complex, they are.  The goal is to develop a model of formulation
              and presentation that accounts for these phenomena.  The project contains five
              series of studies.     Series 1 will examine disfluences in a large corpus of
              spontaneous English conversation.  One study will look at how speakers choose
              the ("thee") over the (thuh) to forecast problems in formulating noun phrases. 
              Another will investigate the contrasting problems that marked by uh and um.  A
              third will examine when and why speakers repeat words as in "and uh there's no
              point in.in doing that," and a fourth, when and why they stretch words.  A
              fifth will compare monologues and dialogues for number and types of
              disfluencies.     Series 2 will use experiments to examine the disfluencies
              speakers produce in difficult situations.  One experiment will examine the
              pattern of disfluences that arises as speakers formulate complicated
              descriptions.  A second and third experiment will investigate the temporal
              details of how speakers manage interruptions caused either by side-tracking or
              by bursts of noise.  A fourth will compare speakers strategies in presenting
              utterances in face-to-face and telephone conversations.     Series 3 will
              investigate the logic that underlies spontaneous repairs of speech.  Precisely
              how do repairs work when speakers replace one word or phrase with another? 
              Several alternative models will be tested  against a large corpus of repairs
              from spontaneous talk.  One study will examine the function of self-talk--when
              speakers interrupt their utterances apparently to address themselves.    
              Series 4 is based on the idea that many disfluences aren't a nuisance to
              listeners, as ordinarily assumed, but a help.  One study will examine
              experimentally how addressees exploit the information present in speakers' uses
              of pauses, uh, um, and other disfluences.  A second will examine listeners'
              interpretations of utterances that contain various disfluencies.     Series 5
              is about how speakers order phrases based on their weight or complexity. 
              Speakers ordinarily prefer, for example, "I looked up the man I had known for a
              long time" over I looked the man I had known for a long time up," placing the
              underlined heavy noun phrase late in the sentence.  These studies will study
              spontaneous uses of many types of constructions for the syntactic,
              informational, and intonational factors that make phrases heavy.  One study
              will investigate how weight is reflected in disfluencies.     Series 6 will
              examine the process by which speakers select heavy vs. light phrases in real
              time.  One experiment will investigate how speakers order phrases as they
              recall descriptions, and another, how they do so as they describe visual
              scenes.  A final experiment will examine how quickly listeners follow
              instructions that contain heavy phrases in various orderings.
