Title       : Generic Passages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1993  
File        : a9309332

Award Number: 9309332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36657              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory N. Carlson carlson@ling.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9309332 Carlson    8   )  Abstract            In a discourse, a fundamental
              relation is for one unit  a sentence, a clause, or a sequence of sentences  to
              be subordinate to another unit.  This observation is common to all approaches
              to the study of discourse.  In this project, however, we focus on a
              construction we dub "generic passages," and consider how best to represent the
              relation within a formal semantic framework.  In the first sections of the
              project, we review some of the salient grammatical and semantic properties of
              generic passages.  We then pose a question for which there is conflicting
              evidence:  the substance of this project is to resolve the conflict,  We
              briefly outline two different approaches that promise to resolve the conflicts,
              and seek evidence for deciding between them or for showing both deficient.     
                   A generic passage is a unit of discourse in which an initial sentence
              introduces a pattern of events, the details of which are expanded on in the
              ensuing sequence of sentences.  An example is given in (1).  1.a.  X        My
              grandmother used to bake special fruit pies every Saturday.  %      b.  X      
               She went to the orchard on Shady Lane early in the morning.  %      c. She
              then used to pick a basket each of apples and peaches.   d.  X        Then she
              would go into the kitchen and shoo everyone else away.  %      e.  X       
              About 4:00 an irresistible aroma would waft through the entire house.  %    
              This project is aimed at understanding the character of these and similar
              discourse units within a formal semantics framework, in order to more fully
              understand the nature of the structures and processes that create discou rse. 
              In working on a narrowly focused problem, we are able to formulate questions
              and proposal with a precision that is much more difficult to achieve taking a
              much broader perspective.           The primary interest of such passages is
              how they fit in with a semantic theory of sentences that express
              generalizations, generic sentences, as opposed to those that express
              information about particular instances of things that happened.  Based on
              extensive previous research, we assume that there is a generic operator active
              in the construction of such discourses, and the investigation of these
              discourses promises to shed some light on the semantics of that operator.  One
              of the main issues this research encounters, however, is the question of
              whether formal processes that hold within sentences may, at times, also hold
              between different units in a discourse.  If this is sustained, it requires that
              discourse be granted some level of syntactic structure, and hence it cannot be
              considered a string of sentence meanings alone that are related to one another.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
