Title       : Revising Knowledge: A Hierarchical Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1993  
File        : a9309515

Award Number: 9309515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57112              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Morris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
              9309515  Morris    In the last twenty years, economists have made tremendous
              strides  in understanding the role of uncertainty and imperfect information  in
              the economy.  Applied fields as diverse as macroeconomics, labor  economics and
              industrial organization are increasingly focussed on  the superior information
              which some economic participants have  relative to others.    This progress has
              been possible because of the existence of a  standard, well understood model of
              how economic decision makers  make choices under uncertainty.  It is assumed
              that economic  decision makers can imagine every possible relevant event which
              may  have occurred in the past and may occur in the future.  Their lack  of
              complete information is reflected in the fact that - while they  can imagine
              all relevant circumstances - they do not in fact know  which circumstances have
              transpired or will transpire in the  future.  An implication of this standard
              approach is that whenever  an economic decision maker does not know something,
              he or she knows  that he or she does not know it.    This model provides a
              useful starting point.  But a series of  recent work, by the principal
              investigator and others, has focussed  on models of incomplete information
              which reflect the fact that  economic decision makers not only do not know
              which circumstances  have transpired or will transpire, but also they do not
              necessarily  understand what all the relevant circumstances are.  Thus we allow
               for the possibility that a decision maker may not know something,  and may not
              know that he or she does not know it.    Thus the first objective of this
              research project is to complete  the principal investigator's development of a
              more realistic model  of choice under uncertainty.  But there is a critical
              conceptual  problem which arises in this construction.  Economists seek to 
              explain choices, including choices under uncertainty, as a  reflection of the
              decision makers' preferences.  But in  constructing a model of uncertainty,
              decision makers'  preferences  are part of the description of the relevant
              circumstances in the  world.  The second objective of the project is to provide
              a  hierarchical description of preferences which gets around this  circularity.
               This will provide a solid analytic foundation for a  more realistic
              understanding of how economic decision makers cope  with uncertainty.    ***
