Title       : Tyrosine Phosphorylation and Axonal Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9309526

Award Number: 9309526
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John T. Edwards                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322620             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Bixby   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9309526  Bixby    A critical feature of the development of the nervous system is
              the ability of individual nerve cells to grow cellular processes, or axons.
              These axons often must grow over long distances over complicated pathways to
              contact their target cells.  This research is aimed at an understanding of the
              molecular signals underlying axon growth.  In the previous grant period, it was
              found that one important mechanism regulating axon growth involves the
              modification of proteins in the axons by enzymes. In particular, a rare class
              of enzyme that phosphorylates proteins on tyrosine residues appears to be
              involved.  Several distinct members of this class of enzyme are localized to
              the exact region of  the growing axon that must make "pathfinding" decisions
              further pointing to the importance of this class of enzyme. At this point, it
              is unclear which enzyme performs which function in axonal growth and guidance. 
              The present study is aimed at understanding this issue.  This study will test
              the role of individual kinases and phosphatases in axonal growth and other
              aspects of development.  Both known and novel enzymes have been identified in
              the early developing nervous system.  Several of  these kinases and
              phosphatases will be tested functionally, using the techniques of molecular
              biology.  Finally, the interaction of  these intracellular signaling molecules
              with neuronal receptors mediating cell-cell recognition will be examined
              biochemically.  The results of  these experiments should allow a more precise
              knowledge of the molecular basis of cell-cell communication in the developing
              nervous system, and an elucidation  of the intracellular signals that regulate
              the ability of  nerve cells to extend long process to reach their target cells.
               ***     : ; <   > ?   A B C D E F G H I J   L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z   \ 
               ^   ` a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z { | } ~             
                                                                                             
                                                     9309526  Bixby    A critical feature of
              the development of the nervous system is the ability of individual nerve cells
              to grow c    o   q                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       j   o   q             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        !         !          
                 F                                                             q         q   
               (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                                 "     
                     h        e          C                 @    bixby    William Proctor, IBN
              William Proctor, IBN                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
