Title       : Research Initiation Award: Recurrent Neural Networks as Representation of
               Nonlinear Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1995       
File        : a9309057

Award Number: 9309057
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennie Si si@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9309057  Si  In system control, a mathematical  description of a process is
              often a  prerequisite to the controller  design.  The system identification 
              techniques for linear systems are  new well understood nonlinear  systems due
              to the inherent  complexity of nonlinear systems and  the difficulty of
              deriving  identification algorithms.  These  difficulties are severed in 
              building empirically based models  because of unavoidable noise in  real-world
              applications.  This  project will use recurrent neural  networks to perform
              nonlinear  system identification.  The  parameters defining the network are 
              determined through input-output  data training.  The methodology for  training
              is essentially gradient-  based.  Stability methods will also  be examined for
              two reasons.   It  provides a qualitative measure of  identification
              performance and  provides some insight as t improve  the efficiency of gradient
              methods.   These approaches themselves are not  unique until real-world
              application  criteria (lower error rates, immune  to noise etc.) are taken into
               consideration.  To account for  noise effect from empirical data,  robust norm
              will be considered as a  measure of parameter prediction  error.  Theoretical
              analysis based  on adaptive systems theory and  statistical analysis will be 
              employed to gain qualitative  understanding of the proposed  problem. 
              Numerical simulation will  be carried out to test proposed  identification
              procedures.  The  goal of both theoretical and  empirical approaches are the
              same:  reveal unexplored aspects of neural  networks for real world problems. 
              The proposed research is inspired  and will be tested by an industrial  scale
              process identification  problem.  In particular the  experiments will be
              conducted at a  Honeywell TDC-3000 real time plant  information and control
              system  interfaced to a methanol-  isopropanil distillation column.  ***
