Title       : Dissertation Research: Transformation of Health in Rural Nepal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1993    
File        : a9309593

Award Number: 9309593
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond B. Hames                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11729              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nina L. Etkin ETKIN@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Etkin/Zvosec  9309593    Tuberculosis is a common disease in the developing
              world and an affliction which is variably treated by culturally specific
              medical techniques.  An understanding of the efficacy of such techniques will
              shed important insight on the adaptiveness of cultural understandings of
              disease and the social and technical support system available to those
              afflicted with tuberculosis.  The objective of this medical anthropological
              research is to investigate the nature and implications of medical beliefs and
              practices in eastern Nepal.  Special focus is on tuberculosis, which, despite
              its sustained impact in Nepal and throughout the developing world, has been the
              subject of little research.  Building on groundwork laid during a pilot study
              in September 1992, this village-based project will utilize a biobehavioral
              perspective that incorporates the use of survey, participant observation,
              structured and unstructured interview, Western biomedical health records, and
              tracking of specific illness episodes to elucidate the interactions of
              biological and cultural aspects of health and disease.  Research topics will
              include local perceptions of disease categories and etiologies, therapeutic
              activities and healers, and expectations and evaluations of disease and
              therapeutic processes and outcomes.    This project is significant for its
              attention to voids in research on sociocultural aspects of tuberculosis
              incidence and impact, for its unique integration of biological and cultural
              aspects of health and disease.  Further, the focus of this study on disease of
              significant local concern underscores it applied dimension a nd its potential
              to inform culturally sensitive and effective health programming, and thereby
              benefit Nepalis, whose knowledge and experience facilitate the research
              project.  ***   s( t(                              @                          
              1               @   4    <                          P  O    `                  
                                                       ^                                     
                                     hrf12.frs    hrf6.frs     hrf12.chm    hrf6.chm    
              egaital.frs  egaund.frs   egasmc.frs   ega512.frs                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 !           !           !                f     ?                       #    
                      #                                 L    Times New Roman    Symbol  &
              Arial  & Lucida Sans    Bookman Old Style       u   u         u           "    
                      h     B   B                           y    etkin zvosec abstract
              abstract dissertation"dissertation abstract zvosec etkin  Raymond Hames Raymond
              Hames                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
