Title       : Energetics of Mammalian Reproduction and Life History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1998     
File        : a9309994

Award Number: 9309994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185200             (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Kenagy kenagy@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1141,1148,
Abstract    :
              9309994  Kenagy    The relationship between reproductive energy expenditures,
              body  condition and reproductive success will be investigated in a  population
              of golden-mantled ground squirrels that has been under  study since 1984.  The
              physiological dimension of the proposed  research focuses on intensive
              physiological performances under  natural conditions -- maximal production and
              maximal work load,  and the accompanying demand for energy.  Two model cases of
              this  are the peak parental production expenditures that occur in  lactating
              females and the peak behavior expenditures that occur  in males associated with
              mating, aggression and defense.  In each  aspect of the study, performances are
              quantified in terms of  proximal energy balance and its phenotypic variation,
              and then  the ultimate success will be evaluated in terms of demography,  i.e.,
              survival and future reproduction.  The direct relationship  of daily energy
              expenditure, and the intermediary relationship of  body mass and condition to
              survival will be examined, recognizing  that reproductive performances may
              operate at similar peak levels  for all members of a population and that the
              resulting  reproductive output is individually optimized.  In freeliving 
              animals we measure energy expenditure using stable isotopes, and  body
              condition (fat vs. lean components) by total body electrical  conductivity. 
              The upper limits of female reproduction, intake  and expenditure will be
              investigated by experimentally  manipulating maternal food supply.  Overwinter
              energy balance  will be evaluated by radiotelemetry of torpor patterns in 
              hibernating squirrels.  Flexibility and variable reproductive  maturity in
              yearling males will be evaluated in terms of energy  balance and an
              experimental manipulation of energy supply.  This  research should contribute
              to an integrated understanding of how  variation in the physiology and behavior
              of individuals in a  population translates into the expression of survival and 
              reproductive success over the cou rse of life history.  ***
