Title       : Dissertation Research: The Impact of Perceived Stress, Health Behavior, and
               Social Support on the Occurrence of IBD in Asian and British Populations in
               Great Britain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1993    
File        : a9309267

Award Number: 9309267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond B. Hames                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet W. McGrath jwm6@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              McGrath/Barone  9309267    It is generally accepted that psycho social stress is
              causally related to health but the precise nature of this relationship is not
              clear.  The purpose of the present study is to examine the importance of social
              factors, particularly social support and culturally determined differences in
              health-related behaviors, as intervening variables linking psycho social stress
              and health outcome.  In particular, the interrelationships between psycho
              social stress, social support, and the frequency, duration, and severity of
              morbid Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) episodes will be examined in Asian and
              British residents of two cities in Great Britain.    IBD is a category of
              chronic gastrointestinal tract diseases, of unknown etiology, that produces
              episodes of nausea, pain and bloody diarrhea.  Europe in general and Great
              Britain in particular are known to have the highest worldwide prevalences of
              IBD, suggesting a genetic predisposition for people of European ancestry. 
              However, Asians living in Great Britain exhibit prevalences of IBD similar to
              native Britons.  The fact that both Asians and native Britons exhibit high
              prevalences of IBD suggests that non genetic factors play an important role in
              the etiology of IBD and that these factors impact equally on British and Asian
              residents of Great Britain.  Psycho social stress is associated with disease
              onset and recurrence by physicians and patients.  Pilot research in Leicester,
              England suggests cultural differences in perceived stress and health behavior
              affect the frequency, duration, and severity of IBD episodes, differences
              masked in prevalence rat es.  It is the hypothesis of the present study that
              British and Asian populations have different cultural patterns for identifying
              and responding through behavior to stressful situations, resulting in different
              patterns of health and stress-related chronic disease, in this case IBD.  ***  
                                                                                             
                                             McGrath/Barone    It is generally accepted that
              psycholsocial stress is causally related to health but the precise nature of
              thi                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 %   '                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              !         !                   !              F 
                                                                                         S   
              Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial  1 Pres Elite  5 Courier New  & Casablanca  
                                        q   "             h          2 E 2 E  +              
                2        DEBRA TERESA WHITE Raymond Hames                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                            
