Title       : Collaborative Research on Trade Unions, Employers' Organizations and Collective
               Bargaining: Data Collection andAnalysis for Nineteen Countries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1993 
File        : a9309391

Award Number: 9309391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110191             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miriam Golden golden@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Wallerstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9309391  Golden    The organizational structure of trade unions, employers' 
              associations and the process of wage bargaining in advanced  industrial
              democracies has been the subject of considerable  research in recent years. 
              Since 1974, the striking cross-national  differences in macroeconomic
              performance has led scholars to study  the ways that wage-setting institutions
              affect how well the labor  market functions.  The majority of the literature
              argues that  centralized bargaining systems produce superior macroeconomic 
              outcomes, expecially lower unemployment, by preventing individual  unions from
              seeking to improve their own members' wages at the  expense of workers who
              belong to other unions or to no union at  all.  Yet many studies argue the
              opposite, that decentralized wage  setting offers the greatest flexibility and
              sensitivity of wages to  conditions in the local labor market.  Most recently,
              the  intermediate position that both highly centralized and highly 
              decentralized systems work better than systems with intermediate  levels of
              centralization has gained wide acceptance.    All of the research to date has
              proceeded on a weak empirical base.   The basic problem is that no one has
              developed adequate measures of  the different attributes of wage-setting
              institutions that might  matter for economic performance.  In this research,
              the  investigators continue their work of compiling a sustematic cross- 
              national and longitudinal data base coverning the most important  institutional
              characteristics of the wage setting process.  In  collecting the data, the
              investigators put together information  from secondary sources, data supplied
              by the major labor market  actors in each of the countries, and expert surveys.
               Their data  will be constructed to allow reliable comparisons over time and 
              between countries.  On the basis of the data, which will be made  publicly
              available for use by other scholars, the investigators  propose to construct
              indicators of critical aspects of the  organization  of unions, employers and
              collective bargaining.   Finally, they intend to use the indicators to test the
              relationship  between bargaining institutions, wage formation, and various 
              aspects of aggregate economic performance.  ***
