Title       : RIA: Towards A Generic Visual Query Language for Object- Oriented Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9309320

Award Number: 9309320
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95732              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kumar Vadaparty kumarv@truth.ces.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,9264,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              RIA:  Towards a Generic Visual Query Language with Formal Basis                
              for Object-Oriented Databases                                                  
                                                                                             
              This is the first year funding of a three-year continuing award.               
              Object-oriented databases have been recognized as very useful for              
              advanced non-traditional applications such as design, planning,                
              scheduling and geographic applications.  Recently a number of                  
              object-oriented data models have been developed. To facilitate                 
              easy querying in these disparate models, a number of visual query              
              languages have been proposed.  This project identifies the basic               
              constructs required for visual querying in object-oriented                     
              applications, and uses them to design and implement a generic                  
              visual query language.  This language extends gracefully from                  
              relational and nested models to disparate object-oriented models               
              (extendibility). It uses as few basic language constructs as                   
              necessary, while at the same time is versatile enough to encode                
              specialized query-features of diverse object-oriented languages                
              (few but powerful core language constructs). Furthermore, such                 
              encodings are user-friendly.  The generic language has strong                  
              theoretical foundations:  (1) enabling formal semantics, with                  
              proper consideration for safety, negation, etc., and a formal                  
              basis for measuring expressivity and complexity; and (2) proving               
              minimality of the constructs and showing how they simulate other               
              useful query-constructs, etc.  Such a generic language will                    
              provide a uniform front-end to users of diverse object-oriented                
              models and applications, and will play an important role if                    
              developed as a server (analogous to SQL-servers) in a client-                  
              server environment.
