Title       : Neural Networks for Adaptive Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9309691

Award Number: 9309691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymon Glantz                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149093             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hillel J. Chiel hjc@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9309691     Chiel    In order to survive and reproduce, animals must pursue
              specific  goals while continuously modifying their behavior in response to 
              changing internal and environmental conditions.  Over periods of  hours or
              days, animals must choose among different mutually  exclusive behaviors, such
              as feeding or mating.  As they engage in  a particular behavior over minutes or
              hours, they must select among  different behavioral responses in order to
              continue to perform that  behavior (e.g., rejecting an inedible piece of food
              in order to  continue feeding).  They must also rapidly alter their behavioral 
              responses within seconds to cope with changes in the environment  (e.g., biting
              harder on tough food).  What are the neural  mechanisms underlying the ability
              of animals to generate adaptive  behavior?    In order to address this
              question, the principal investigator  proposes to study a behavioral switch in
              the marine mollusc Aplysia  californica.  Preliminary results indicate that
              Aplysia is capable  of switching among different behavioral responses as
              environmental  conditions change.  Specifically, the animal can switch from 
              ingestive to rejection responses if it attempts to ingest inedible  material.  
               The investigator proposes to use intracellular recording from nerve  cells in
              vivo and in vitro (1) to identify and characterize the  properties of premotor
              neurons and interneurons that cause the  switch in the timing of the activity
              of these motor neurons, as  well as (2) to identify and characterize the
              properties of sensory  neurons that trigger these different patterns of
              activity.  Using  these data, he will (3) simulate and analyze the neural
              network  responsible for the behavioral switch.  These three specific aims 
              will allow him to test different hypotheses about the neural  organization of a
              behavioral switch:  is it due to dedicated neural  circuits, to a distributed
              neural circuit, or to circuits that have  some shared and some distinct neural
              elements?  It will also allow   him to develop a more abstract description of
              behavioral switching,  based on concepts from dynamical systems theory.***
