Title       : Credit, Insurance and Impediments to Trade in Theory and Actual Economies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9309485

Award Number: 9309485
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281577             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Townsend rtownsen@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research could make significant contributions to theory,                  
              econometrics, field research and our basic understanding of                    
              formal, informal, market and programmed credit-insurance.                      
              This project uses theory, econometrics, and field work to examine              
              how credit and insurance systems work both in theory and in                    
              actual economies.  Existing theoretical models are confronted                  
              with data, consolidated and reformulated.  Solutions to the                    
              models are deduced analytically, as for the work on risk-sharing,              
              or simulated numerically, as in the models for private                         
              information.  More generally, institutions and programmed credit-              
              insurance schemes are evaluated relative to characteristics                    
              suggested by theory: risk-contingencies, monitoring, group                     
              formation, training of borrower and staff, expectations, and                   
              limited enforcement.  Econometrics is used for analysis of                     
              consumption and labor with an eye toward what techniques allow                 
              one to say something definite about an economy relative to a                   
              theoretical benchmark.  Field research leading to original data                
              is used to evaluate actual risk response mechanisms and to see if              
              impediments to trade of the kind postulated by theorists are                   
              serious impediments in practice.                                               
                                                                                             
              The economies studied include poor high risk villages in northern              
              Thailand, using data gathered in field work, and in India's semi-              
              arid tropics, using the standard data set gathered by the                      
              Institute for Crops Research of the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT).               
              The work will be extended to consider national economies as a                  
              whole, e.g., Thailand as a growing economy with wide disparities               
              in the levels and growth rates of income, using data gathered by               
              the National Statistical Office of Thailand.  The work also                    
              includes consideration of various schemes for the promotion of                 
              credit and insurance.  Credit and insurance will be examined from              
              the point of view of theory and compared with data from these                  
              actual economies.  Arrow-Debreu full risk sharing or complete                  
              markets models and, where complete markets models are judged to                
              be inappropriate, contract theory and mechanism design will be                 
              used in conjunction with the ICRISAT data for Indian villages,                 
              data for Thailand as a whole, and data on indigenous profit-                   
              sharing groups in India, Bangladesh and Thailand.
