Title       : Physiological and Psychophysical Studies of Spatial Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1993    
File        : a9309826

Award Number: 9309826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell L. De Valois   (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen K. De Valois  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9309826   De Valois     The visual system is able to distinguish several spatial
              features  of visible objects, including form, texture and motion.  The visual 
              cortex of the brain has been subdivided into a many different areas  based on
              both anatomical and functional criteria.  There are  physiological recordings
              showing the activity responses in the  brain to visual stimuli, but the nature
              of how that cortical  organization relates to the process of "seeing" is
              complex and not  yet clear.  Psychophysical tests use quantitatively
              well-defined  optical stimuli while measuring responses to properties such as 
              detectability or discriminability.   This project uses identical  stimuli for
              psychophysical tests and for physiological tests to  determine directly to what
              extent the nerve cells in various levels  of the cortex participate in
              processing patterns.   Novel stimuli  are exploited that incorporate patterns
              with the spatial components  filtered in various quantifiably specified ways. 
              In particular,  the question of whether fundamentally different processes are
              used  in texture discrimination and form discrimination will be  addressed. 
              Results will be valuable to our understanding of how  the brain processes
              information, and will have an impact on visual  neurobiology and more broadly
              to neuroscience, with likely  application to computational vision, to
              artificial vision  architecture and to visual display systems.    ***
