Title       : Continuous Time Stochastic Processes in Economics and Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1995        
File        : a9309699

Award Number: 9309699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160147             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose A. Scheinkman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9309699  Scheinkman    This project consists of two parts: (1) the study of
              dynamic  problems with irreversibilities similar to the dynamic decision 
              making problems encountered in negotiating international  agreements to avoid
              future environmental catastrophes, and (2)  the development of methods to
              evaluate and estimate nonlinear  continuous time models using discrete time
              data from financial  markets.  The two parts of the project are related in that
              the  methods used to study environmental irreversibilities are  extensions and
              applications of the models developed for financial  markets.      Much of the
              research on biodiversity, ozone depletion and other  aspects of environmental
              policy focuses on the irreversibility of  certain actions that alter the
              environment.  Part of this project  develops new mathematical tools to study
              the effects of  irreversibilities like those present in many environmental 
              questions, on dynamic problems.  This research should provide  theoretical
              insights as well as numerical methods that could be  helpful in evaluating the
              value of environmental preservation.    Continuous time formulations been used
              to produce theoretical  insights in a variety of questions in finance and
              economics and  are also used, in practice, to yield pricing and hedging 
              strategies in financial markets.  Much less has been done to  develop methods
              to evaluate and estimate these models when only  discrete time observations are
              available, as is the case in  economic applications.  Part of this project aims
              at filling this  gap by developing a series of methods to evaluate nonlinear 
              continuous time models using discrete time data.  The research  will provide
              theoretical justification for the proposed methods,  and also use them to
              evaluate alternative models of the  determination of securities prices.  The
              objective is to increase  our understanding of several of the determinants of
              securities  prices and their volatility.  ***
