Title       : New Directions in the Molecular Theory of Electromagnetic Response and in
               Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1993      
File        : a9309005

Award Number: 9309005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharine L C. Hunt klch@tpauli.cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,9222,
Abstract    :
              Professor Katharine Hunt is supported by a Career Advancement                  
              Award from the Special Projects Program in the Chemistry                       
              Division to pursue new directions of research in the theory of                 
              electromagnetic response and non- equilibrium thermodynamics.                  
              In the first area of research, Dr. Hunt will develop a new                     
              theory, based on nonlocal current- density susceptibilities,                   
              which will be used to characterize the intramolecular                          
              contributions to experimentally measured magnetic properties of                
              molecules.  Dr. Hunt will conduct research on a novel method                   
              for screening nonlinear optical materials via the ordinary                     
              Raman effect.  Additional problems to be studied within this                   
              field of research include selective bond cleavage, and studies                 
              of van der Waals forces between macromolecular chain segments.                 
              In the second field of study, non-equilibrium thermodynamics,                  
              Dr. Hunt will conduct theoretical research in chemical wave                    
              front propagation in inhomogeneous systems in an effort to                     
              better understand the thermodynamic behavior and the                           
              concentration fluctuations that accompany chemical oscillations                
              in continuous-flow stirred tank reactors.                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              Dr. Hunt's theoretical research impinges upon two important                    
              fundamental problems: 1) understanding the interactions which                  
              are important for explaining the response of atoms and                         
              molecules to electromagnetic fields; and 2) the underlying                     
              physics which applies to non-equilibrium chemical systems which                
              exhibit nonlinear properties such as wave propagation and                      
              chemical oscillation.  The first area has important                            
              implications with regard to the design of new optical                          
              materials, and the second area forms a basis for the                           
              oscillatory behavior often exhibited in biological systems such                
              as the cardiac muscle.
