Title       : The Site of Androgen Action on Synapse Elimination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1998       
File        : a9309856

Award Number: 9309856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $512000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia L. Jordan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9309856  Jordan         During normal development, adult patterns of synaptic 
              connections are established through an elimination of excess  neural
              connections.  For example, in newborns, muscle fibers  receive innervation from
              several different motoneurons.  By the  time the mammal has matured into
              adulthood, muscle fibers are  each typically innervated by only a single
              motoneuron.  Dr.  Jordan's research program seeks to understand the cellular
              and  molecular bases of synapse elimination.  Her model is a   a relatively
              simple neuromuscular system, namely the  perineal levator ani muscle and its
              innervating motoneurons  located in the spinal nucleus of the bulbocavernosus. 
              Studying  synapse elimination in this system offers the significant  advantage
              that this mechanism can be regulated by steroid  hormones.  Androgen treatment
              during a specified period of  development  permanently prevents some synapse
              elimination in  this system. Thus, androgens are a naturally occurring factor 
              that influences the development of the central nervous system.   Dr. Jordan
              will use steroid hormones as a tool for the control  and manipulation of
              synapse elimination.  Information about where  androgen acts to prevent this
              loss is necessary for directing  further experiments aimed at identifying the
              underlying  mechanisms.  In addition, she will examine the mechanisms that 
              initiate the onset of synapse elimination.  Dr. Jordan will  explore the
              possibility that it is the electrical uncoupling of  the neurons that underlie
              the selective stabilization and  maintenance of synapses.  Information gained
              about the factors  controlling this crucial developmental event in the
              neuromuscular  system could be applied to neuronal populations in the brain
              that  undergo similar synaptic alternations due to either normal or 
              pathological processes.    ***
