Title       : Asset Market Structure, Savings and Investment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1998     
File        : a9309978

Award Number: 9309978
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204117             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah J. Lucas   (Principal Investigator current)
              John Heaton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9309978  Lucas    Financial markets play a central role in channeling savings
              to  productive investments and allowing individuals to share and  reduce risk. 
              If these markets were complete and frictionless,  savings, investment, and
              asset prices could be analyzed without  consideration of factors such as
              idiosyncratic risk, transactions  costs, and market structure.  But empirical
              evidence suggests  that individual consumption patterns cannot easily be
              explained  by aggregate consumption alone, as would be the case if there  were
              complete risk-sharing.  Casual observation also suggests  that there are
              potentially important frictions in financial  markets due to brokerage fees,
              illiquid markets and so on, and  that information problems and legal
              restrictions limit the extent  of feasible contracts.  The contribution of this
              project comes  from developing theoretically rigorous and empirically tractable
               models in which individuals face aggregate and idiosyncratic  income shocks,
              and have limited access to financial markets.  The  goal of this research is to
              better understand the effect that  borrowing and short sales constraints,
              transaction costs and  other financial market imperfections have on aggregate
              savings,  investment, the level of interest rates, risk premia and trading  in
              financial markets.      Of particular interest are the implications of a
              decline in  financial market transactions and increased market access, as has 
              occurred over time.  The project examines how these factors  affect risk
              premia, the amount of risky investment and the  distribution of asset holding
              in the economy.  Further, the  project examines whether financial innovation
              should be expected  to increase or decrease the overall level of savings in the
               economy.  Determining the net effect of financial innovation on  equilibrium
              savings and investment will have implications for our  understanding of how
              financial innovation affects the growth path  of the economy.  To assess some
              of these predictions, empirical   relationships will be estimated using data
              from sources such as  the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the Survey of
              Consumer  Finances.  The project also looks for more direct evidence on the 
              extent to which asset holdings are used to buffer idiosyncratic  income shocks.
               ***
