Title       : International Technology Diffusion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1995     
File        : a9309935

Award Number: 9309935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Eaton jeaton@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel Kortum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9309935  Eaton    Much of the recent macroeconomic literature seeking to
              explain  international differences in labor productivity and in growth  rates
              assumes severe impediments to international capital  mobility but instantaneous
              international transmission of  technology.  In contrast, much of the
              international trade  literature has treated technology as imperfectly mobile,
              and has  sought to attribute differences in growth rates and in living 
              standards to differences in available technologies.  The purpose  of this
              research is to answer the following questions: (1) What  factors determine the
              rate at which innovations emanate from  different countries?  (2)  To what
              extent and how rapidly do  innovations in particular countries affect
              productivity  elsewhere?  (3)  How do countries differ in terms of their 
              propensity to absorb innovations from other countries?  (4)  What  are the
              implications of the answers to the previous questions for  long-run growth and
              productivity differentials?  The relationship  between technology and
              international economic growth is one of  the central issues in the economics of
              global change.  Future  scenarios about the long-run consequences of different 
              environmental policies depend on our understanding of this  relationship.  Also
              the emphasis on international capital  mobility makes the research relevant to
              the debate about the  significance of investments in national civil
              infrastructure  because one of the principal arguments for investing in civil 
              infrastructure is that it improves U.S. productivity and growth  rates relative
              to other countries.    More specifically, the investigators analyze
              theoretically and  econometrically the process of technological innovation at
              the  national level, and the diffusion of technologies across  countries.  One
              component of the project is the development of a  macroeconomic model of a set
              of interdependent economies that  incorporates technical progress and capital
              accumulation at the  national level as explanations fo r growth, and that
              allows for  varying degrees of international mobility of both capital and 
              technology.l  The model is adapted and used for econometric  estimation and
              simulation.  Initially the focus will be at the  aggregate level, with
              subsequent work studying the creation and  international diffusion of
              technology within individual  industries.  The analysis will make use of OECD
              data on industry-  level productivity, R&D expenditures, and scientists and 
              engineers, the Yale-Canada patent data, and national accounts  data provided by
              the World Bank and by Heston and Summers.  ***
