Title       : Efficiency of Heading Perception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1995       
File        : a9309820

Award Number: 9309820
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225081             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Banks marty@john.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9309820  BANKS    Humans are able to move rapidly through complex environments
              while  avoiding stationary and moving obstacles; clearly the sensory  modality
              most important for this skill is vision.  The ease with  which people use
              visual motion information to guide navigation  belies the underlying complexity
              of the task.  Self-motion through  an environment produces a pattern of
              movement on the retina called  the optic flow field.  An influential early
              proposal was to  identify the direction of self-motion with respect to
              obstacles by  locating the source of flow, i.e., the focus of expansion, but
              the  task is actually much more complicated.  First, since the sensing  of 2D
              motion (which is required to derive the optic flow field in  the first place)
              is a difficult problem in its own right, one  cannot assume that a noise-free
              vector field is available for  calculation of observer motion.  Second, since
              people commonly move  their eyes and head while locomoting, these movements
              obliterate  the focus of expansion.  Third, since visual scenes often contain 
              moving objects besides the observer, those objects do not produce  a consistent
              focus.  Despite these complications, people use the  optic flow field very
              effectively to judge heading relative to  landmarks and other moving objects. 
              This research is mainly  concerned with how efficiently human observers use the
              information  contained in the optic flow field to determine the parameters of 
              their self-motion.  A measure of efficiency derives from the  comparison of the
              performance of an ideal observer for heading  tasks to that of human observers
              in the same tasks.  Because the  ideal observer uses all of the information in
              the flow field, its  performance provides a rigorous benchmark against which to
              compare  human performance.  Specific comparisons will not only allow the 
              measurement of human efficiency but also the identification of some  of the
              causes of inefficiency.  The research will demonstrate how  variables such as
              number of elemen ts in the display, type of flow  field displayed, sharpness
              and size of the display, position of  stimulation on the retina, presence of
              rotational flow due to  eye/head movements, and knowledge of the scene geometry
              affect  human efficiency in determining the direction of self-motion.    While
              the products of this research will enhance our understanding  of space and
              motion perception, they may also have important  practical consequences.  For
              one thing, since biological systems  have evolved robust mechanisms to subserve
              visually-guided  navigation, a better understanding of how this is accomplished
               should lead to better algorithms for mobile robotic systems.   Second, the
              development of an ideal observer for heading tasks will  provide a benchmark
              against which to compare the performance of  computer algorithms.  Third, since
              perception of heading with  respect to stationary and moving objects is crucial
              for driving and  flying, a better understanding could lead to improved
              procedures  for screening and training drivers and pilots and for designing 
              instruments, cockpits, and roadway and runway markings.    ***
