Title       : Topics on the Dynamics of the Income and Wealth Distribution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1997    
File        : a9309514

Award Number: 9309514
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150206             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose-Victor Rios-Rull vr0j@anaga.sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9309514  Rios-Rull    The principal investigator will study a series of
              interrelated  projects, all of them sharing the feature of studying the 
              determinants and the dynamics of the income and wealth  distribution.    The
              projects can be divided into two main groups differing in the  mechanism in
              place for the redistribution of income and wealth.   The first group of
              projects considers uninsurable employment risks,  while the second group allows
              for redistribution through tax  policies that are endogenously generated by the
              interaction of  agents.    The first project tries to answer the question of
              whether the key  properties of the income distribution in postwar U.S. can be 
              accounted for by the movements associated with fluctuations in  economic
              activity.  Both employment and the factor shares of output  present strong
              cyclical behavior.  The models used are hard to work  out and this study will
              solve a simpler approximated economy.   Associated with the problem just
              described is the question of what  can account for the large values of the Gini
              Indices in the  distribution of wealth.  This issue of understanding the
              origins of  the large wealth and income inequality is addressed in a second 
              project that tries to determine the properties of the process for  uninsurable
              labor income risk that are required to obtain wealth  distributions like the
              one observed.  This labor income process  will be compared to those found in
              empirical studies.    The second main part of this research deals with general
              issues of  economic policy determination and its relation to the distribution 
              of people over key variables, like wealth.  It builds on a dynamic  notion of
              political equilibrium.  The specific projects involved  are, first, to
              investigate the success of the redistributional  model, in accounting for
              empirical findings that relate growth  performance and the distribution of
              wealth.  The second project  explores the changes in the income and wealth
              distribution since  World War II.  It aims to find  out how much of those
              changes can be  accounted for purely on redistributional grounds.    ***
