Title       : RUI: Temporal and Spatial Systems in Child Language: Language/Thought (L/T)
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9309376

Award Number: 9309376
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Weist weist@fredonia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Fredonia
	      Central Avenue
	      Fredonia, NY  14063    716/673-3111

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9229,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9309376  WEIST                                ABSTRACT         The purpose of
              the research is to study the relationship  between conceptual development and
              language acquisition in the  domain of spatial and temporal location within a
              Polish/Finnish/  English comparative framework. The research was designed to
              test  the hypothesis that language/thought interactions are  bidirectional,
              i.e., cognitive and linguistic relativity are  inherent in the acquisition
              process. Previous research on  conceptual development has show that the form of
              space/time  representations changes during the period from about three to  four
              years of age. In the early phases of development, spatial  schemas are
              egocentric, routelike, and landmark-oriented, and  temporal schemas contain
              event-to-event sequential linkage. In  the late phase, children acquire the
              potential to construct  representations with properties which are abstracted
              from the  experience such as an allocentric/coordinated perspective on  space
              and a higher order/scheduled perspective on event  structure. Prior research by
              the PI and others on child language  has uncovered a transition in the form of
              spatial/temporal  location from mono- to bi-referential. Within the
              monoreferential  system, the primary object/event (or figure) is related to a 
              single referent object/event, and with the emergence of the  bireferential
              system, children acquire the potential to relate  the primary object/event to
              two or more referent objects/events.  Regarding cognitive relativity, the
              research was designed to  determine if the development of coordinated
              representations  establishes a state of conceptual readiness for the linguistic
               transition to bireferential location.       This research is relevant to a
              number of basic questions  concerning the process of language acquisition. It
              has been  proposed that the spatial systems are more primitive then  temporal
              systems, and the inference has been made that spatial  location will precede
              temporal location in development. This   inference has never been tested
              directly, and this research will  do so. Currently, cognitive relativity is
              likely to be accepted  as a demonstrated fact in the spatial domain but not the
              temporal  domain in spite of the fact that supporting evidence is equally 
              scarce in both areas. This research will provide a balanced  perspective on
              this issue. The question of linguistic relativity  is the most difficult to
              evaluate. This research takes advantage  of some general differences between
              Slavic and Finno-Ugric  languages to probe the potential effect of linguistic
              complexity  on the acquisition process.  ***
