Title       : Research Initiation Award: Nonisothermal Modeling of Resin Transfer Molding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1993       
File        : a9309317

Award Number: 9309317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce M. Kramer                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Renata S. Engel rengel@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9309317 Engel          This research concerns the development and verification
              of a method which will reduce the cycle time when manufacturing thick
              composites using resin transfer molding.  The resin transfer molding (RTM)
              process is a low pressure, low temperature method of transferring a thermoset
              resin into a mold which contains a fiber preform.  While it has been used
              predominately for manufacturing thin laminates, RTM is ideally suited for
              manufacturing thick composites, as a mold can easily accommodate three
              dimensional preforms.  However, manufacturing thick section composites is more
              involved than that of thin sections because of the difficulty with precise
              process control and the increased time required to infiltrate the fiber preform
              and cure the resin.          A numerical model will be developed to describe
              the nonisothermal infiltration of thermoset resins into thick fiber preforms. 
              The resin flow will be simulated at the micro scale level by considering the
              flow or resin around and through heated fiber bundles.  Direct heating will
              temporarily reduce viscosities for increased infiltration rates.  Furthermore,
              the resulting elevated temperature through the mold will reduce curing cycles. 
              This research will be verified experimentally with resin transfer molding
              equipment and various combinations of conduction heating and resistance heating
              of the fiber preform, mold and resin.  Such a model can be used to decrease the
              cycle time, such a intra resin transfer molding process.  This should reduce
              cost, while maintaining high quality.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
