Title       : Endogeneity in Brand Choice Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1993    
File        : a9309812

Award Number: 9309812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Miguel Villas-Boas Villas@haas.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell Winer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9309812  Villas-Boas    Random utility choice models are commonly utilized in
              empirical  work in a variety of theoretical and appliced areas.  These models 
              typically have two components: a deterministic component of utility  which is
              function of observed variables, and a stochastic component  or error term.     
              This project will develop a new multinomial probit model that  incorporates
              endogeneity of the variables accounting for the  deterministic component of the
              latent utility for the objects in  the choice set.  The context of the research
              is applied management  science, in particular, marketing science, where random
              utility  models of the type proposed are commonly used to evaluate the  effects
              of marketing variables such as price, promotion (e.g.  coupons), and
              advertising on brand choice.  The underlying  rationale is that previous
              research in this area has provided  potentially misleading estimates of the
              true effects of marketing  variables on brand choice because it has not
              accounted for the  endogeneity in these marketing variables.  The objective of
              this  research is thus to provide a method that generates consistent  estimates
              of the marketing variables effects and appropriate  optimal allocation of
              marketing resources, by constructing a model  where the endogeneity of the
              explanatory variables is explicitly  accounted for. These estimates will be
              compared with the ones  obtained through existing, single-equation methods. 
              The model will  be estimated using data from electronic scanners commonly used
              in  supermarkets and department stores.  ***
