Title       : RPG: Disruption of Equivalence Classes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1995      
File        : a9309997

Award Number: 9309997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17493              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol Pilgrim   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Wilmington
	      601 South College Road
	      Wilmington, NC  284033201    910/962-3167

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              9309997  PILGRIM    One fundamental feature of language is that seemingly
              arbitrary  stimuli, such as spoken or written words, are treated as if they 
              are equivalent to environmental referents.  Similarly, responses to  both a
              written word (e.g., a newspaper's forecast of rain) and a  spoken word (e.g., a
              weatherman's "Rain") may closely resemble  responses to the actual event (e.g.,
              the rain itself).  These sorts  of relations seem to be implied whenever we
              speak of symbolic  function.  Despite their arbitrary nature, however, the
              particular  symbolic relations that comprise any given language are relatively 
              standardized and unchanging.  Furthermore, preliminary data suggest  that some
              dimensions of symbolic relations may be particularly  resistant to change.  An
              interesting question to be asked of basic  symbolic (or equivalence) relations,
              then, concerns their  flexibility.  Under what conditions will symbolic
              relations be  changed, disrupted, or abandoned?    The present research will
              investigate the nature of symbolic  relations by focusing on their stability,
              once established.  The  primary objective of this research is to discover the
              conditions  under which symbolic relations are likely to change.  In a series 
              of four experiments, college-student subjects seated in front of a  computer
              display will be taught a "mini-language" or symbol system  by training
              relations between abstract figures.  Once symbolic  relations are demonstrated
              (as determined by a specified pattern of  responding on standardized test-trial
              arrangements known as  stimulus equivalence), experiences that contrast with or
              disconfirm  the originally established relations will be arranged.  For 
              example, in one experiment subjects will be penalized for showing  one of the
              originally-trained relations.  Subsequent tests will  reveal whether the
              programmed challenges have altered the original  symbolic relations. 
              Attempting to disrupt established symbolic  relations will increase our
              understanding of the conditions under   which natural language classes are able
              to accommodate change, as  well as the conditions under which modification of
              established  relations is unlikely.  Not only may such information be of value 
              in understanding basic language processes, but efforts to teach  language
              skills may be strengthened by findings related to  potential sources of
              disruption.    ***
