Title       : Producer Services Growth and the Development of Corporate Complex Networks in
               U.S. Metropolitan Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1996   
File        : a9309357

Award Number: 9309357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26876              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Richard Goe goe@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   One of the most important dimensions of the recent                        
              transformation to a service economy within the United States has               
              been the growth of producer-service industries, firms that                     
              provide products and services to business firms and other                      
              organizations, such as government agencies.  From 1980 to 1988,                
              these firms accounted for roughly one-third of all new jobs                    
              established in the nation.  The growth of these firms has                      
              substantially altered the ways that American businesses organize               
              production.  Most producer-services firms locate in metropolitan               
              areas and become parts of complex corporate networks, which                    
              usually consist of headquarters hubs linked to producer-service                
              firms.  This project will expand knowledge about the spatial and               
              social structures of these complex corporate networks in                       
              metropolitan areas of the U.S. through in-depth case studies of                
              four networks, two in manufacturing and two in services.                       
              Personal interviews will be conducted with officials in both                   
              contracting companies and producer-service contractors in the                  
              Akron, Cleveland, Kansas City, and San Francisco metropolitan                  
              areas.  Special attention will focus on identification of the                  
              reasons why U.S. corporations have turned to outside contractors               
              for the provision of producer services, how externalization of                 
              producer services has been related to broader forms of industrial              
              organization, what social relations underlie market relationships              
              between firms and producer-service providers, how forms of                     
              producer-service externalization vary among different types of                 
              industries, how corporate complexes have been spatially                        
              restructured, and what factors contribute to these spatial                     
              shifts.  Data from these interviews will be used to form and test              
              hypotheses about the spatial and social structure of industrial                
              organization.  They also will facilitate the development of a                  
              theoretical model of producer-service externalization, which will              
              be tested in subsequent studies.                                               
                   This project will help fill important gaps in knowledge                   
              about the dramatic restructuring of American industry, especially              
              the growth of producer-service firms and their operation within                
              complex corporate networks.  The data collected in interviews                  
              with both suppliers and users of producer services will test a                 
              number of important hypotheses, and they will assist in                        
              development of more general models of industrial organization.
