Title       : Computational Economics with Applications to Taxation, Industrial Organization,
               and Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1995   
File        : a9309613

Award Number: 9309613
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210794             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Judd   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    9309613  Judd    The primary goal of economic policy-making is to improve
              the  economic well-being of all.  To facilitate this, good analyses of  the
              economic growth process are needed.  With this in mind, the  investigator
              proposes to continue his work on computational methods  in economics with a
              focus on problems of taxation, imperfect  competition, and finance, and their
              importance in fostering  economic growth.    New methods for analyzing problems
              in finance will be applied, and  the effects of insider trading and appropriate
              government policies  will be studied.  In particular, the research will focus
              on how  insider trading affects capital accumulation and economic growth,  and
              on how vigorously insider trading laws should be enforced.  New  methods will
              also be used to analyze the effects of new securities  on financial markets. 
              These methods will then be used to study  which securities should be
              introduced, and the results will be  compared to the securities and contracts
              which exchanges have  incentives to introduce.    The study of imperfect
              competition will focus on assessing the  likely importance of tacit collusion
              and on evaluating various  tests which have been used to detect collusion. 
              Different  government policies such as merger and antitrust rules will be 
              evaluated to determine which rules are best for consumers, and  which are best
              for economic growth.    The optimal taxation part of the research will combine
              earlier work  on innovation with work on factor taxation to begin a dynamic 
              theory of optimal taxation with public goods, patents, innovation,  and
              endogenous economic growth.  The appropriate sharing of the tax  burden between
              labor and capital will be examined in light of  interactions between profits,
              innovation, job creation, and wages.    ***
