Title       : Enduring Rivalries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1993      
File        : a9309840

Award Number: 9309840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Diehl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9309840  Diehl    Historians commonly criticize studies in a behavioral mode as
              being  "ahistorical" and complain that these studies lump together a  disparate
              group of events without regard for historical context.   This investigation
              starts from the simple observation that many  wars have involved the same set
              of states, such as India and  Pakistan, or Israel and its Arab neighbors. 
              India and Pakistan  have fought three wars in the last forty-five years, with
              the  outcomes of the first wars arguably having a strong influence on  the
              occurrence and timing of the wars that followed.  Similarly,  Israel and Arab
              states have clashed over territory four times since  1948.  From these
              examples, the proposition that one conflict  should be viewed in the historical
              context of previous conflicts  seems plausible.  The researchers propose to
              investigate how the  enduring rivalry context interacts with, is the cause of,
              and is  the effect of power relationships and system structure.  Thus, they 
              are concerned with how enduring rivalries begin, when they escalate  to war,
              how they end, and what factors affecting enduring rivalries  are manipulable by
              national decision makers.    Given the importance of enduring rivalries in the
              international  system, this project investigates a total of forty-five enduring
               rivalries over the period 1816-1986.  Several major themes run  throughout
              this research project:  1) the concept of enduring  rivalries emphasizes the
              interconnection of international conflict  over space and time, 2) enduring
              rivalries have a "life cycle" -  they begin, develop, and die, and 3)
              state-level and dyadic  processes interact with system level phenomena. 
              Specifically, the  researchers address the following questions:  1) how do
              enduring  rivalries begin?  They look at how states become entangled in 
              recurring conflict in contrast to those that are able to resolve  their
              differences quickly and effectively; 2) how do enduring  rivalries end?  They
              are concerned with when enduring rivalrie s are  terminated and the conditions
              (peaceful or violent) surrounding  that end; 3) what are the dynamics of
              enduring rivalries?  The  specific foci here are understanding the timing of
              war in rivalries  as well as how conflict in enduring rivalries is influenced
              by past  (and the prospect of future) conflict and outcomes; and, 4) what 
              effect do enduring rivalries have on other conflict?  Here, they  look at how
              an enduring rival's relationships, and the propensity  for conflict, with other
              states is affected by their participation  in an intense competition (e.g.,
              what effect did the Cold War have  on U.S. relations with other states?)
