Title       : Properties of Transsaccadic Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1995       
File        : a9309564

Award Number: 9309564
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1993   
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194587             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Irwin dirwin@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9309564  IRWIN    Our eyes move from object to object in the world several times
              each  second.  We scan the world by means of saccades--fast eye movements  that
              are separated by brief fixations during which the eyes are  relatively still. 
              Each eye movement causes visual stimulation to  be swept across the retinas,
              producing a blur or smear that is not  ordinarily perceived because vision is
              suppressed during saccades.   Because of this suppression, we acquire visual
              information from the  world only during fixations, when the eyes are still. 
              For this  reason, our visual information about the world is registered in 
              isolated glimpses that are separated in time.  Furthermore, the  contents of
              these isolated glimpses are not identical, because  different regions of the
              world fall on different parts of the  retina when the eyes change position. 
              Despite this rapidly  changing and discontinuous visual input, we ordinarily
              perceive the  world as unified, stable, and continuous.  How the perceptual 
              system accomplishes this has puzzled psychologists and vision  researchers for
              over a century.  One frequent hypothesis is that  the contents of individual
              eye fixations are combined in memory  across eye movements to produce a
              coherent mental representation of  the visual environment.  This research will
              investigate the  characteristics of this hypothetical process.  In particular,
              the  research will determine how much information is remembered from one  eye
              fixation to the next, whether some kinds of information are  remembered better
              than others, and how this information is stored  and combined across eye
              movements.    The experimental procedure will involve having individual
              observers  view visual displays on a computer terminal screen while their eye 
              movements are monitored by an eyetracking device.  During selected  eye
              movements, the visual display will disappear and the observer's  memory for
              that display will be assessed.  For example, the  observer may indicate whether
              a second display is identi cal to or  different from the first display, attempt
              to report some particular  information that was present in the first display,
              or name an  indicated object in a new display as rapidly as possible.  These 
              responses will reveal what aspects of the original display are  stored in
              memory, maintained across an eye movement, and used to  relate successive eye
              fixations to each other.    The question of how people perceive a continuous
              visual world  across eye movements is a classic problem in perception.  The 
              research will advance the solution to this problem.  In addition,  the research
              will lead to the development of more sophisticated  theories of spatial
              representation and spatial cognition in  general.  From a practical standpoint,
              the research will help human  factors engineers design visual displays, and
              tasks that require  multiple eye fixations on a display, to take best advantage
              of an  operator's ability or inability to combine different kinds of  visual
              information across eye movements.    ***
