Title       : RESEARCH INITIATION AWARD: The Full Wave Analysis of High Speed Electrical
               Interconnects for VLSI Packaging on High Performance Multiprocessor Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1993      
File        : a9309179

Award Number: 9309179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George Lea                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Gedney gedney@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9148,
Abstract    :
              9309179  Gedney  The purpose of this project is the  development of techniques
              that will  provide the fullwave analysis of  complex electrical interconnect 
              networks of VLSI packages.  To  facilitate the accelerated  development of high
              performance  VLSI devices, accurate and  efficient analysis tools are 
              essential for the proper design of  the electronic interconnects.  
              Principally, these methods will  provide, 1) the extraction of 
              transmission-line equivalent  circuit parameters over a broad  frequency range,
              2) the modeling of  coupling between interconnect  etchs, signal lines, leads,
              or  other coupled lines in complex  environments, and 3) accurate  simulations
              of pulse propagation on  three-dimensional interconnect  networks.  The
              proposed analysis  techniques are based on: i) a  generalized Yee-algorithm
              based on  unstructured grids, and ii) a time-  domain finite element method
              based  on higher-order vector elements.   These methods are extremely robust, 
              and are capable of simulating  temporal field in complex  environment, as well
              as being  highly computationally efficient.   Furthermore, they are designed to
               be interfaced with computer aided  modeling and tools to facilitate  the
              design engineer.  The  simulation of complex electrical  interconnect networks
              will lead to  sizable problems with potentially  109 degree of freedom.  To 
              facilitate problems of this scale,  efficient prarallel algorithms are 
              proposed.  Specifically, spatial  decomposition techniques will be  used for
              both the generalized Yee-  algorithm and the time domain  finite element
              method, while  efficient iterative matrix solution  algorithms based on domain 
              decomposition methods, e.g.,  additive Schwarz methods with a  coarse
              preconditioner based on a  wire-basket based method, will be  studied for the
              time-domain finite  element method approach.  ***
