Title       : Neuropeptide Y and the Regulation of Metabolic Homeostasis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1993    
File        : a9309545

Award Number: 9309545
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. White   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9309545  White         One of the most basic needs of a complex organism is the 
              maintenance of nutrient and energy homeostasis, a process which  requires
              coordination of nutrient, hormonal, and neuronal signals  to integrate
              metabolism with behavior.  Food intake, appetite and  body weight are
              controlled by the brain through an interaction with  peripheral signals.  This
              interaction is complex and poorly  understood even though it is of obvious
              importance.  Recently, it  has been discovered that a peptide in the brain,
              neuropeptide Y,  induces feeding when injected into specific nuclei of the 
              hypothalamus.  Indeed neuropeptide Y is one of the most abundant  peptides and
              is one of the most potent stimulants of food intake in  satiated mammals. 
              During his previous NSF support, Dr. White  demonstrated that neuropeptide Y is
              an integral link in the  communication between the periphery and the brain for
              regulating  energy homeostasis and food intake.  He will now determine the 
              means by which neuropeptide Y gene expression in the hypothalamus  and
              pituitary is directly responsive to peripheral hormones  regulating metabolism,
              i.e. insulin, glucocorticoids and thyroid  hormone.  Dr. White will examine how
              much neuropeptide Y is formed  under various experimental conditions that
              manipulate peripheral  hormone levels.  These studies of neuropeptide Y gene
              regulation by  the peripheral hormones will provide valuable information about
              the  physiological role of this peptide in integrating metabolic signals 
              important in energy homeostasis, food intake and body weight  regulation with
              neuroendocrine function of the hypothalamus.  These  studies can serve as a
              basis for understanding how such regulatory  systems become disturbed in
              physiologies such as obesity and  anorexia nervosa and may lead to development
              of therapies for  controlling human eating disorders.   Indeed, Dr. White in 
              collaboration with others in the Division of Endocrinology,  submitted New
              Technology Disclosures for the use of specifi c diet  formulations for the
              treatment of morbid obesity and for the  stimulation of growth hormone
              secretion in growth hormone-  suppressed individuals through the manipulations
              of specific brain  neuropeptide systems.    ***
