Title       : Bioluminescence: Molecular Mechanisms and Biochemical Control in Microorganisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1995   
File        : a9306879

Award Number: 9306879
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Hastings hastings@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Therese Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to understand the molecular and              
              biochemical mechanisms of bioluminescence in bacteria and                      
              dinoflagellates, including the genes coding for the proteins                   
              involved and their evolutionary origins.  In dinoflagellates, the              
              luciferin, a tetrapyrrole probably derived from chlorophyll, is                
              oxidized enzymatically to produce light.  The mechanism of this                
              reaction, the enzymatic intermediates, and the identity of the                 
              emitter, will be studied using proteins produced by recombinant                
              techniques from cloned genes and synthetic substrate(s).  The                  
              structures, sequences and organization of these genes will be                  
              determined, and their evolutionary origins will be investigated.               
              In bacteria, luciferase is a flavoprotein monooxygenase which                  
              catalyzes the oxidation of aliphatic aldehydes to the corresponding            
              acids.  Luciferase-bound intermediates along with accessory                    
              "emitter" proteins will be characterized using photophysical and               
              enzymological techniques to investigate the nature of the primary              
              excited state and how it is formed.  Possible alternative functions            
              of luciferase, such as protection against cellular damage by oxygen            
              radicals, will also be studied using bacteria which grow in 100%               
              oxygen and were isolated from a human wound.                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              Although the emission of visible light by living organisms is a                
              rare, curiosity of nature, it is also a unique tool for exploring              
              unusual biological energetic processes.  The objective of the                  
              research is to understand the molecular and biochemical mechanisms             
              of bioluminescence, and to examine the control and evolutionary                
              origin of the genes involved.  We will principally use simple                  
              marine unicellular organisms in this study; bacteria and                       
              dinoflagellates.  The bacteria emit blue-green light. These cells              
              often live in association with higher organisms in the gut tract or            
              in specialized light emitting organs.  Dinoflagellates have a very             
              different bioluminescence system which seems to have evolved                   
              independently, and makes use of a substance related to chlorophyll.            
                                                                                             
              The dinoflagellates are responsible for the blooms (called red                 
              tides) in the ocean, where they produce potent neurotoxins which               
              accumulate in the shellfish that ingest them, thus making the                  
              shellfish poisonous for man.  The phosphorescence of the ocean seen            
              at night is also due to dinoflagellate bioluminescence.  Our                   
              studies are learn about the biochemistry for this peculiar light               
              emission reaction.
