Title       : Molecular Phylogenetics of the Sternorrhyncha (Insecta: Homoptera) and Their
               Bacterial Endosymbionts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1994     
File        : a9306495

Award Number: 9306495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1993   
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214818             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy A. Moran nmoran@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9306495 Moran          Aphids, whiteflies and related insects include some of
              the most devastating pests of agriculture and forestry.  The survival and
              reproduction of all of these insects depend on distinctive bacteria called
              endosymbionts.  These bacteria live inside special cells of their insect hosts
              and they manufacture essential nutrients that are absent from the plant sap
              that is the sole diet of these insects.  Endosymbionts are normally passed from
              mother insect to offspring, with transmission occurring internally.  Scientists
              studying these insects have long speculated that properties of the insects,
              such as ability to attack particular varieties of plants, might depend on the
              nature of the endosymbionts.  Furthermore, associations with one strain of
              bacteria might sometimes be lost and replaced by associations with a different
              strain.  In fact, acquisition of new bacterial associates has been suspected to
              be the basis of new abilities of insects to attack previously resistant plant
              varieties.  Until recently, these suspicions could not be tested because the
              endosymbiont bacteria cannot be grown outside their insect hosts and were
              therefore difficult or impossible to characterize.  Modern methods of molecular
              biology now allow us to explore these previously mysterious organisms.  This
              project, a collaboration between an entomologist and a bacteriologist, uses DNA
              sequences from both the insect genes and the bacterial genes in order to answer
              questions regarding the origin and persistence of the associations between
              these insects and their endosymbiotic bacteria.  Preliminary results have shown
              that the association between aphids and their primary endosymbion ts is
              extremely long lived, persisting for millions of years.  An implication for
              agricultural pest management is that the appearance of new strains of aphid
              pests is not due to the acquisition od new bacterial associates, as previously
              speculated.  Also, initial work during the first year of funding with a prior
              NSF award showed that a new strain of whitefly that has become a devastating
              pest of vegetable crops did not originate through the gain of a new bacterial
              associate, as speculated previously by agricultural entomologists. %%%         
              Characterization of the long term history of the endosymbiotic associations
              between these specialized bacteria and their host insects will add to basic
              knowledge of an essential aspect of the biology of these important insect
              groups which include many economically important pest species.  This research
              takes advantage of recent developments in molecular biology and also in
              computer processing of the DNA sequences. ***                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
