Title       : Response to Crowding and Vegetation Shade in Impatiens capensis: Genetic
               Variation and Fitness Consequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1997      
File        : a9306637

Award Number: 9306637
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1993   
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johanna M. Schmitt Johanna_Schmitt@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9109,9169,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9306637 Schmitt          Many plants display striking stem elongation and other
              morphological responses to the reduced ratio of red to far red light (R:FR)
              characteristic of vegetation shade; recent physiological studies have shown
              that these responses can be induced by the R:FR of light reflected onto plant
              stems by neighbors.  Plant physiologists have suggested that shoot elongation
              in response to reduced R:FR is advantageous because it enables plants to sense
              and avoid competition for light.  On the other hand, shoot elongation is
              thought to be disadvantageous at low density.  The study proposed here will
              provide the first test of these predictions in an evolutionary context.  By
              examining the relationship between elongation and fitness at manipulated
              densities in natural populations of the common native annual    Impatiens      
              capensis    (jewelweed or touch me not), Dr. Schmitt will determine whether
              elongation in response to low R:FR is favored in crowded stands, but
              disadvantageous at low density.  Moreover, by using R:FR to induce or inhibit
              elongation, the performance of experimental plants with "appropriate" and
              "inappropriate" morphologies can be compared both at low density and in dense
              canopies.  Dr. Schmitt will also examine genetic variation in response to R:FR
              within and between natural populations to determine the potential for this
              trait to evolve and test for adaptive differentiation in response to light
              quality among pop ulations.  The integration of quantitative genetic analysis,
              studies of population differentiation and adaptation, and direct measurement of
              selection in different environments will provide valuable information about the
              evolution of an ecologically important functional trait.  This research will
              integrate genetic, physiological, and population biology approaches to the
              study of adaptive plasticity, and will introduce physiological methods for
              using R:FR to manipulate morphology to plant population biologists. %%%        
               The results will contribute to understanding how plants interact in natural
              communities and will provide an ecological and evolutionary context for current
              research on the molecular genetics and physiology of plant responses to light
              spectral quality.  This work will also be relevant to agriculture and forestry
              because it will provide useful information about how response to R:FR affects
              performance and yield in dense stands.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
