Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Statistical Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1993       
File        : a9306196

Award Number: 9306196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99997              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Ruppert davidr@orie.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,
Abstract    :
                   The project will involve work in five areas of statistical                
              modeling:  (1) efficient bandwidth selectors for nonparametric                 
              estimation by local polynomial regression, (2) risk assessment by              
              orthogonal array sampling, (3) variance modeling for quality                   
              improvement and productivity in engineering, (4) robust                        
              regression with errors-in-variables, and (5) adaptive spline                   
              approximations in dynamic programming.                                         
                   The principle investigator and his graduate students will                 
              investigate several applications of statistics to engineering and              
              environmental science.  The first application is to modeling the               
              relationship between two quantities, for example, percent carbon               
              in an alloy and hardness, when there is no known mathematical                  
              form for this relationship so that the mathematical form must be               
              derived from data analysis.  The second is the assessment of                   
              risks (say of cancer) from environmental policies when many of                 
              the relevant quantities (say the dose response between cancer and              
              dioxin) are known only with uncertainty.  The third is the design              
              of engineering experiments to learn how to reduce variation in                 
              manufacturing processes.  The fourth is in the area statistical                
              modeling when some of the data are subject to gross measurement                
              errors---the object is to identify the gross errors or at least                
              to eliminate their effect upon the estimation of quantities of                 
              interest.  The fifth is a new computational method for finding                 
              the best method of controlling systems, for example, the ``best''              
              inventory policy for a business where demand is uncertain.  Here               
              the ``best'' policy properly balances the cost of excess                       
              inventory with the loss of sales when demand exceeds                           
              inventory.
