Title       : CAA: DNA-Protein Interactions Regulating Transcription of the Id Protein Gene
               During Myogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1993      
File        : a9306547

Award Number: 9306547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra B. Sharp ssharp@calstatela.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-3481

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9222,
Abstract    :
              This research is supported by an NSF Career Advancement Award to               
              Women.  The work addresses a single aspect of one of the most                  
              compelling questions challenging molecular biologists today, that              
              is, how the differentiation processes by which animals develop                 
              specialized organs from a single fertilized egg are regulated.  One            
              such process is that of muscle formation or myogenesis.  During                
              myogenesis, myogenic cells turn on expression of numerous genes                
              whose projects are specific to and necessary for function of                   
              muscle.  The turning on of muscle specific genes is accompanied by             
              down-regulation of expression of a family of genes which code for              
              proteins whose function appears to be to inhibit differentiation,              
              the Id or Inhibitor of differentiation proteins.  Id proteins are              
              not unique to muscle cells and one hypothesis is that Id inhibits              
              the differentiation of cells already commited to a specific                    
              developmental pathway until such time in embryogenesis as terminal             
              differentiation is appropriate.  In culture, when myoblasts or pre-            
              muscle cells are treated with the drug doxorubicin, and are then               
              placed in medium in which they would normally differentiate into               
              myotubes or muscle cells, they do not differentiate.  Instead, the             
              cells produce abnormally high levels of Id mRNA and protein, and               
              the genes which should be turned on during differentiation remain              
              off.  Genes are turned on and off by interactions between                      
              specialized regulatory proteins and specific DNA sequences in their            
              promoter or control regions.  These experiments are designed to                
              determine and compare the sites of specific protein-DNA                        
              interactions in the promoter region of the Id gene in cells which              
              are expressing Id at different levels, myoblasts, myotubes, and                
              muscle cells affected by exposure to doxorubicin.  "In vivo                    
              footprinting" will be used to determine where the regulatory                   
              proteins are bound.  The nucleotide sequence of the promoter region            
              will be determined, and the occupied sites will be compared to                 
              those already known to bind various tissue specific and ubiquitous             
              regulatory proteins.                                                           
                                                                                             
              In order for any biological developmental process to occur                     
              successfully, it must be carefully regulated.  Molecular biologists            
              have been successful at identifying a number of different                      
              regulatory proteins which control development.  One such protein is            
              called Id, and one of its functions appears to be to keep pre-                 
              muscle cells from becoming muscle tissue until exactly the right               
              time in development.  The results of this research will increase               
              our appreciation for the intricacies of development, and in so                 
              doing may provide insight into some developmental disorders or                 
              diseases which occur when molecular controls fail.
