Title       : Rates of DNA Sequence Change on Avian Chromosomes: A Test of the Replicative
               Division Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1996      
File        : a9306823

Award Number: 9306823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Quinn tquinn@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306823 Quinn          The proposed research will investigate the rate of single
              copy DNA divergence in the sex and autosomal chromosomes of birds.  The
              replicative division hypothesis suggests that the number of rounds of
              replicative division in germ line cells per unit chronological time determines
              the rate of DNA sequence change.  Birds provide an excellent model for testing
              this interesting hypothesis because in birds the heterogametic sex is reversed
              from that seen in mammals.  Microdissection of avian chromosome metaphase
              spreads and DNA amplification and cloning techniques will be used to isolate
              single copy DNA from the W, Z, and autosomal chromosomes of several waterfowl,
              and the nucleotide sequence of these clones will be determined.  These data
              will be used to compare rates on different chromosome type in relation to the
              number of replicative divisions that particular chromosome undergoes. %%% The
              replicative division hypothesis and the repair mechanism hypothesis address the
              basic pattern of heritable mutational change in DNA.  Unfortunately, these
              hypotheses cannot be tested using mammalian chromosomes.  This proposal
              utilizes some well designed experimental procedures, an appropriate model
              system (birds), and state of the art chromosome and molecular techniques to
              provide a powerful test for these two opposing hypotheses.  The results have
              several implications.  First, sex specific markers will be obtained, and these
              markers can  be used in breeding programs of endangered species that do not
              show sexual dimorphism.  Second, the results of W chromosome rates of change
              can be compared to existing information on maternally inherited mtDNA
              sequences, and these data may have important implications to systematic
              biology.  Finally, some very important molecular techniques will be refined,
              and these offer great potential to other studies of comparative chromosome
              mapping. ***                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
