Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Global Qualitative Analysis of Ecological Models with
               Delays and Diffusions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1993 
File        : a9306239

Award Number: 9306239
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yang Kuang kuang@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306239  Kuang       The investigator studies the global qualitative behavior of
               solutions of some ecological models with delays or diffusions.   The principal
              themes of this work are the fundamental problems of  finding various criteria
              for the uniform persistence of these  considered systems, the global stability
              of steady states, the  existence of periodic solutions and spatial patterns,
              and the  existence of chaotic behaviors.  These topics indeed cover most 
              aspects of the so-called global qualitative analysis of nonlinear  systems.  In
              particular, the investigator studies some  mathematical models of populations
              dispersing among patches in  heterogeneous environments, where various kind of
              interactions  are considered. In addition to performing the traditional local 
              stability or bifurcation analysis, he considers global stability,  bifurcation,
              and chaos aspects of the nonlinear systems.       Time delays and space
              variations constitute  integral components of most ecological, biological, 
              physiological, chemical, physical, economic and atmospheric  processes.  Almost
              all these real-life processes are nonlinear in  nature.  They are normally too
              complicated to simulate in a lab,  or too difficult to understand from
              experimental work alone.  In  order to better manage or control such processes,
              it is necessary  to study them mathematically.  Most of the previous approaches
              to  these applied mathematical problems have been local (pretending  the system
              behaves in a small region as if it were linear rather  than nonlinear) and thus
              do not paint the whole picture of the  real systems.  This project tries to
              gain a full view of the  real picture by focusing on the nonlinear effects of
              the dynamics  of the considered systems.  This work offers a better 
              understanding of the dynamic interplay of the effects of time  delays and
              diffusions.  In particular, the final results can be  useful to ecologists,
              engineers, and system scientists.  ***
