Title       : Dissertation Research: Community and Regional Organization in First Intermediate
               Period Egypt: An Archaeological Investigation at Abydos, Egypt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1993     
File        : a9306806

Award Number: 9306806
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew D. Adams  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. David O'Connor, Mr. Matthew Adams, a                
              graduate student at the University of Pennsylvania, will collect               
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze material from              
              ongoing archaeological excavations at the site of Abydos which is              
              located in the Nile Valley of Upper Egypt. During previous work at             
              the site Dr. O'Connor discovered a group of houses which were                  
              destroyed by fire and not reoccupied. The result of rapid burning              
              was extraordinary preservation. For example, the team has uncovered            
              ceramic vessels with contents such as grain and figs intact. Ovens             
              were discovered with bread moulds and the bread within still in                
              place. The site thus provides a unique opportunity to examine daily            
              life. In addition, large quantities of lithics, seals and ceramics             
              were also recovered. Mr. Adams will analyze these remains as well              
              as other materials from adjacent time periods to determine how                 
              social organization changed over time.                                         
                                                                                             
              Abydos is important because of its geographically marginal                     
              position. It lies at the boundary between the Upper and Lower                  
              Kingdoms and as centralized authority waxed and waned over time,               
              the political, social and economic position of Abydos was directly             
              affected. Mr. Adams is focussing his work on the First Intermediate            
              Period when centralized rule was in a decline and he wishes to                 
              learn what kinds of adaptations took place at a local level. He                
              will examine the extent to which regional networks continued to                
              exist and whether or not a hierarchical political and settlement               
              organization was maintained in this provincial region. He will also            
              examine changing economic relationships within Abydos itself to see            
              whether occupational specialization declined.                                  
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. While much is known            
              about how complex societies develop, archaeologists have relatively            
              little understanding of the reverse process when large scale units             
              fall apart. The work will increase our understanding of an                     
              important but little known site and provide data of interest to                
              many archaeologists. It will also aid in the training of a                     
              promising young scientist.
