Title       : An Investigation of Biomembranes as Fractal Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1994       
File        : a9306382

Award Number: 9306382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary F. Blackwell blackwem@lawrence.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lawrence University
	      Box 599
	      Appleton, WI  549120599    414/739-3681

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9221,9229,
Abstract    :
              The present proposal is to explore, by means of numerical and                  
              theoretical investigations, the feasibility of the hypothesis                  
              that biomembranes define spaces that have a random fractal                     
              geometry, and to design experimental tests of the hypothesis.                  
              Numerical methods will be developed for the study of molecular                 
              mobility in two-dimensional hard sphere fluids, so that the                    
              time/distance scale dependence of lipid/lipid and lipid/protein                
              obstruction can be more fully elucidated.  Experimental                        
              measurements of anomalous transport properties will be developed               
              in order to find evidence of (1) dependence of the diffusion                   
              coefficient on the measurement length scale and (2) time-                      
              dependence of the second order rate coefficient in homogeneous                 
              solutions and in biomembranes.  The goal of these research                     
              planning activities is to design experimental and theoretical                  
              protocols that will form the basis of a proposal to the NSF for a              
              Research in Undergraduate Institutions grant, to support a three               
              year program of research carried out be undergraduate students at              
              Lawrence University, under the direction of the present PI.                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Molecular mobility may be an important determinant of metabolic                
              rates in biomembranes, particularly for enzymes and substrates                 
              that are spatially restricted, as in portions of the                           
              photosynthetic and respiratory electron transport chains.                      
              Biomembranes are heterogeneous, disordered media that may possess              
              fractal geometry.  Recent theoretical investigations have                      
              suggested that transport properties, such as diffusion and                     
              conduction, may well be anomalous in heterogeneous spaces.  The                
              diffusion constant has been shown to depend on the length scale                
              of measurement in random fractals, and the rate coefficient of                 
              bimolecular reactions, a constant in homogeneous reaction spaces,              
              has been shown to be time dependent.  The research planning                    
              activities proposed here are motivated by the idea that these                  
              recent theoretical developments may provide fundamental new                    
              insights into the nature of molecular mobility in biomembranes.                
              If membranes are fractal objects, then they may display anomalous              
              transport properties experimentally, and this may not only                     
              resolve some longstanding issues in biophysics, such as the                    
              disagreement between diffusion constants measured on different                 
              length scales, but also have profound metabolic implications.
