Title       : Macroscopic Quantum Phenomena in Magnetic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1994     
File        : a9306947

Award Number: 9306947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anupam K. Garg agarg@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
              The quantum mechanical tunneling of macroscopic degrees of freedom             
              will be studied in magnetic systems, such as the total moment in               
              ferromagnetic and the Neel vector in antiferromagnetic particles of            
              size approx. 100 Angstroms. If such exists, it would significantly             
              enlarge the known range of applicability of the superposition                  
              principle. Special emphasis will be placed upon studying                       
              dissipation due to environmental degrees of freedom with a view to             
              guiding and understanding experiments. Examples of dissipative                 
              agents are nuclear spins, eddy currents and spin waves. Certain                
              quantum phenomena resulting from the topological phase in the spin             
              path integral will also be studied. Magnetic domain wall motion                
              will also be studied from a tunneling perspective. A combination of            
              path integral and perturbative methods will be employed involving              
              both numerical and analytical work.                                            
              %%%                                                                            
              This proposal involves the theoretical study of quantum mechanics              
              applied to systems with a large number of degrees of freedom. The              
              question is whether systems whose state is determined by a                     
              superposition of macroscopically distinct states (eg. a magnetic               
              moment and its orientation) can behave in a similar way to those               
              with few degrees of freedom - that is exhibit tunneling across                 
              classically forbidden barriers or exhibit resonance. Good                      
              candidates for these phenomena are small magnetic particles, but,              
              to date, experiments aiming at proof of existence have been                    
              controversial. This work aims to guide and critique experiment and             
              to study those mechanisms (energy loss) which could mask the                   
              effect. The work has value because of its possible relevance to                
              magnetic recording media where such effects would be undesirable.
