Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Existence and Blow-up of Solutions of Nonlinear Wave
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1993    
File        : a9306797

Award Number: 9306797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans Lindblad   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Work to be done on this project concerns the time evolution               
              of solutions to partial differential equations, especially                     
              nonlinear wave equations.  The basic question which arises in                  
              these studies is the possibility of breakdown or blow-up of                    
              solutions.  For some equations one has global existence of                     
              solutions whereas for others the solution will fail to exist                   
              after some finite time.  One focus of the work is in the study of              
              low regularity solutions, that is, solutions with low regularity               
              data.  The motivation is from equations in physics in which                    
              energy is conserved.  If local existence can be established, the               
              conserved energy will guarantee existence in the energy norm                   
              indefinitely.  Present results require that a large number of                  
              derivatives be small, leaving no sense of what can go wrong. In                
              addition to studying the period of existence of solutions, work                
              will also be done in trying to describe the behavior of solutions              
              at the onset of blow-up, perhaps one of the most challenging                   
              problems facing researchers in this area today.                                
                   Many important equations in physics can be written as                     
              systems of nonlinear wave equations.  These include classical                  
              field theory in a fixed gauge, continuum mechanics and the                     
              classical equations of Einstein, Yang Mills and equations of                   
              nonlinear elasticity.  The mathematical study of how the                       
              solutions to these systems progress with time centers on some of               
              the most important questions under investigation in mathematical               
              analysis.
