Title       : Development of a Model System for Studies of Structural Alterations Arising from
               Oxidative Modification of Membrane Associated Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1993       
File        : a9306348

Award Number: 9306348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: K A. Sukalski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              The long-range goal of this research is to define the role of the              
              lipid bilayer in mediating oxidative damage to membrane-associated             
              proteins.  The data resulting from the preliminary experiments                 
              proposed here will be the basis of a regular proposal to NSF.  That            
              proposal will be to use the model system consisting of cytochrome              
              b5 and cytochrome b5 reductase incorporated separately and together            
              into the bilayer of liposomes and to characterize, in terms of                 
              protein structure and function, the effects of free radical                    
              generation within the bilayer and from the acqueous media. Changes             
              in protein structure will be determined by peptide mapping on HPLC,            
              amino acid analysis and, ultimately, by protein sequencing.                    
              Oxidative damage to a cysteine or lysine residue essential for the             
              binding of NADH by cytochrome b5 reductase would be expected to                
              result in impaired enzymic activity.  In addition,, the oxidation              
              of other amino acid residues including histidine, arginine and                 
              proline as well as cysteine or lysine residues of either protein,              
              not involved at the active site, could potentially impair function             
              because of alterations in conformation.  Finally, cytochrome b5                
              contains heme iron which may serve as a nucleation site for                    
              oxidative damage of amino acid residues in which vicinity of the               
              heme or on a neighboring cytochrome b5 reductase molecule.                     
              Once the amino acid residues susceptible to oxidative damage are               
              known, careful studies can be done on the effect of changing the               
              lipid composition of the liposomes and contrasting the effects of              
              free radicals generated within the bilayer to those generated in               
              the surrounding aqueous compartment.                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              The studies proposed here will establish conditions for examining              
              oxidative modifications to membrane-associated enzymes in a model              
              system.  Oxidant species may originate exogenously from components             
              of tobacco smoke and air pollutants as well as exposure to                     
              radiation.  They may arise endogenously from normal metabolic                  
              reactions and through the metabolism of certain solvents, drugs and            
              pesticides.  Highly reactive oxidant molecules can cause tissue                
              damage by reacting with polyunsaturated fatty acids in cell                    
              membranes, nucleotides in DNA and cytosolic proteins.  However,                
              little is known about the extent of oxidation of proteins                      
              associated with lipid bilayers.  The potential for impaired                    
              function is great as membrane-associated proteins are responsible              
              for a host of reactions necessary to maintain viability.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        //
