Title       : Vocalizations and Fitness in Female White-Crowned Sparrows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1993      
File        : a9306467

Award Number: 9306467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luis F. Baptista   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      
	      San Francisco, CA  94118    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              9306467  Baptista    Young white-crowned sparrows learn songs from adults, and
              vocal tradition coupled with  isolation of local populations gives rise to
              regional song dialects.  A number of parallels  between speech development in
              humans and song development in birds have been noted.   These include early
              language acquisition, bilingualism or singing two song types at dialect 
              boundaries, lateralization of the brain, location of speech/song storage
              centers, and vertical  tradition along sexual lines (i.e., sons learn from
              fathers and daughters from mothers).    Although song and singing behavior of
              male white-crowned sparrows have been subjects of  intense study over the last
              three decades, little attention has been paid to song of females.   Dr.
              Baptista and his colleagues recently documented regular singing by female
              white-  crowned sparrows.  The present research is designed to test the
              function(s) of female singing  in territoriality and/or mate advertisement as
              well as the role of song quality in acquiring a  high-quality mate early in the
              breeding season to ensure successful breeding.  One prediction  to be tested is
              that females with good-quality songs will produce more young than females  with
              poor-quality songs (as measured by a new technique called autocorrelation). 
              Even  though white-crowned sparrows (like many species of songbirds) have
              generally been thought  to be monogamous, previous studies have indicated that
              over 30% of white-crowned  sparrows in a population are products of matings
              outside the "monogamous" pair.  The  pursuit of such matings may be a female
              strategy that ensures maximum production of  young, but it also leads to
              conflict between the sexes.  Dr. Baptista predicts that high-quality  females
              will try to mate with more than one male.  This prediction will be tested by
              DNA  fingerprinting, which will reveal identities of males fathering young in a
              nest.    Recognition of the occurrence and role of female vocalizations has the
              potential to  revolutionize our under standing of vocal behavior, its social
              and evolutionary importance,  and its neural and hormonal mechanisms.
