Title       : Characterization of Copper-Dependent Regulation of Plastocyanin Biosynthesis in
               Scenedesmus obliquus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1993 
File        : a9306694

Award Number: 9306694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanette M. Quinn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              9306694 Quinn The objective of this proposal is to carry out preliminary studies
              essential for a detailed investigation of the mechanism of copper dependent
              plastocyanin biosynthesis in Scenedesmus.  This detailed study will be
              undertaken by the PI as part of her independent research program.  Specifically
              the objectives of the research proposal are to identify and isolate cDNA clones
              containing Scenedesmus plastocyanin encoding sequences and to generate a
              genomic library and screen it to identify plastocyanin encoding genomic clones.
               The genomic clones will be subcloned and sequenced so that potential
              regulatory regions can be compared with sequences from the copper regulated
              cytochrome C6 gene of Chlamydomonas.  Finally, since Scenedesmus is currently
              not a convenient experimental system for molecular and genetic analyses, the
              phytocyanin encoding genomic clones will be introduced into the heterologous
              host C. reinhardtii and the resulting transformants tested for their ability to
              express the Scenedesmus plastocyanin gene in response to the level of available
              copper ions.   The outcome of these experiments will determine the future
              directions and methodologies to be used for further characterization of the
              mechanism of regulation of plastocyanin biosynthesis.  The results of these
              experiments will offer insights into the conservation of copper independent
              regulatory pathways between related organisms.  The utility of this novel
              approach, if sucessful, could also greatly expand future prospects for algal
              molecular biology in general. %%% Algae are capable of utilizing two different
              proteins in the photosynthetic process. Which is used depends on the presen ce
              or absence of copper ions in the environment.  This project examines the
              mechanisms underlying the induction of expression of one of these genes in
              response to the presence of copper ions in the environment. ***                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
