Title       : SGER: Collaborative Research: Hurricane Andrew Effects on Forest Composition in
               the Everglades
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1993     
File        : a9306317

Award Number: 9306317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fla Dept of Environ Protec
	      3900 Commonwealth Boulevard
	      Tallahassee, FL  323996515    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   When Hurricane Andrew slammed into Everglades National Park               
              with wind gusts over 170 mph, it decimated the local forests while             
              leaving areas of open wetlands largely unharmed.  Trees were                   
              stripped of all their leaves, most branches were broken off, and               
              many trees were toppled or shattered.  Only a few trees remained               
              standing in some mangrove forests.  Evergreen woodlands were                   
              transformed from lush forests to brown tangles of leafless debris.             
              Bald cypress and slash pine forest were also heavily damaged.                  
              Although Andrew was a natural disaster of enormous scale,                      
              hurricanes in the region have been frequent in the past and must               
              have been an important force shaping these forests.  As the first              
              major hurricane to directly strike the Park in over 25 years,                  
              Hurricane Andrew presents a rare  opportunity to investigate the               
              sensitivity of different forests types to hurricane damage and to              
              observe the speed and patterns of forest recovery.  This                       
              information is important because forests make up critical fish and             
              wildlife habitats and recreational areas with the Everglades, even             
              though the Everglades are commonly thought of as open wetlands.                
                   Both the degree of damage and the speed with which trees can              
              regrow will determine which species make up a post-hurricane                   
              forest.  The native tree species within the Park appear to differ              
              greatly in their abilities both to withstand hurricane-force winds             
              and to regrow after hurricane damage.  The recovering forest should            
              be composed of those tree species that were damaged the least,                 
              those that can resprout the fastest, as well as those that can                 
              invade open areas.  Research will focus on the extent of damage to             
              the tree species within mangrove, tropical hardwood, pine, and                 
              cypress forests in Everglades National Park.  Data will also be                
              taken on which species recover from damage, how fast they recover,             
              and which species colonize open areas in the forests left by the               
              hurricane.  This information will help to predict what the                     
              recovered forests should look like as well as understand how                   
              hurricanes have affected these forests in the past.//
