Title       : RPG: Molecular Tools for Studying Cotton Fiber Elongation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1993      
File        : a9306710

Award Number: 9306710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn A. Zeiher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,9221,
Abstract    :
              This is a research planning grant for women.  Cell elongation                  
              depends on the irreversible extension of the cell wall and on                  
              hydraulic conductivity and turgor of the cell.  The uptake and                 
              production of osmotically active solutes for maintenance of turgor             
              is essential to maintain cell elongation for extended time periods.            
              The cellular mechanisms that coordinate the osmoregulation of the              
              cell and extension of the cell wall during cell elongation are                 
              poorly understood.  Cotton fibers provide an excellent experimental            
              system for studying molecular mechanisms regulating cellelongation.            
              The fibers on the cotton ovule grow synchronously allowing fiber               
              elongation to be followed developmentally.  Each fiber is a single             
              cell which eliminates the complications of cell division.  In                  
              cotton fibers, malate is one of the osmotically active solutes                 
              responsible for the maintenance of turgor.  As an initial step in              
              ultimately identifying the signal transduction mechanism(s)                    
              responsible for coordinating osmoregulation and cell wall                      
              loosening, the regulation of PEP carboxylase, the enzyme involved              
              in malate synthesis during fiber elongation, is being studied.                 
              Five isoforms of the fiber PEP carboxylase have been identified and            
              are distinguishable by their electrophoretic mobility on SDS                   
              polyacrylamide gels.  Two of these isoforms are preferentially                 
              expressed during maturation of fiber elongation.  The immediate aim            
              of this project is to determine how these different PEP carboxylase            
              isoforms are produced.  Two complimentary approaches will be taken:            
              (1) isolation and characterization of the PEP carboxylase gene(s)              
              and (2) purification and characterization of the different forms of            
              the PEP carboxylase protein.  These studies provide the necessary              
              background to define thephysiological function of these different              
              isoforms during fiber elongation and more specifically, the role of            
              these isoforms in the osmoregulation of the fiber cell.                        
                                                                                             
              The cotton fiber is commercially valuable in the manufacture of a              
              large percentage of the world's textiles.  Improved spinning                   
              systems and increased production speeds place increasing demands on            
              the cotton fiber by the textile industry.  Efforts to improve the              
              fiber quality of existing cotton germplasm in terms of uniformity,             
              strength and extensibility of the fiber are essential for the US to            
              remain competitive in world markets.  Defining the underlying                  
              regulatory mechanism(s) controlling fiber elongation utilizing                 
              modern molecular tools will be of immense importance in future                 
              development of breeding and genetic engineering strategies for                 
              improving the fiber's spin value.
