Title       : Biological Disturbance and the Organization of Neotropical Stream Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1993      
File        : a9306639

Award Number: 9306639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander S. Flecker asf3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306639 Flecker          Neotropical streams contain diverse and abundant
              assemblages of fishes, some of which process large volumes of sediments.  The
              proposed research will examine the impacts of fishes as sources of biological
              disturbance in neotropical stream communities.  Preliminary studies indicate
              that biological disturbance of sediments by fishes has strong consequences that
              propagate widely through riverine food webs. Three hypotheses about the role of
              biological disturbance will be addressed:  1) biological disturbance generates
              resource patchiness by modifying sediment distributions, 2) biological
              disturbance maintains species diversity by generating a dynamic mosaic of
              resource states, and 3) detritivorous fishes are keystone species whose
              presence strongly modifies food web interactions.  These objectives will be
              examined through a series of observational and experimental field studies
              conducted in the Andean piedmont of Venezuela.  A detailed analysis of spatial
              heterogeneity of sediment accrual patterns will be undertaken from a patch
              dynamics perspective.  Patch characteristics over different spatial and
              temporal scales will be quantified using methods employed for the analysis of
              landscapes.  These data will be linked with detailed observations and
              experimental exclusions of fishes at different spatial scales.  The influence
              of biological disturbance in maintaining species diversity will be manipulated
              and changes in species diversity patterns will be assessed.  The role of
              detritivirous fishes as keystone species in Andean streams will be examined by
              selectively excluding detritivores. %%% Findings from this study will
              contribute to our limited understanding  of factors organizing neotropical
              stream communities.  This research will integrate sediment animal relationships
              into a stream community context.  Results will indicate whether human impacts
              on detrital feeding fishes form overexploitation and impoundments may be
              manifested throughout stream food webs. ***                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
