Title       : Evolution in Auriculariaceous Fungi: Structural and Molecular Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1997  
File        : a9306578

Award Number: 9306578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. McLaughlin davem@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306578 McLaughlin          Evolutionary relationships within the basidiomycete
              fungi are not understood.  These fungi can be divided into two groups based on
              the characteristics of the basidium.  One of these groups, the
              heterobasidiomycetes, appears to be intermediate between the ascomycetes, the
              presumed ancestors of the basidiomycetes, and the presumably advanced second
              group.  Research by Dr. McLaughlin will characterize ultrastructurally and cell
              biologically species in several orders of heterbasidiomycetes to elucidate
              their evolution and clarify their systematics.  The characters to be examined
              include the spindle pole body, nuclear division, speta, the cytoskeleton,
              basidia, and branch initiation.  Cladistic analysis of the structural
              characters will provide guidance on phylogenetic relationships.  Phylogenetic
              trees obtained from analysis of molecular sequences of large subunit ribosomal
              DNA of the species examined structurally will be used to test conclusions
              reached with morphological data. %%%          A major focus of this study will
              be the Auriculariales fungi.  This unnatural order contains species with simple
              or complex septa.  The simple septa moss parasites, which have been postulated
              to be ancestral to the rust fungi (Uredinales), will be intensively studied. 
              In addition to the characters listed above, the cell interface between the moss
              host and the parasite will be examined, inoculation studies on mosses will be
              carried  out,a nd asexual stages of the moss parasite will be characterized. 
              In the complex septate Auriculariales cytological comparisons will be made with
              the Tremellales.  To obtain material for this and future studied, fungi will be
              collected and cultured in Costa Rica.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
