Title       : A Monograph of Tachysphex Wasps of Africa and Adjacent Xeric Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1998   
File        : a9306812

Award Number: 9306812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wojciech J. Pulawski wpulawski@calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      
	      San Francisco, CA  94118    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9306812 Pulawski             Tachysphex    is a genus of ground nesting solitary
              wasps, occurring in all parts of the world except the polar regions.  Females
              provide their nests with various orthopterous insects such as grasshoppers,
              cockroaches and mantids.  Most of these wasp species are quite common,
              especially in arid lands, and are thus a factor in controlling population
              levels of their prey.  In contrast to the other parts of the world, the African
              species remain largely unstudied, yet the number of species, an estimated 200,
              is higher than in any other zoogeographic region of the world.  The available
              publications are outdated (e.g. Arnold, 1923; 1924).  They do not reflect the
              modern level of knowledge of the morphology of these wasps and do not even
              allow recognition/identification of the vast majority of individual species. 
              Such poor knowledge is a clear handicap in all faunal inventories, studies of
              insect biology and insect zoogeography and prevents attempted use of   
              Tachysphex    for biological control.  The Principal Investigator (PI) in this
              project will collect both specimens and behavioral/biological information on
              these wasps through extensive collecting efforts in several countries in Africa
              and on Madagascar.  Data will also be gathered from existing collections in
              several museums.  The PI already done monographic work on members of this genus
              for other areas and this African project will contribute to completion of a
              major monographic treatment of the genus for the world. %%%          This major
              taxonomic revision of a group of solitary ground nesting wasps will contribute
              to basic knowledge of relationships of these wasps.  It will also provi de
              information on their nesting behavior and prey preferences which may be of
              utility in biological control and pest management of several pest grasshopper
              and cockroach species. ***                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
