Title       : Transition from Host to Phage Metabolism After T4 Infection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9306418

Award Number: 9306418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90533              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth M. Kutter kutterb@evergreen.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Burton S. Guttman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Evergreen State College
	      
	      Olympia, WA  98505    206/867-6000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9178,9229,
Abstract    :
              9306418  Kutter  The bacteriophage T4 laboratory at The Evergreen State College 
              (Olympia, WA) is continuing studies on the transition from host to  phage
              metabolism (host takeover).  The laboratory has focussed for  many years on the
              function of the phage T4 alc gene, which shifts  transcription from
              cytosine-containing bacterial DNA to T4 DNA  containing
              5-hydroxymethylcytosine.  They have now cloned alc gene,  which was possible
              only in an expression vector designed for very  lethal genes.  Experiments with
              purified Alc confirm that it  interacts with the host RNA polymerase (RNAP) and
              stops transcript  elongation, and it can cause release at specific, complex
              sites.   They propose further studies on the action of Alc.  The Alc protein 
              has an interesting basic domain whose role will be studied by means  of mutant
              analysis, partial proteolytic digestion, and antibodies  directed against
              specific domains.  The laboratory has also been  completing the T4 genomic map
              and sequence integration, and they  have been studying the process of host
              takeover more globally,  including sequencing a 12-kbp region of the t4 genome
              that includes  many new genes that are probably involved.  They will clone and 
              study the effects of some of these new genes, as well as the  previously
              identified genes controlling nuclear disruption and  internal proteins, and a
              region of the genome they have  characterized that controls stimulation of, and
              changes in lipid  metabolism.  They plan to particularly focus on identifying
              T4  genes that stop host translation, using the genomic sequence data  they
              have assembled; they will study new T4-encoded ribosome-  binding proteins and
              identify other translation effects upon  induction of cloned new genes.  They
              also will also look for T4  factors that modify host factors, inactivate host
              messenger RNA ,  or release nascent host protein from the ribosomes.  %%% 
              These studies are of general interest in modeling a wide range of  mechanisms
              viruses may use in subverting host cells  to virus  multiplication and in
              analyzing lethal genes.  A number of  undergraduate students will also have the
              opportunity to take part  in a stimulating research problem.  ***
