Title       : RPG: Phenotypic and Genetic Differentiation Along an Elevation Gradient in
               Solidago macrophylla
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1993     
File        : a9306246

Award Number: 9306246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17298              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Kelly c1756@umslvma bitnet  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                   The genetic divergence of populations is considered an                    
              important step towards speciation.  However, the degree to which               
              natural plant populations have diverged for quantitative traits is             
              unclear because of maternally biased estimates of differentiation.             
              The goal of Dr. Kelly's research planning grant is to use an                   
              elevational gradient to determine whether life history,                        
              morphological, and fitness traits have evolved in response to                  
              climatic variability in the goldenrod species Solidago macrophylla,            
              a native perennial plant of northeastern North America.  Clinal                
              variation in plant phenotype will be correlated with elevational               
              variation in environmental conditions that may be acting as                    
              selective forces for the evolution of fitness-related features of              
              plant size and reproductive condition.  Subsequent research will               
              consist of a series of reciprocal transplant experiments that are              
              designed to distinguish paternal (pollen) effects from maternal                
              contributions (chloroplast, mitochondria, endosperm) to phenotypic             
              variation both within and among populations.  The latter research              
              component is a novel and important addition to traditional                     
              reciprocal transplant studies that have usually failed to control              
              for local versus long-distance pollination.                                    
              %%%                                                                            
                   Research on Solidago macrophylla will be the first to estimate            
              the level of genetic differentiation for quantitative traits among             
              populations while controlling for maternal bias (effects of local              
              sources of chloroplasts, mitochondria and endosperm).  The results             
              of the study will augment understanding of the degree to which                 
              quantitative life-history traits in plants have evolved in response            
              to natural selection.  In addition, the results will clarify                   
              patterns of genetic diversity among populations for quantitative               
              traits, information that is necessary for effective conservation of            
              rare and endangered plants.
