Title       : Reproductive Cycling in Fundulus Heteroclitus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1995  
File        : a9306123

Award Number: 9306123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin A. Wallace WALLACE@UFBIOT  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kelly E. Selman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9306123  Wallace    Fundulus heteroclitus females ovulate and spawn in their
              natural  habitat with a semilunar periodicity coincident with spring tides  for
              up to eight months of the year; they also spawn with a  semilunar periodicity
              under constant, controlled laboratory  conditions at any time during the year. 
              Highly elevated levels  of circulating estradiol-17 Beta (E2)are associated
              with each  spawning episode.  A biological clock for reproductive activity, 
              and involving cyclic E2-release by the ovary, thus appears to  exist in this
              abundant and experimentally convenient teleost.    In order to appreciate the
              operant factors in the reproductive  cycling of F. heteroclitus, various
              aspects of reproductive  activity will be monitored by Dr. Wallace over several
              spawning  episodes.  These include vitellogenin and gonadotropin levels in  the
              bloodstream and biogenic amine levels in the hypothalamus.  If vitellogenin and
              gonadotropin levels are found to fluctuate,  corresponding mRNA levels will be
              measured in the liver and  pituitary, respectively.  The manner by which
              gonadotropins  regulate aromatase activity in prematurational follicles (the 
              source of elevated E2 levels) will also be addressed together  with the
              competence of follicles to respond to relevant hormones  at various times
              during the cycle.    The effect of E2 on cyclic spawning will be experimentally
               investigated by administering E2 at various times during the  spawning cycle. 
              Other drugs will also be provided in order to  explore cause and effect
              relationships in the hypothalamic-  pituitary-gonadal axis.    Finally, a
              series of observations will be made on egg hatching  patterns and locomotor
              activity.  Semilunar patterns in such  processes, if convincingly demonstrated,
              would indicate that F.  heteroclitus has a genetically determined, biological
              clock that  regulates its overall physiology.  ***
