Title       : Compilation and Publication of Tai Linquistic Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9306363

Award Number: 9306363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44847              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Hudak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                          9306363  Hudak      This project seeks to compile, edit and publish
              data from fourteen (14) hitherto undescribed or poorly described languages and
              geographical dialects of the Tai language family (Red Tai, Black Tai, White
              Tai, Shan, Western Nung, Nung, Lue, Tho dialects, and Guangxi dialects). The
              original data were collected and transcribed by William J. Gedney in the 1960s
              and 1970s in Taiwan, Hong Kong, Vietnam, Thailand, and Laos. Refugees from
              Burma, China, and northern Vietnam served as informants. The field data
              obtained consist of extensive wordlists and texts that include folktales,
              songs, proverbs, poetry, and sentences.       For the data comprising the
              lexicon, it will be necessary to extract each recorded item and check its
              accuracy, looking for inconsistencies and errors in transcription. In many
              cases, tones will need to be identified and numbered. The second step will be
              to index and organize the lexicon into glossaries with consistent alphabetical
              lists. At the present time, the data for the lexicon exists in a variety of
              different stages: some are recorded in the original field notebooks; some have
              been recorded on individual file cards for indexing and alphabetizing; and some
              are in texts still to be extracted. None has been checked for accuracy. Entries
              may already have glosses in English, but many have definitions written in Thai.
              Some have no definitions at all.       For each text, the same steps in
              checking for accuracy must be followed In addition, individual English glosses
              must be added along with free translations.       The expected outcome of this
              project is a series of three monographs that will complete the publication of
              Gedney's unpublished field notes. Of these three volumes, one will be devoted
              to the Lue language (1200 pp. est.), one to Southwestern Tai dialects (500-600
              pp. est.), and one to Central Tai dialects (500-600 pp. est.). Each monograph
              will contain an extensive glossary; texts with interlinear and free
              translations; and an introductio n that discusses the geographical location and
              name of each language or dialect, a description of the phonology and syntax,
              sociolinguistic features, and a discussion of the field methodology employed.  
                  The information presented in the three published monographs will be
              significant on several levels: it will add important new dimensions toward a
              reconstruction of the history and evolution of the Tai language family; it will
              help illuminate the relationship of Tai languages to other languages of
              southeastern and eastern Asia, potentially unifying the number of hypotheses
              regarding the language groupings in this area; it will provide important
              sources of data for the study of Tai syntax and discourse; it will be of value
              to many research problems in general comparative linguistics; and it will
              provide rich cultural resources pertaining to small ethnic groups whose
              traditional lifeways are rapidly changing and disappearing.
