Title       : Regulation of Signal Transduction in the Colony Stimulating Factor-1 Receptor by
               Serine/Threonine Phosphorylation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1993       
File        : a9306519

Award Number: 9306519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Angel Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9106,9221,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The colony stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF-1R), encoded by the              
              proto-oncogene c-fms, is a tyrosine kinase receptor which modulates            
              macrophage growth and metabolism.  This investigator is interested             
              in the mechanisms that regulate receptor function.  This project               
              focuses on the regulation of this growth factor receptor by                    
              phosphorylation/dephosphorylation of serines and threonines. The               
              goal of the planning period to be supported by this grant is to set            
              up an experimental system for the identification of sites of serine            
              phosphorylation in the C-terminus of this receptor.  The first                 
              objective is to construct a C-terminal truncation mutant by site-              
              directed mutagenesis, express the mutant receptor in myeloid 32D               
              cells and then confirm the presence or absence of C-terminal                   
              phosphorylation by 2D thin layer tryptic phosphopeptide mapping of             
              immunoprecipitated CSF-1R.  A complementary strategy will be to                
              synthesize the C-terminal domain as a bacterial fusion protein and             
              to utilize the fragment in an in vitro kinase assay that contains              
              preparations of either candidate serine/threonine kinases or                   
              unfractionated cellular extracts.  Following, serine to alanine                
              mutants that cover the entire C-terminus will be constructed to                
              pinpoint the actual sites of phosphorylation.  The phenotypes of               
              these serine mutants will be studied in terms of effects on                    
              receptor tyrosine kinase activity, down-regulation and                         
              desensitization, interaction with intracellular substrates and                 
              growth potential.  Work will also be initiated to identify the                 
              responsible serine/threonine kinase.  The second objective of the              
              planning period is to begin studies that explore reciprocal                    
              mechanisms involving serine/threonine phosphorylation which may                
              regulate the interactions between CSF-1R and the platelet-derived              
              growth factor receptor in 3T3 fibroblasts and between CSF-1R and               
              the interleukin-3 receptor in 32D cells.                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              The phosphorylation of the amino acids serine and threonine is                 
              likely to represent an important regulatory mechanism for certain              
              classes of growth factor receptors.  This award will provide start-            
              up support for a beginning investigator undertaking research in                
              this important area.
