Title       : RPG: Investigation of the Androgenic Basis for Male-Like Females in the
               Salamander Genus Aneides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1994     
File        : a9306523

Award Number: 9306523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Staub Staub@Gonzaga.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gonzaga University
	      502 East Boone Avenue
	      Spokane, WA  992580087    509/323-6102

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9221,
Abstract    :
                    9306523  Staub  The goal of this research planning grant is to describe
              the  endocrinological mechanisms underlying the normal expression of  male-like
              secondary sexual characteristics in females of several  species in the
              salamander genus Aneides.  The project tests the  hypothesis that the
              expression of these male-like traits in females  of several species of Aneides
              is a consequence of higher levels of  circulating plasma androgens or androgen
              receptors in target  tissues relative to females which lack these traits.  To
              accomplish  this, the following studies are planned: 1) documentation of the 
              secondary sexual characteristics of the jaw musculature of males  and females,
              2) characterization of the androgen receptors in the  jaw musculature of males
              and females, and 3) determination of  levels of circulating plasma androgens
              and estrogens in males and  females.  Results will be analyzed in a
              phylogenetic framework with  the goal of understanding how endocrinological
              variation can  explain the dramatic morphological variation expressed within
              the  genus Aneides.    In some salamander species, females express male-like
              traits, such  as enlarged jaw musculature.  The goal of the proposed research
              is  to describe the hormonal basis of the expression of these traits in 
              females of several species in the salamander genus Aneides.  The  proposed
              project tests the hypothesis that the expression of these  male-like traits in
              females is a consequence of higher levels of  androgens (e.g. testosterone) or
              androgen receptors in the jaw  musculature relative to females which lack these
              traits.  The  proposed research 1) compares male and female jaw musculature, 2)
               examines levels of androgen receptor binding in the jaw musculature  of males
              and females, and 3) surveys levels of circulating sex  hormones (androgens and
              estrogens) in males and females.  The  primary significance of the proposed
              project is that it will  provide information on the role of androgens in the
              development of  normal female  characteristics, a role that has remained
              relatively  unexplored.  ***
