Title       : Spectroscopic Studies of Protein Folding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1996    
File        : a9306367

Award Number: 9306367
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heinrich Roder H_Roder@fccc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Cancer Research
	      7701 Burholme Avenue, Fox Chase
	      Philadelphia, PA  191112412    215/728-2490

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9306367  Roder  The main objective of the proposed work is to gather kinetic and
               structural information on the initial stages of protein folding.   The time
              resolution of kinetic folding studies will be extended  into the
              sub-millisecond time range by using laser flash  photolysis and improved rapid
              mixing techniques to initiate the  folding reaction.  The resulting
              conformational changes will be  monitored by transient spectroscopy in the
              visible and near-UV  region, as well as steady-state fluorescence and
              picosecond   time-resolved fluorescence.  These techniques will be applied to  
              cytochrome c and variants prepared by site-directed mutagenesis.   By taking
              advantage of the redox and ligand binding properties of  the covalently
              attached heme group, it is possible to initiate  the folding reaction of
              cytochrome c by photoreduction, or by  photodissociation of a carbon monoxide
              ligand bound to the  reduced heme iron in the unfolded protein.  The collapse
              of the  polypeptide chain will be monitored by time-resolved fluorescence  in
              conjunction with rapid mixing techniques, initially using  continuous-flow and
              later a jet mixing device for measurements on  a sub-millisecond time scale. 
              %%%  The question of how a polypeptide chain can spontaneously fold  into a
              biologically active protein is of fundamental and  practical importance
              throughout molecular biology, but we are  only just beginning to unravel some
              of the principles of this  remarkable reaction.  Because of the limited time
              resolution of  conventional kinetic techniques, there are at present no direct 
              experimental observations on protein folding events on the sub-  millisecond
              time scale.  Yet, these rapid structural events are  key to understanding how
              protein folding is initiated, which is  the focus of numerous theoretical
              efforts to solve the protein  folding problem.  Kinetic studies involving novel
              optical  triggering and fast mixing methods will provide unique insight  into
              chain collapse and secondary formation during early  stages  of protein
              folding.  ***
