Title       : RPG:Role of the Fas Antigen and Bcl-2 in Ovarian Follicular Apoptosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1993       
File        : a9306483

Award Number: 9306483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Quirk   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443456    518/474-2011

NSF Program : 1146      ANIMAL SYSTEMS PHYSIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9221,
Abstract    :
              This is a research planning grant for women.  Follicles in the                 
              ovary undergo a continuous process of growth and regression; only              
              a small minority actually proceed to ovulation.  Substantial                   
              evidence suggests that atresia occurs by the process of apoptosis,             
              or programmed cell death.  However, the genes controlling apoptosis            
              are not known.  The operating hypothesis of this research is that              
              ovarian follicular apoptosis occurs in response to definable                   
              signals: either lack of a survival factor or induction by a                    
              cytotoxic stimulus.  Genes coding for two proteins, the fas antigen            
              and BCL-2, have been demonstrated to be intimately involved in                 
              apoptosis in other systems, inducing and suppressing the process,              
              respectively.  Limited data available indicate that the fas antigen            
              is expressed in the mouse ovary and bcl-2 is expressed in the                  
              chicken ovary.  The proposed preliminary research will examine the             
              role of these genes in ovarian follicular apoptosis by studying                
              their expression in vivo in healthy and atretic follicles of rats.             
              Subsequent research will examine the regulation of expression of               
              the fas antigen and bcl-2 in rat follicular cells in vitro by                  
              various mediators of follicular development.  Finally, a potential             
              cause and effect relationship between fallicular atresia and                   
              expression of these genes will be examined by inhibiting the                   
              activity or expression of the gene products using antibodies and               
              antisense oligonucleotides to mRNA.                                            
                                                                                             
              Mammalian females are born with a full complement of germ cells,               
              the oocytes, present in the ovary.  Oocytes become surrounded by a             
              structure called the follicle which is comprised of granulosa and              
              theca cells.  Throughout life ovarian follicles are stimulated to              
              develop, a process involving growth and differentiation of all cell            
              types within the follicle.  Only a few of the follicles that enter             
              the growing pool actually progress to ovulation.  The vast majority            
              begin to degenerate, or undergo atresia at different points in the             
              developmental process.  Recent evidence indicates that ovarian                 
              follicular atresia occurs by programmed cell death, an active                  
              process whereby a cell mediates its own death by following a                   
              genetically determined developmental program.  Factors regulating              
              cell death in the ovary have not been identified.  This propossal              
              will test whether genes encoding two proteins, the fas antigen and             
              BCL-2, which are involved in inducing and suppressing programmed               
              cell death in other systems (the immune system, nervous system and             
              in various tumor cells) also regulate cell death in the ovary.  An             
              understanding of follicular degeneration is essential to allow                 
              development of improved methods of fertility control, treatment of             
              infertility and enhancement of fertility.  There is intense                    
              interest in programmed cell death because of its involvement in a              
              wide variety of normal developmental processes as well as its                  
              relevance to the development of cancers.  The ovary provides an                
              excellent model for the study of programmed cell death.
