Title       : Role of Abscisic Acid in the Regulation of Root Growth at Low Water Potentials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1995        
File        : a9306935

Award Number: 9306935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222513             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Sharp SharpR@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric S. Ober  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9306935  Sharp  Studies in the Principal Investigator's laboratory have shown
              that  accumulation of the hormone abscisic acid (ABA) is required for the 
              maintenance of primary root elongation in maize under water-limited 
              conditions.  Recent evidence indicates that one role of ABA in this  regard is
              the regulation of proline accumulation for osmotic adjustment.   The proposed
              research aims to determine the cellular mechanisms  underlying this
              relationship.  Building upon recent data and a review of  the published work in
              plant as well as animal and bacterial systems, a  hypothesis is developed that
              ABA accumulation in the root growth zone at  low water potentials regulates
              membrane ion transport and intracellular  ion levels, which in turn induces
              mechanisms for growth maintenance  including the accumulation of proline. 
              While the role of ABA in  regulating ion transport in stomatal guard cells is
              well-established,  such information is scant with regard to the action of ABA
              in growth  regulation.    The primary objective is to test this hypothesis
              using  electrophysiological approaches, emphasizing changes in membrane 
              potential and ion concentrations and fluxes in the root growth zone  caused by
              low water potentials and manipulation of endogenous ABA levels.   Emphasis will
              be placed on measurements of K+ and H+.    As in previous work, endogenous ABA
              will be manipulated within  physiologically meaningful levels in roots growing
              at low water  potentials using both the inhibitor fluridone and the vp5 mutant
              of maize  to inhibit carotenoid (and ABA) biosynthesis.  In all experiments a
              high  degree of spatial resolution will be emphasized to address differential 
              responsiveness to ABA within the root growth zone.  Conventional and ion- 
              selective microelectrodes will be used to measure changes in membrane 
              potential, cytoplasmic ion levels and ion transport between roots grown  at
              high and low water potential, and in roots at low water potentials in  which
              endogenous ABA levels are altered.  A sol ution culture system has  been
              developed for this work, and preliminary experiments have shown  changes in
              membrane potentials in the root growth zone in response to  altered water
              potentials and to exogenous ABA.  The electrophysiological  measurements of ion
              levels will be compared with values obtained by x-ray  microanalysis (EDX). 
              Appropriate collaborations have been established to  facilitate the
              electrophysiological and EDX measurements.      Parallel to the studies of
              ionic regulation, the biochemistry of proline  accumulation in the root growth
              zone at low water potentials and as  affected by ABA will be examined.  The
              contributions of increased  synthesis, decreased catabolism, increased uptake,
              and decreased  incorporation into protein will be assessed.     The proposed
              research is a step toward the long-range goal of identifying  specific plant
              processes or traits which could be used in crop germplasm  improvement
              programs.  The studies should provide much needed information  in the fields of
              ABA physiology and root growth regulation under water-  limited conditions,
              which have been characterized by slow progress.   ***
