Title       : Dissertation Research: Navajo Beliefs and Behaviors Regarding Early Childhood
               Food Intake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1993     
File        : a9306225

Award Number: 9306225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond B. Hames                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl Ritenbaugh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project examines the beliefs and behavior of Navajo                       
              mothers regarding control of early childhood food intake and                   
              its relationship to childhood obesity.  Subjects will                          
              include all mothers of children twelve to twenty-four months                   
              of age, and the appropriate children, residing in Pinon,                       
              Arizona,  a small, rural community on the navajo                               
              Reservation.  Also included for the study will be other                        
              caretakers of the children, trading post managers and staff,                   
              and health care workers in the community.  Ethnographic                        
              methods, including semi-structured interview and participant                   
              observation, and cognitive anthropological methods,                            
              including free listing and pile sorting, will be utilized to                   
              elicit information regarding food beliefs.  Structured                         
              observation will be used to determine the dietary intake of                    
              a subsample of the children.  Anthropometric measurements at                   
              various skinfolds sites will be obtained to determine which                    
              of the children are obese.  Mothers' food believes will be                     
              categorized and related to the children's obesity status.                      
              Results will augment the anthropological literature                            
              regarding cultural determinants of food behavior, and will                     
              be potentially useful to nutrition educators working with                      
              the Navajo to prevent childhood obesity and thereby the                        
              early onset of Non-Insulin-Dependent Diabests Mellitus.
