Title       : The Role of Protons in Integrating the Activities of Endosperm and Embryo in
               Germinating Cereal Grains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1995       
File        : a9306355

Award Number: 9306355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell L. Jones rjones@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9306355  Jones  The goals of this proposal are to understand how the
              activities of the  aleurone, starchy endosperm and scutellum of germinating
              cereal grains  are integrated.  The mobilization of the starchy endosperm of
              cereal  grains, a tissue that consists entirely of dead storage cells, will be 
              studied, and a simple model in which pH plays a key role in the  regulation of
              endosperm mobilization will be tested.  This model is based  on the observation
              that low pH is essential for the synthesis and  secretion of hydrolytic enzymes
              by the aleurone and scutellum, for the  activity of these enzymes in the
              endosperm, and for the uptake of sugars  and amino acids produced by the
              activity of secreted hydrolases.   Experiments are proposed that have been
              designed to test the hypothesis  that acidification of the endosperm is brought
              about by proton pumps  located at the plasma membrane (PM) of aleurone and
              scutellum cells.  The  capacity of the aleurone and scutellum to acidify the
              external medium  will be evaluated by incubating these tissues in unbuffered
              and buffered  media in the presence of gibberellic acid (GA) and abscisic acid
              (ABA).   Acidification of the incubation medium will be monitored using pH 
              electrodes and by titration.  The mechanism of acidification of the  endosperm
              by aleurone and scutellum will be examined.  Since the PM of  barley aleurone
              does not possess detectable levels of a P-type ATPase,  the possibility that
              acidification is brought about by a V-type ATPase at  the PM will be tested. 
              Specific inhibitor of V-type ATPases will be used  to examine acidification in
              vivo, and H+ transport by PM vesicles  isolated from aleurone and scutellum by
              phase partitioning will be used  to study the process in vitro.  Acidification
              by isolated aleurone layers  occurs rapidly after addition of GA, an
              observation that indicates that  H+ transporters are constitutively expressed
              in this tissue.  Specific  cDNA and antibody probes will be used to measure PM
              H+ATPase RNA and  protein l evels in aleurone and scutellum, and experiments
              will be carried  out to establish whether GA and ABA regulate the expression of
              genes for  these transporters.  Because the scutellum contains endogenous GAs,
              the  role of GA in regulating acidification in this tissue will be examined in 
              GA deficient mutants of barley.  Since aleurone cells secrete large  amounts of
              H+, they must possess a mechanism for maintaining charge  balance.  The
              possibility that charge balance in aleurone and scutellum  cells is achieved by
              the synthesis and export of organic and inorganic  anions will be explored
              using high performance liquid chromatography of  incubation media.  Since one
              of the goals of this proposal is to  understand the role played by H+ in
              coordinating the activities of  germinating grain, 31P NMR spectroscopy will be
              used to monitor pH  changes in the endosperm of intact germinating grain.  The
              hypothesis  that endosperm pH plays a key role in regulating endosperm
              mobilization  will be tested using NMR to monitor pH in grain exposed to
              stresses known  to inhibit germination or seedling growth or exposed to applied
              ABA and  GA.  If endosperm pH proves to be a reliable and early indicator of
              the  response of the cereal grain to stress, a simple test for measuring this 
              parameter will be devised.  The successful completion of this research  will
              contribute to fundamental knowledge about physiological processes in  plants as
              well as well as provide information of a practical nature to  growers of cereal
              crops.  ***
