Title       : LTREB: Collaborative Research: Hydrologic-nutrient Cycle in Small, Undisturbed
               and Human-manipulated Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1997     
File        : a9306211

Award Number: 9306211
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55002              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles T. Driscoll ctdrisco@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In this collaborative project scientists at the Institute of                   
              Ecosystem Studies and Syracuse University will continue long-term              
              biogeochemical studies at the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest                
              (HBEF) in New Hampshire to evaluate trends in atmospheric                      
              deposition, streamwater chemistry and cycling of critical nutrient             
              elements.  During the past three decades, dramatic changes in                  
              atmospheric deposition, streamwater chemistry, vegetation biomass              
              and soil chemistry were observed at the HBEF.  These changes have              
              important ecological implications for the management of base-poor              
              forest ecosystems, which are widespread throughout the                         
              northeastern U.S.  In particular, a decline in atmospheric inputs              
              of base cations has increased the sensitivity of forest and                    
              aquatic ecosystems to continuing high inputs of acidic deposition,             
              as well as to forest management practices, such as harvest by                  
              clearcutting.  Neither the decline in atmospheric inputs nor                   
              declines in forest floor concentrations of base cations observed               
              during this period were predicted from existing knowledge or from              
              models of nutrient cycling for forest ecosystems.  Significantly,              
              the pattern of recovery following anthropogenic acidification                  
              suggests that acidification may not be a fully reversible process.             
              %%%                                                                            
              Long-term efforts at synthesis and integration of biogeochemical               
              information at Hubbard Brook will be continued.  Results from this             
              research will improve the  understanding of biogeochemical flux                
              and cycling in forest ecosystems of the northeastern U.S.  In                  
              addition, the continuation of the long-term record of                          
              precipitation, streamwater and soilwater chemistry at Hubbard                  
              Brook will provide a basis for interpreting the effects of                     
              changing atmospheric deposition on biogeochemical processes in                 
              terrestrial and associated aquatic ecosystems.
