Title       : Control Processes in a Terrestrial Food Web: Trophic Interactions of a
               Generalist Predator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9306692

Award Number: 9306692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204250             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Wise   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research will investigate top-down and bottom-up             
              control processes in a poorly understood but critical terrestrial              
              food web:  the detritus-based web of the forest floor. The wolf                
              spider Schizocosa oreata, an abundant generalist predator, occupies            
              an intermediate position in food webs of the leaf-litter community             
              of deciduous forests throughout eastern North America.  This                   
              project investigates control processes in this food web using                  
              laboratory experiments and a series of short-term and long term                
              manipulative field experiments designed to reveal how S. oreata                
              interacts with trophic levels above and below it.                              
              %%%                                                                            
              Understanding how food webs function is critical to prudent                    
              management and conservation of ecological communities.  Current                
              food-web theory focuses on how resource limitation and predator-               
              prey interactions affect species on different trophic levels.                  
              Densities of species at intermediate trophic levels may be                     
              sensitive to cascading effects of top predators, or top-down                   
              control, and also may respond to changes in resource levels at the             
              bottom of the food web, or bottom control.  The results will be                
              broadly applicable because spiders are major predators in all                  
              terrestrial habitats, and because processes within the forest-floor            
              food web are critical to energy flow and nutrient cycling in forest            
              ecosystems.
