Title       : Effects of Disturbance and Spatial Heterogeneity on Nutrient Retention and
               Transport in a Stream-Riparian Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1996       
File        : a9306909

Award Number: 9306909
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart G. Fisher s.fisher@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy B. Grimm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9189,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9306909   Fisher        This research will determine the effect of spatial  
              configuration on nutrient retention in stream-riparian   ecosystems.  Streams
              are complex, heterogeneous systems   consisting of a wetted channel, saturated
              sediments below and   adjacent to the wetted channel, and a strip of
              terrestrial   vegetation (the riparian zone) at each lateral edge.  The extent 
                and shape of each of these varies greatly in space and time.  As    water
              flows downstream, it moves to varying degrees among these   components. 
              Because of several favorable properties, streams of    arid lands will be used
              as model systems for this study.        The overall goal of this project is to
              determine how   configuration affects the extent to which materials transported
                in this water are retained and recycled within a given reach.    This goal
              will be met by addressing four questions around which   the research is
              organized.  First, how does spatial pattern   influence nutrient retention? 
              Spatial configuration and its   effects will initially be considered for a
              single point in time.     This will be accomplished by mapping the stream
              ecosystem a two   scales to determine its physical configuration, describing  
              hydrologic connections among these elements, and the consequences    of flow
              path for retention of nutrients.  Configuration will be   manipulated
              experimentally to determine the effect of different   patterns on the retention
              process.  Second, how does disturbance    affect this relationship?  Several
              individual flash flood and   drought events will be studied in terms of their
              effect on   configuration and recovery of system function between events.   
              Third, how do configuration and function interact over large   spatial and
              temporal scales?  This analysis will involve scaling    up reach-scale
              processes to include geomorphic variation   generated by valley floor width. 
              Temporal scaling will be   accomplished by considering the effect of variable
              flood and   drought regimes;  their frequency , intensity, and distribution in 
                time.  Fourth, how general are results derived from North   American desert
              streams for this ecosystem type worldwide?  This    question will be answered
              with a comparative study of the   pattern-process relationship among streams of
              similar deserts in    Australia and Spain.   %%%   This research is significant
              in that it will contribute to basic    scientific understanding of how pattern
              and process interact in   complex ecosystems.  It is an advance over black box,
              well-mixed    reactor models that have been commonly used in ecosystem ecology.
                  Research results will be useful to applied ecology as well.    Streams are
              open systems which link terrestrial uplands with   downstream reservoirs,
              groundwater supplies, or estuaries.    Retention and transformation of stream
              load in transit affects   the quality of water delivered to recipient systems. 
              Riparian   and other wetland ecosystems are increasingly used for this  
              "nutrient filtration" capacity.  Results of this research will   aid in
              understanding this process in natural streams and   optimizing it in managed
              and human-designed systems.   ***
