Title       : Phylogenetic Systematics of Lysipomia: Speciation and Biogeographical Studies in
               Andean Paramo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1994     
File        : a9306974

Award Number: 9306974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Jane Harrington                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22796              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tina J. Ayers ayers@jan.ucc.nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                   Phylogenetic studies of genera restricted to the Andean paramo            
              and puna provide a unique opportunity to explore evolutionary                  
              processes in tropical, high elevation environments.  Dr. Ayers is              
              studying the Andean plant genus Lysipomia of the Campanulaceae                 
              family, currently thought to comprise about 30 species of "cushion"            
              plants.  Two species are widespread and have many named,                       
              geographically restricted subspecies and varieties.  The remaining             
              species show little or no infraspecific variation and have                     
              extremely narrow ranges, with many endemic to a single ridge top or            
              volcanic cone.  These endemics occur throughout the Andes, but the             
              greatest species diversity is found in Ecuador and Peru on both                
              sides of a major geologic division of the northern Andes known as              
              the Piura Divide or the Huancabamba Depression.  Phylogenetic                  
              studies employing modern molecular and traditional morphological               
              characters will test whether this geologic barrier and recent                  
              climatic changes associated with it have played an important role              
              in the evolutionary history of Lysipomia.                                      
              %%%                                                                            
                   Mechanisms or processes of evolutionary change can be studied             
              only against the background of known patterns of change, in the                
              origin and extinction of species.  Dr. Ayers in a research planning            
              grant begins a molecular (DNA-based) and morphological study of the            
              patterns of diversification in a group of high-elevation "cushion"             
              plants, in relation to their geographical distribution in the                  
              northern Andes.  Field work to make plant collections combined with            
              laboratory study of chloroplast DNA mutations and herbarium study              
              of morphological features will provide insight into patterns of                
              species divergence and the role of geographical barriers and                   
              dispersal routes.
