Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Wavelet and Sampling Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1993  
File        : a9306430

Award Number: 9306430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karlheinz Grochenig groch@math.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9218,
Abstract    :
              Grochenig  9306430       This project is concerned mathematical problems arising
              in  wavelet and sampling theory. Particular emphasis will be placed  on the
              analysis of multidimensional problems.  The thread which  ties together the
              theories comes from the broader concept of  frames developed in the early
              1950's, but not recognized for its  importance in new developments in signal
              processing.  One  objective of the work is the construction of orthogonal and 
              biorthogonal wavelet bases for a general class of dilation  matrices in higher
              dimensions.  A particular step towards  this construction is the
              characterization of all self-similar  tilings which occur naturally in any
              attempt to find solutions  ofdilation equations.  The general construction of 
              nonseparable wavelets will exploit the links with the theory of  self-similar
              tilings.  This type of wavelet basis is needed in  applications to coding,
              compression and fast transmission images  to obtain more flexibility with
              respect to the number of  wavelets, the angular frequency distribution and the
              sampling  geometry. The second objective is the development of algorithms  for
              the reconstruction of band-limited multivariate functions  from irregular
              samples.  Particular emphasis will be given to the  relation between
              finite-dimensional implementable models of  irregular sampling to the original
              infinite-dimensional  reconstruction problem, and th analysis of efficiency and
              speed  of iterative reconstructions.       The growth of wavelet analysis has
              transformed a sizable  portion of research in harmonic analysis into efforts to
              find  efficient and fast procedures for analyzing and transmitting  signals in
              diverse areas such as tomography, seismology, data  compression and image
              reconstruction.  Many of the concepts have  been known in various forms in the
              mathematical literature, but  recent applications and discoveries have added
              impetus to the  basic goal of local analysis of signals in both time and 
              frequency at different scales in a comput ationally efficient  manner.    ***
