Title       : Fate of Cleaved Signal Peptides of the Endoplasmic Reticulum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1994  
File        : a9306875

Award Number: 9306875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence R. Griffing                    
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eve Perara eperara@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/469-2141

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9178,9221,9229,
Abstract    :
                The mechanism of protein transport across specific intracellular             
              membranes is a central issue in cell biology.  This project focuses            
              on the hydrophobic signal sequences which direct the transfer of               
              secretory proteins across the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane,             
              the first step in the secretion of proteins from the cell.  The                
              importance of signal sequences has been well-established, but their            
              fate, once removed from precursor proteins by the action of the ER             
              membrane protein signal peptidase, is unknown.  The objective of               
              the experiments to be carried out is to investigate the proteolysis            
              of different polypeptides containing functional signal sequences in            
              an effort to define a proposed signal peptide hydrolase activity in            
              Xenopus laevis oocytes.  The intracellular fates of both engineered            
              and unmodified cleaved signal peptides will be observed, and the               
              properties of their degradation will be characterized.  The results            
              of these investigations will be used to develop a working assay for            
              signal peptide hydrolases in Xenopus oocytes.  Such an assay is                
              essential to efforts to identify and purify the proteins which                 
              specifically metabolize cleaved signal sequences.  These proteins              
              may be important not only for clearance of signal sequences from               
              cells, but also in the actual mechanism of translocation across the            
              ER membrane.  The technique which will be employed to follow the               
              fate of cleaved signal peptides in Xenopus oocytes may provide a               
              powerful tool for the dissection of discrete steps in the transfer             
              of proteins across the ER membrane in living cells.                            
              %%%                                                                            
              The transfer of proteins across the ER membrane as they are                    
              synthesized in eukaryotic cells is a critical first step in the                
              trafficking of proteins to a variety of destinations, including                
              lysosomes and the extracellular space (secretion).  Advances in our            
              understanding of this fundamental process are important not only               
              for general understanding of how cells function, but also for                  
              biotechnology.  This project addresses the question of the fate of             
              the cleaved signal sequence, that is, the piece of the newly-                  
              synthesized protein which is required for transport across the ER              
              membrane, but which is not part of the "finished" protein product              
              and is therefore enzymatically cleaved from the rest of the protein            
              very soon after the transfer is effected.  This is an area of cell             
              biology which has received very little attention, despite the high             
              level of research activity on other aspects of the secretory                   
              process.  There is a good likelihood that unforeseen new and                   
              potentially important insights will emerge from the work.
