Title       : Control of Segmental Identity by Drosophila Homeoproteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1995       
File        : a9306704

Award Number: 9306704
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan Botas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      1200 Moursund Avenue
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/790-4846

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9306704  Botas    One of the least understood problems in Drosophila
              developmental  genetics is the specification of segmental identity by homeotic 
              selector genes. What are the functions of target genes of  homeoproteins? What
              are the specific control elements through which  homeoproteins exert their
              identity functions? What are the  molecular bases for the phenomena of
              phenotypic suppression? By  addressing these questions, this work will provide
              insight into how  homeotic selector genes control morphogenesis.
              decapentaplegic  (dpp) is under homeotic control. dpp expression in parasegment
              7 of  the embryonic visceral mesoderm (vm) requires normal function of 
              Ultrabithorax (Ubx); in addition, ectopic expression of Ubx leads  to ectopic
              expression of dpp. Ubx protein (UBX) binds to the dpp  site in polytene
              chromosomes. A 600 base pare dpp enhancer (vm-en),  identified by
              immunoprecipitation with purified UBX, confers  regulation by Ubx in the vm.
              Two adjacent UBX binding sites in vm-  en have been defined by DNAse I
              footprinting. Sequences in vm-en  required for enhancer function will be
              defined by deletion  analysis. Site directed mutagenesis will be carried out to
               determine: 1) the function of UBX binding sites in vivo and 2)  whether UBX
              regulates dpp directly. Lack of function mutations in  either Ubx or dpp
              disrupt midgut morphogenesis by causing the lack  of the second midgut
              constriction. A vm-en dpp transgene able to  rescue this mutant dpp phenotype
              has been constructed. This  transgene will be used to investigate directly the
              role of specific  vm-en sequences, including the UBX binding sites, in midgut 
              morphogenesis. abdominal-A (abd-A) completely represses dpp in  parasegment 8
              of the vm. This repression is also conferred by vm-en  but is not a consequence
              of abd-A repressing Ubx. Hence, the vm-en  is an ideal tool to investigate a
              general phenomena of epistasis  among homeotic proteins known as phenotypic
              suppression.  A 450-  base pair dpp embryonic ectoderm enhancer (ee-en)  has
              also been  identified by immunoprecipitation with UBX and the possible 
              function of dpp in PNS development and the roles of ee-en and its  homeodomain
              binding sites will be studied. The investigation of the  control of
              segment-specific morphogenesis by Drosophila  homeoproteins is likely to be of
              general interest because of the  evolutionary conservation of homeotic/Hox
              genes from Drosophila to  humans. The control of segment specific functions of
              dpp by  homeotic genes is particularly relevant because many proteins of  the
              TGF-beta family have been implicated in a variety of essential  developmental
              functions in vertebrates.  ***
