Title       : CAA: Molecular Taxonomy of the Clownfish Sea Anemones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1993     
File        : a9306403

Award Number: 9306403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daphne G. Fautin fautin@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
                   In a career advancement award Dr. Fautin will learn modern                
              methods of molecular phylogenetics, including restriction                      
              endonuclease analyses of mitochondrial DNA and nucleotide                      
              sequencing in the laboratory of Dr. Deborah Smith at the University            
              of Kansas.  The focus of the work is on the phylogeny and taxonomy             
              of selected sea anemones, including those that are symbiotic with              
              clownfishes and some that harbor algae internally.  Mitochondrial              
              DNA mutations among the several species of sea anemones will be                
              compared and used for the reconstruction of phylogenetic                       
              relationships among these marine animals.  Molecular data will be              
              integrated with traditional morphological characters used to                   
              distinguish species and genera of anemones.  One long term goal is             
              to compare the pattern of species divergences in sea anemones with             
              that for their symbiotic fish associates, on the one hand, and with            
              the associated symbiotic algae on the other, in order to explore               
              mechanisms of coevolutionary change.                                           
              %%%                                                                            
                   Symbioses are biologically challenging phenomena, including               
              those between sea anemones and their internal (algae) and external             
              associates (clownfishes or anemonefishes).  Dr. Fautin in a career             
              advancement award is adding new molecular data (DNA mutations) to              
              traditional morphological knowledge of sea anemones in order to                
              improve the taxonomy of these marine organisms and to explore                  
              patterns of phylogenetic relationship among the several genera                 
              worldwide.  A robust phylogeny for the sea anemones will then                  
              permit study of the pattern of coevolutionary divergence among the             
              algae and fishes associated with these fascinating creatures.
