Title       : Characterization of Ubiquitin Pathway in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1998       
File        : a9306759

Award Number: 9306759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $613148             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy Callis jcallis@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                        9306759  Callis  The eukaryotic ubiquitin pathway involves the
              covalent attachment  of the protein ubiquitin to cellular proteins. 
              Ubiquitinated  proteins can then be targeted for proteolysis, or ubiquitination
               can result in a stable post-translational modification.  Therefore  the
              ubiquitin pathway represents an important pathway regulating  protein levels
              and their activities in eukaryotes.  The isolation  and identification of
              substrates for ubiquitin modification are  essential for an understanding of
              the regulation and specificity of  this pathway.  While the number of
              ubiquitinated proteins appears  to be large based on immunoblot studies, the
              number of identified  in vivo substrates is small.  In higher plants, only one
              endogenous  plant protein has been identified as a substrate of the ubiquitin 
              pathway.  Two different approaches towards identifying and  isolating higher
              plant in vivo substrates using Arabidopsis  thaliana as the model system are
              outlined in detail and will be  performed.  Identification of additional in
              vivo substrates will  further our knowledge of the roles of the ub pathway in
              higher  plants and contribute toward an understanding of the regulation of 
              ubiquitination.  Two components of the ubiquitin pathway that are  relatively
              uncharacterized in higher plants and are important for  an understanding of the
              regulation of the pathway will be cloned.   Their isoation will also contribute
              toward a long term goal of  producing an in vitro conjugation system with
              specificity identical  to that found in vivo.    Ubiquitin is encoded by a
              multi-gene family in higher plants.  All  members of the ubiquitin gene family
              in Arabidopsis thaliana have  been isolated.  The roles of multiple ubiquitin
              genes will be  addressed through studies of the environmental and developmental
               changes in ubiquitin gene expression.  In addition, the expression  of
              ubiquitin genes in other ecotypes will be determined to assist  in the
              identification of functionally important genes.  A   combination of these two
              approaches will increase our understanding  of the ubiquitin pathway in higher
              plant metabolism, development,  and physiology, and define its role in
              mediating plant responses to  environmental stresses.  ***
