Title       : CAA: Role of Extracellular Matrix Proteins in Craniofacial Development in
               Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1994      
File        : a9306847

Award Number: 9306847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen K. Smith kksmith@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9222,
Abstract    :
              The pattern of expression of two extracellular matrix proteins,                
              tenascin and thrombospondin, is being examined during craniofacial             
              development in mammals.  These proteins are thought to be                      
              significant in musculosketetal development, in the process of                  
              ossification, in the establishment of connective tissue patterning,            
              as well as in a number of other developmental events.  Two model               
              systems -- mice and the mini-opossum, Monodelphis domestica -- will            
              be used to test these hypotheses.  Specific studies include: the               
              use of PCR cloning techniques to contruct a marsupial cDNA probe to            
              tenascin; the use of these probes to map the spatial and temporal              
              expression of tenascin in cranial skeletal tissues in the                      
              developing marsupial neonate; the comparison of the pattern of                 
              expression in Monodelphis with that in mice; the collection of                 
              pilot data for a future study involving the experimental                       
              manipulation of matrix gene expression in vivo by application of               
              exogenous growth factors; and the mapping of expression of                     
              thrombospondin in time and space in mic embryos.                               
                                                                                             
              This project is significant for a number of reasons.  First, it                
              will allow an examination of the processes involved in normal                  
              craniofacial development and may help illuminate the significance              
              of two molecules thought to be of general significance in                      
              development.  Second, it will make use of a new model for mammalian            
              development, Monodelphis domestica, in which most development                  
              occurs after birth.  Additionally, these studies will allow                    
              exploration of the molecular basis of heterochronies observed in               
              marsupial and placental mammal development.  Finally, in line with             
              the goals of the Career Advancement Award, this project will                   
              provide the opportunity to extend previous research into entirely              
              new directions.
