Title       : Why Does Forest Growth Decline with Stand Age? An Experimental Test of Carbon
               Acquisition and Allocation Over Stand Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1995  
File        : a9306356

Award Number: 9306356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James K. Martin                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Fownes jfownes@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael G. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Binkley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              0521400   Plant Productivity                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1325,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9306356  Fownes  Why does forest growth decline with stand age?  An experimental
              test of carbon acquisition and allocation over stand development.  the overall
              goal of this research is to understand the production biology of even-aged
              forests.  Biomass accumulation rates of even-aged forests typically increase at
              first, peak, and then decline.  The conventional explanation has been that leaf
              area index, and thus gross while woody biomass, and thus respiration, continues
              to increase until relatively little photosynthate remains for new growth. 
              However, this proposition has not been tested directly.  Recent evidence, both
              direct estimates of stand respiration and indirect indices of growth
              efficiency, suggest that this explanation cannot be correct.  We propose an
              integrated experimental test of three hypotheses:  (1) that respiration does
              account for declining growth rate, (2) that nutrient availability decreases
              over time, thereby lowering leaf area, photosynthesis, or both, or (3) that the
              pattern is caused by shifting allocation of net production to
              infrequently-measured components, particularly roots.   %%%  The significance
              of the research lies in answering one of the fundamental questions in forest
              ecosystem biology.  If the respiration hypothesis is refuted, conventional
              explanations of stand growth dynamics will be overthrown.  Understanding the
              controls of stand growth and carbon allocation will be crucial for predicting
              the response of tropical forest to changing climate.  The practical
              significance of the research will be in formulating a comprehensive approach to
              plantation management, and in answering such questions as how to optimize the
              plant-density/ rotation-length/ harvest-size relationship, and whether
              late-rotation fertilization is likely to be beneficial.  The region around the
              experimental site is receiving serious consideration for a commercial
              Eucalyptus plantation industry, and results will be readily adopted into
              planning and management.
