Title       : SGER: Sensory Transduction of Blue Light in Corn coleoptiles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1993     
File        : a9306801

Award Number: 9306801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eduardo Zeiger zieger@lbes.medsch.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal requests a Small Grant for Exploratory Research to               
              develop preliminary data for a critical test of the hypothesis that            
              carotenoids function as blue light photoreceptors in the                       
              phototropic response of corn coleoptiles.  Current thinking in the             
              field ascribes the role of blue light photoreceptor to flavins or              
              flavoproteins.  Recent work in this laboratory, however, has                   
              provided tantalizing evidence for a role of the carotenoid,                    
              zeaxanthin in blue light photoreception.  The research proposed                
              here addresses the question of whether this molecule serves as the             
              photoreceptor for coleoptile phototropism, a well characterized                
              blue light response.  Pilot studies with corn coleoptiles have                 
              shown that they operate the xanthophyll cycle and have zeanthin                
              concentrations that track their light environment.  Proposed                   
              experiments are designed to correlate the extent of the phototropic            
              response with prevailing zeaxanthin concentrations in the                      
              coleoptile, and to establish whether coleoptile chloroplasts show              
              a blue light response.  Other experiments with corn mutants having             
              an altered pigment composition will seek to correlate changes in               
              phototropic sensitivity with their pigment content.                            
              Characterization of the blue light sensing mechanism in the                    
              coleoptile system would significantly enhance our understanding of             
              blue light sensory transduction in plants.                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              One of the most fundamental responses of a plant to its environment            
              is that the growing tip of a young plant shoot turns and grows                 
              toward light.  Blue light is most effective in eliciting this                  
              response, but the mechanism by which plant tips sense blue light is            
              not yet understood.  As the first step in the response blue light              
              must be absorbed by a specific chemical compound, but the chemical             
              photoreceptor has not yet been identified with certainty.                      
              Establishing the nature of the blue light photoreceptor would be an            
              important contribution to understanding of this fundamental plant              
              response.  Circumstantial evidence has led most investigators in               
              the field to believe that the photoreceptor is probably a type of              
              organic molecule known as a "flavin".  Dr. Zeiger, however, has                
              obtained some results suggesting that a different class of organic             
              molecule, a "carotenoid" may be the real blue light receptor. If a             
              carotenoid is, indeed, the blue light photoreceptor this would be              
              a very important advance, but the evidence at present is too                   
              incomplete to justify launching a full scale research program on               
              the subject.  This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will permit            
              Dr. Zeiger to develop sufficient preliminary data to determine                 
              whether a full scale project should be undertaken to study the                 
              function of carotenoids as blue light photoreceptors.
