Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1995  
File        : a9306199

Award Number: 9306199
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Phillips phillips@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9306199  Phillips       This project studies differential equations from two 
              different areas, the calculus of variations related to nonlinear  elasticity
              and the evolution of defects for nonlinear systems.   Continuing work on the
              regularity of solutions to problems from  nonlinear elasticity builds on
              recently established results  showing that certain boundary value problems from
              two dimensional  elasticity have solutions which are locally Lipschitz
              continuous  homeomorphisms.  Efforts will now be made to derive estimates for 
              these solutions and to use them to address regularity questions  for general
              boundary value problems. A particular class of  elliptic variational problems
              called polyconvex will also be  studied to determine gradient estimates for
              solutions to this  type of problem and to investigate the possibility of
              isolated  singularities in their solutions.  The second line of work  concerns
              smooth solutions to the parabolic Ginzburg-Landau  system.  For each fixed
              moment of time, the solution is viewed as  a vector field over the spacial
              domain.  A defect is defined as  place where the field is null.  The evolution
              of the  defect pattern and how it depends on the nonlinear structure of  the
              system is to be investigated.  In particular the phenomena  of creations,
              mutual annihilation and stable pattern formation  of defects are to be studied.
                    Partial differential equations form a basis for  mathematical modeling of
              the physical world.  The role of  mathematical analysis is not so much to
              create the equations as  it is to provide qualitative and quantitative
              information about  the solutions.  This may include answers to questions  about
              uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  In addition, analysis  often develops
              methods for approximation of solutions and  estimates on the accuracy of these
              approximations.  ***
