Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Viscoelastic and Multilayer Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1995  
File        : a9306635

Award Number: 9306635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daljit S. Ahluwalia                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Renardy renardym@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9306635  Renardy       The proposal addresses a number of problems in the 
              mathematical analysis of viscoelastic and multilayer flows and  encompasses
              three components: i) the development of a rigorous  mathematical foundation for
              the analysis of instabilities and  bifurcations in viscoelastic flows.  The
              issues to investigate  include the connection between linear stability and
              spectrum, and  the existence of center manifolds which allow the reduction of 
              the dynamics to ODEs.  While these issues are well understood in  Newtonian
              fluid dynamics, very little is known in viscoelastic  fluids; ii) the study of
              instabilities and qualitative dynamics  of fluid interfaces.  Previous work in
              the area has been  concerned with linear stability and "simple" bifurcations. 
              The  proposed research will concern more complicated bifurcations,  such as
              sideband instabilities, and situations where several  unstable modes coexist;
              iii) the study of flow problems with open  boundaries.  Such open boundaries
              arise from truncation of flow  domains for numerical purposes. The proposed
              research is aimed at  addressing questions relating to open boundaries in
              viscoelastic  flows, and the possibility of artificial instabilities resulting 
              from the presence of open boundaries.  A graduate student will  work on the
              existence of steady flows for model equations  resulting from kinetic theories
              of polymer solutions.       The proposed research is aimed at further
              developing the  mathematical theory of the flow of polymeric liquids, as well
              as  multilayer flows.  Such flows are important in many industrial  processing
              operations. The results of the proposed research will  be helpful in developing
              a better qualitative understanding of  such flows and in developing methods for
              their numerical  simulation.  The research focusses in particular on the study
              of  instabilities, i.e. qualitative changes in the nature of the flow  when
              certain parameters are changed, and on problems introduced  by artificial
              boundaries which arise w hen the flow domain is  truncated for numerical
              purposes.  ***
