Title       : Maternal Manipulation of Sibling Aggression as a Possible Mechanism of Sex-Ratio
               Adjustment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1994  
File        : a9306912

Award Number: 9306912
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George W. Uetz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence G. Frank LGFrank@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Glickman  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9306912  Glickman    Siblicide, the killing of one sibling by another, has been
              well studied in a number  of bird species, but has only recently been described
              in a mammal.  Integrating  data from a long-term field study with observations
              made in a research colony,  Dr. Laurence Frank has found that newborn spotted
              hyenas fight violently at  birth, have an array of adaptations for winning the
              fight, and that one usually  dies in the first weeks of life when both sibs are
              the same sex.  This aggression is  associated with massive prenatal exposure to
              androgens, which are presumably  responsible for the unique syndrome of genital
              masculinization, enhanced  aggressiveness, and dominance over males that
              characterizes the female spotted  hyena.  Reproductive records from a long-term
              field study show that female  hyenas appear to adjust the sex ratio of their
              offspring according to their own  social rank and current demographic
              conditions.    Through intensive study of wild female hyenas and their
              offspring in the critical  first month of life, Dr. Frank will test the
              hypothesis that female spotted hyenas  are able to influence the outcome of
              neonatal aggression to concentrate parental  investment in a singleton of the
              favored sex.  Behavioral observations will  commence at birth, and will include
              detailed observations of maternal behavior at  the natal den and regular
              inspection of the den hole with a fiber-optic video  camera to monitor number
              and condition of the young.  To assess costs of offspring  of both sexes, Dr.
              Frank will regularly assess dominance relations within the litter  and weight
              gain by cubs.  In addition, he will continue to maintain genealogical, 
              demographic, and dominance records that date back to 1979.    This research
              addresses basic questions in three fields of behavioral biology:  sibling
              aggression and parent-offspring conflict, sex-ratio adjustment, and  hormonal
              influences on aggression.  Siblicide poses an array of questions that 
              challenge our understanding of kin sele ction and the costs of reproduction. 
              Under  what circumstances is it evolutionarily advantageous for a young animal
              to kill its  nearest relative?  Does this behavior also benefit the parents'
              fitness, or does the  surviving sibling benefit at the cost of both its dead
              sib and its parents?  Should  the primary hypothesis be proven, it will
              demonstrate that maternal behavior is  capable of influencing the sex ratio of
              offspring after birth, and will lead to  important questions about the
              cognitive processes involved, since the  demonstrated pattern of adjustment
              apparently responds to changing ecological  and social variables.  This work is
              coordinated with a major study of hyena  endocrinology and development in
              Berkeley, one goal of which is to identify the  role of prenatal androgens in
              shaping neonatal aggression.  Because humans  produce the same hormones that
              appear to influence physical and behavioral  development of the spotted hyena,
              insights into their role in hyena aggression may  help focus questions about
              their role in human behavior.
