Title       : A Mechanistic and Spatial Analysis of Plant Competition in Two Contrasting
               Grassland Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1994        
File        : a9306499

Award Number: 9306499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1993   
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda L. Wallace lwallace@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9198,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9306499  Wallace   The aim of this proposal is to provide new data on
              individualistic competitive interactions among dominant grass species that do
              versus do not have compensatory responses to being grazed by large ungulates. 
              An exixting model of plant growth and competition will be modifed to increase
              the handling of spatial and temporal variablity for individualistic competitive
              interactions.  The data will be used to parameterize the model as well as
              increase our mechanistic understanding of competitive interactions and plant
              compensatory response to removal of aboveground biomass under competitive
              circumstances.  The question is an important one for the structuring of
              grasslands.  And few studies focus on actually documenting and then
              incorporating differential plant response to herbivory into mechanistic,
              predictive models.  The proposed work builds on the expertise of productive PIs
              and the collaboration is likely to continue to be a productive one.  The
              experimental approach proposed is carefully thoughtout and intensive.  I like
              the intensive physiological compenent, the data from which should complement
              and verify work being done on other labs.  For the experiment, I had one
              question which I did not find addressed: What are the proposed extent, timing
              and persistence of the clipping treatments proposed?  Also, a quibble perhaps,
              it seems to me that the experiment measures response of clipped vs unclipped
              plants to (potential) resource limitation rather than directly measuring
              competition as claimed.  For the model, the one question I had was whether the
              rule, to distribute resources in proportion to demand ba sed on root biomass,
              was really an appropriate rule (even though I know that it is often the rule
              used)?  It seems to me to build in a couple pf assumptions that are probably
              not warranted, especially in this study: that rate of uptake is proportional to
              root biomass and that it is equal among compensating and noncompensating
              species.  Overall, a very strong proposal (though perhaps a somewhat
              disproportionaltely large investment, even on an annual basis, especially since
              the offcampus overhead rate was allowed.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              !              F                             v 
                         v                                 7    Times New Roman    Symbol  &
              Arial  5 Courier New                                 "             h        E+ 
              e      8                 K    abstract for Linda Wallace    Deborah Johnson
              Deborah Johnson                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
