Title       : RPG: Metapopulation Models at Two Spatial Scales Using Freshwater Mussels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1993     
File        : a9306687

Award Number: 9306687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13835              (Estimated)
Investigator: Caryn C. Vaughn cvaughn@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                   Metapopulation models are important tools for understanding               
              distribution and abundance of organisms at large spatial scales.               
              Because these models attempt to integrate local population dynamics            
              with immigration and extinction events occurring between sites,                
              they form a bridge between the traditionally separate domains of               
              population ecology (local abundance) and biogeography (regional                
              occurrence).  Freshwater mussel communities in rivers provide an               
              exemplary system in which to assess metapopulation models across               
              different regional scales: within a stream itself (small drainages)            
              and within a network of streams (major river drainage).  Mussel                
              communities are naturally distributed in patches because they only             
              occur on appropriate substrate within a river.  Local populations              
              are prone to frequent extinction because of the shifting course of             
              rivers which redeposits sediment and eradicates mussel beds.  Dr.              
              Vaughn will take advantage of historical (near-fossil) data on                 
              mussel assemblages in the Red River drainage along with SCUBA-                 
              facilitated inventory of current mussel communities in order to                
              quantify colonization and extinction rates through time and over               
              spatial scales from local to regional.                                         
              %%%                                                                            
                   Rudimentary metapopulation models have been evaluated with                
              datasets that emphasize current assemblages of species.  Data on               
              temporal fluxes are needed to begin to quantify rates and patterns             
              of colonization and extinction over regional spatial scales.  Dr.              
              Vaughn in a research planning grant is beginning to assemble such              
              datasets by concentrating on mussel communities in the Red River               
              drainage.  The work takes on added urgency in light of the recent              
              introduction of an alien asian clam that may prove an aggressive               
              competitor in the region.
