Title       : Context Effects on Reinforcement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1995        
File        : a9306736

Award Number: 9306736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ben A. Williams bawilliams@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9306736  Williams    Research on animal learning has generally been segregated
              into the study of  Pavlovian conditioning, which involves the association
              between stimuli and  reinforcers, and instrumental (operant) conditioning,
              which involves the relation  between responses and reinforcers.  Dr. Williams'
              recent research has  demonstrated striking parallels in how contingency effects
              operate for the two  types of conditioning.  He will now extend the analysis to
              determine in more  precise detail whether contingency effects in the two
              domains depend on the same  underlying  associative processes.  In particular,
              he asks whether standard  measures of the strength of instrumental behavior,
              rate of reinforcement and  choice between different response alternatives, can
              be explained in terms of the  concept of stimulus value as predicted by
              Pavlovian association theory.    This research may revolutionize the conceptual
              foundations of general theories of  learning.  The fundamental assumption of
              learning theory for most of this century  has been that "associative strength"
              is composed of individual increases and  decreases in associative value due to
              individual occurrences of reinforced and  nonreinforced behavior.  This
              assumption is challenged by recent findings showing  that the animal seems
              sensitive to the overall rates of reward available in the  situation
              independent of its own behavior.  In other words, the animal uses its  behavior
              to estimate these overall reward rates, rather than the reverse causal 
              direction of the reward producing changes in the "strength" of the behavior. 
              At  the core of this issue is the viability of associative concepts to provide
              a  reductionistic account of learning.  This theoretical issue has
              ramifications for all  of neuroscience, because recent emphases on identifying
              the neural mechanisms  underlying learning and cognition must be predicated on
              the correct view of the  learning processes in order to have any hope of
              success.
