Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Multivariate Nonparametric Methodology Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9306658

Award Number: 9306658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Scott scottdw@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9218,
Abstract    :
                   Nonparametric methodology is widely used in one and two                   
              dimensions, but not in high dimensions.  This research proposal                
              focuses on the mid-range dimensions in an attempt to foster a                  
              deeper understanding of the implications of the curse of                       
              dimensionality.  Particular emphasis will be given to                          
              multivariate regression and density estimation problems, and                   
              closely related applications.  Anecdotal evidence suggests a gap               
              exists between the apparent successes of nonparametric                         
              methodology and the poor performance predicted by theory.  We                  
              will examine new points of view, especially related to adaptive                
              estimation.  Higher quality estimation has often required use of               
              negative kernels, but recent research and shown that equivalent                
              gains are possible in regions where the Hessian is indefinite,                 
              often in the tails which dominate in higher dimensions.  Other                 
              recent work suggests that cross-validation algorithms which are                
              considered of marginal practical value in one dimension, improve               
              dramatically in the multivariate case.  We have found the many                 
              bandwidth selection algorithms cluster into two cases, and                     
              propose to characterize and investigate these classes. Dealing                 
              with medium dimensional data gives rise to many problems in data               
              visualization which we propose to investigate. Multivariate                    
              visualization requires aids and guides such as cognostics.  We                 
              plan to extend our density estimation visualization capabilities               
              to regression surfaces as well as applications such as visual                  
              clustering and discrimination. We propose to extend univariate                 
              ideas of mode estimation and testing based on the mode tree and                
              simulation to several dimensions.  Algorithmic development for                 
              multiprocessor and parallel architectures will be briefly                      
              considered. Nonparametric methodology seems to work well in the                
              hands of experts, and this research is designed to not only aid                
              the expert but to facilitate the use of the methodology by a                   
              wider audience.                                                                
                   The proposer has recently completed a book on the topic of                
              multivariate density and regression estimation, and related                    
              applications, particularly focusing on histograms and their                    
              logical extensions (Scott, 1992).  Difficult theoretical problems              
              with practical consequences still abound.  However, widespread                 
              application reflects the general acceptance of nonparametric                   
              methodology.  The growth in the field of scientific visualization              
              is fertile ground for these exploratory procedures.  This project              
              attempts to capitalize on existing investments in large data                   
              bases, by developing flexible techniques that attempt to extract               
              the maximum amount of information and structure hidden in the                  
              high dimensional data.
