Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1997 
File        : a9306265

Award Number: 9306265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack K. Hale HALE@MATH.GATECH.EDU.  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shui-Nee Chow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9306265  Hale       The thrust of this proposal is to continue to develop the 
              theory of infinite dimensional dissipative systems by the  consideration of
              specific types of problems.  For example, in  Partial Differential Equations,
              we study the dependence of the  flows upon parameters, concentrating on the
              boundary conditions,  diffusion coefficients, dissipation coefficients and the
              shape of  the domain.  Comparison of flows defined by such equations will  be
              restricted mostly to the global attractors.  For Functional  Differential
              Equations, we will be primarily interested in  singular  perturbation problems
              which relate the solutions to the  properties of maps defined by limit
              equations.       Many physical systems are modeled by partial differential 
              equations defined on a bounded domain.  The study of the effects  of the domain
              (its shape, etc.) on the dynamics is of paramount  importance.  This is
              especially true if the geometric properties  ofl the domain act as a control
              variable, as, for example, those  included under lthe name lof optimal shape
              design, as well as  others.  Also, many domains are small in some directions
              and it  is advantageous to make a reduction to a lower dimensional domain  for
              design as well as computational purposes. The present  proposal addresses
              questions of this type.  In lazer optics and  models in ecology and biology,
              one encounters singularly  perturbed delay differential equations.  In such
              cases, the limit  equation for the singularly perturbed parameter equal to zero
               is mapping.  We address in this proposal the relationships  between the
              dynamics of the delay equation and the dynamics of  the map.  ***
