Title       : Relating Zooid and Colony Growth in Modular Organisms Arborescent Cheilostome
               Bryozoans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1993   
File        : a9306729

Award Number: 9306729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott H. Lidgard lidgard@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9306729  Lidgard       Unlike solitary animals such as dogs or cats, bryozoans
              are  animal colonies.  Each colony is made up of tens or even  thousands of
              modules called zooids.  The zooids within a colony  often differ from one
              another in form, but share a similar kind  of growth by budding from
              pre-existing zooids.  This colonial  organization thus introduces variation and
              complexity not found  in the growth of solitary animals.  Different
              arrangements of  zooids and different budding processes allow bryozoan colonies
              to  grow into a remarkable variety of forms, including vines, sheets,  mounds
              and miniature "trees".  Bryozoans are among the most  diverse groups of bottom
              dwelling animals in marine and  freshwater habitats.  Yet skeletal anatomy
              related to budding and  colony formation is unknown for many encrusting and
              most erect  bryozoans because no broadly based study has been attempted.       
               The purpose of this research is to analyze zooid and colony  growth among
              tree-like cheilostome bryozoans and to fill critical  gaps in neglected areas
              of cheilostome morphology.  These  comparative studies will allow (a)
              evaluation and extension of  previous growth models based on studies of
              encrusting colonies to  include newly recognized patterns in erect colonies,
              (b)  assessment of the taxonomic distribution of characters related to  zooid
              and colony growth, and (c) documentation of relationships  among zooid form and
              budding patterns and colony form.  Light  microscopy and scanning electron
              microscopy will be used to  compare growth patterns in both living and fossil
              groups.  %%%       Bryozoans are interesting and poorly understood colonial 
              animals.  What appears to be a single "tree-like" form may  actually consist of
              thousands of individuals.  This project will  study patterns of colony growth
              both in living and fossil forms  of these animals.  Insights will be provides
              for a major group of  animals whose higher level relationships are poorly
              resolved and  whose fossil record contains muc h of the known diversity.  ***
