Title       : CAA: Genetic Exchange Between Bacillus Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1993      
File        : a9306522

Award Number: 9306522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55928              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen E. Duncan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
                   The nature of species, and to what degree closely related                 
              species are demarcated by barriers to genetics exchange, are                   
              perhaps less clear for bacteria than for any other major group of              
              organisms.  Studies of genetic exchange between the closely related            
              soil bacteria Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus licheniformis are                 
              being conducted by Dr. Kathleen Duncan in order to test hypotheses             
              about possible mechanisms opposing free gene exchange among                    
              bacteria.  Knowledge of mechanisms operating in nature that might              
              prevent the free interchange of genes among soil bacteria would                
              greatly aid in making decisions about the release of genetically               
              engineered microorganisms.  Investigations will focus on:  (1)                 
              spontaneous, natural exchange between spores germinated in                     
              sterilized soil; (2) protoplast fusion; and (3) transformation of              
              competent B. subtilis with purified DNA.  The hybrids produced will            
              be analyzed to determine the extent of DNA transfer using methods              
              of sequencing, restriction-enzyme digests, allozyme                            
              electrophoresis, and growth tests on selective media to identify               
              the origin of specific genes.  The fitness of hybrid strains will              
              be evaluated during growth in soil in order to estimate the                    
              likelihood of success in nature.                                               
              %%%                                                                            
                   New methods in molecular genetics make possible the monitoring            
              of gene exchange among soil bacteria, a phenomenon critical to                 
              concerns about genetically engineered organisms.  Dr. Kathleen                 
              Duncan employs sophisticated DNA analyses to evaluate the extent               
              and fate of gene transfer among Bacillus soil bacteria, including              
              the role of hybrid strains carrying blocks of DNA from closely                 
              related species.
