Title       : The Effects of Uncertainties in Physical Property Data and Models on Chemical
               Process Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9321865

Award Number: 9321865
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles A. Garris                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wallace B. Whiting   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rakesh K. Gupta  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Gupta  9321865    Measurements of fluid-phase equilibrium necessarily involve
              experimental error.  Current models developed from these data (both equations
              of state and activity coefficient models) typically are significantly less
              precise than are the data.  The quality of process simulation results based on
              these models is, thereby, limited.  The objective of this project is to develop
              a rational and rigorous method for evaluating the relationships between the
              uncertainties in thermodynamic experiments, models, and design.    The approach
              is to use Monte Carlo simulation to study the sensitivities and uncertainties
              of base cases (chosen in collaboration with academic and industrial colleagues)
              and thereby to formulate and to evaluate heuristics for experimental design,
              model development, and process design.  Preliminary results show that there is
              a very significant uncertainty in the design and operation of processes when
              one considers the seemingly small uncertainties in data for vapor-liquid
              equilibrium.  A common approach in the chemical processing industries is to
              apply safety factors to designs to account for this uncertainty.  However,
              Monte Carlo uncertainty analysis can quantify the uncertainty and lead to
              rationalization of the safety factor approach.    The development of
              thermodynamic models from experimental data requires the regression of model
              parameters, and the results of these regressions can serve as input to the
              Monte Carlo simulations.  However, the classical application of the maximum
              likelihood regression method assumes that the model is inherently more accurate
              than are the data.  For phase-equilibrium data, often the inverse is true. 
              Therefore, an approach will be developed that eliminates this inconsistency and
              allows one to compare models and their accuracy's on a rational basis.    One
              ultimate goal of this work is to separate the uncertainty of physical-property
              into two categories: those caused by model uncertainty and those caused by
              experimental uncertainty.  Mon te Carlo simulations will be performed to
              develop strategies to make this separation.   ***
