Title       : Academic Science Policy in the Clinton Administration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1996  
File        : a9321505

Award Number: 9321505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84889              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheila Slaughter slaughtr@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Rhoades  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 0000,9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9321505  Slaughter  This research project will examine and monitor the ways that
               currently developing science and technology policy shapes  academic science. 
              For the past fifty years, defense and related  agencies and independent
              agencies concerned with basic research  have accounted for a large portion of
              budgets for academic  science.  If the current Administration pursues a
              civilian  technology policy, these funding arrangements will change.  The 
              objectives of this project are to measure and attempt to explain  change with
              regard to:  ideologies of science, budgets and types  of science projects,
              sites for academic science, alliances and  coalitions that support academic
              science.  The project will focus  on the following three questions:  Whose
              voices and interests  will be present and represented in debates surrounding
              federal  science and technology policy?  What impact will changes in  science
              policy at the national level --specifically enactment of  a technology policy
              that reshapes the defense conversion and  biotechnology agendas -- have on
              channels (agencies and processes  by which money is distributed), levels
              (international, national,  state, local), sectors (industry, university,
              federal labs), and  sites (concrete geographical locations) where science is
              done?   Do discourse and spatial analyses suggest that an institutional  class
              embracing private and public sectors and Democratic and  Republican parties has
              emerged and developed a coherent science  and technology policy?  The project
              will monitor documents  produced by forum groups concerned with science policy
              in the  defense conversion and biotechnology areas, congressional  committee
              hearings, and legislation, as well as materials from  the executive branch,
              DOD, NIH, and NSF, and perform discourse  analysis to understand what new
              narratives and ideologies of  science are emerging.  It will track
              organizational changes in  science agencies, budget changes and award
              allocations to  universities, university-industry partners hips, and
              corporations,  and perform time-series data analysis of changes to see who 
              benefits from change, should change occur.  The project will  gather data about
              linkages between organizational and  institutional actors who share similar
              science policy ideologies  to see if a new science policy coalition or
              class-wide consensus  on defense conversion and biotechnology is developing,
              and how it  intersects with policy agendas related to civilian technology 
              policy.  ***
