Title       : Chemical and Spectroscopic Studies of Stratospheric Aerosols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1996     
File        : a9321582

Award Number: 9321582
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret A. Tolbert Margaret.Tolbert@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321582  Tolbert       Chemical reactions on type I polar stratospheric clouds
              (PSCs)  are currently believed to be a key step in polar ozone destruction.  
              Although type I PSCs are thought to be composed of nitric  acid/water vapor
              (HNO3/H2O) mixtures, their exact chemical  composition and phase are still
              uncertain.  This research project  will use infrared, visible, and ultraviolet
              spectroscopy to  determine the chemical composition of type I PSCs.  First, the
               optical constants for NHO3/H2O mixtures will be measured over a wide 
              wavelength range for use in comparisons with field observations of  type I
              PSCs.  Laboratory studies of model type I PSC film growth  will also be
              performed.  These studies will use in situ FTIR  spectroscopy as a probe of the
              chemical composition and phase of  the condensed material during PSC nucleation
              and growth.       In addition to using spectroscopy to identify PSCs, new 
              spectroscopic experiments will study surface reactions on type I  PSCs.  The
              reaction of chlorine nitrate (CIONO2) with hydrochloric  acid (HCl) on type I
              PSCs is currently believed to be the single  most important heterogenous
              reaction promoting ozone loss.   Previous work has shown that this reaction
              depends strongly on the  relative humidity is increased.  Large angle
              reflectance FTIR  spectroscopy will be used to probe the surface reaction of
              CLONO2  with HCI on model type I PSC films.  Surface spectroscopic probes  of
              the condensed phase during should yield insight into the complex  mechanism of
              this important heterogenous reaction.       In addition to chemical reactions
              on PSCs, there is now  heightened interest in heterogenous chemistry on the
              global  stratospheric sulfate aerosol (SSA) layer. Chemical reactions on 
              background and volcanic SSAs may be responsible for the down ward  trend in
              ozone observed in the last decade.  This project will  investigate the chemical
              and physical properties of SSAs, composed  primarily of sulfuric acid and water
              vapors (H2SO4) and(H2O).  Spectroscopi c experiments will also be performed to
              characterize  low temperature liquid and frozen sulfuric acid films 
              representative of SSAs fro use in comparisons with field  observations of SSAs.
               In addition, the chemical reactivity of SSAs  will be studied.  A combination
              of gas phase and condensed phase  detection of reactants and products will be
              used to obtain a more  complete picture of the condensed phase reactions. 
              Initial studies  will focus on the uptake and reactivity of HOx reservoir
              species in  sulfuric acid as a function of composition and phase of the acid.
