Title       : Exploratory Research: The Potential of Chemical Analysis of Organic Residues on
               Ground Stone Tools in Reconstructing Prehistoric Diet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1995  
File        : a9321601

Award Number: 9321601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ofer Bar-Yosef obaryos@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine I. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321601  Bar-Yosef    Drs. Ofer Bar-Yosef and Katherine Wright, in collaboration
              with  chemists from University College, University of London, will  conduct
              chemical analysis of residues incorporated onto prehistoric  pounding and
              grinding stones. The objects to be studied derive from  a series of sites in
              Jordan and Israel. On this basis they hope to  reconstruct the uses to which
              these objects were put, determine  whether individual specimens served to
              reduce animal or plant  products, and hopefully identify the individual plant
              species. They  will employ thin-layer chromatography and gas
              chromatography-mass  spectroscopy. Materials selected for analysis derive from
              secure  well dated archaeological contexts and include both pre-  agricultural
              and early agricultural sites.    The domestication of plants and animals
              occurred in the Near East  ca. 10,000 years ago and marks a major transition in
              human  lifestyle. This "Neolithic revolution" provided the basis for 
              population increase, the development of settled village life and  the rise of
              civilization. Archaeologists wish to understand the  process which lead to
              domestication and recognize how difficult it  is to accomplish this. Plants
              only infrequently leave a visible  mark in the archaeological record because -
              in contrast to animal  bone - they are often fragile and do not preserve well.
              It is known  by ethnographic analogy that ground stone objects are often used
              to  process plant and animal foods and for this reason Drs. Bar-Yosef  and
              Wright are focussing on such materials.    This research is important for
              several reasons. It will help to  develop a technique which may be applied in
              many archaeological  situations. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists  and increase our understanding of how complex societies such as
              our  own developed.  ***
