Title       : Metal Complexes with Fullerene and Polyphosphine Backbones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1995  
File        : a9321257

Award Number: 9321257
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Balch albalch@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321257  Balch  University of California - Davis  Dr. Alan Balch, Chemistry
              Department, University of California at  Davis, is supported by the Inorganic,
              Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program for studies of fullerene
              chemistry and of metal complexes of polydentate phosphines. The reversible
              binding of metal fragments will be evaluated as a route to obtaining complexes
              of  the higher fullerenes, which will then be structurally characterized. The
              chemistry of these complexes will be evaluated both to understand fundamental
              properties and to prepare crystalline polymers which may posses interesting
              electronic properties. Polyphosphine complexes which contain several metal
              atoms arranged around an open space within the molecule will be prepared. These
              will be utilized to explore reactivity both within and outside of these
              cavities and the ability of the complexes to interact with one another to form
              new metallomacromolecules will be evaluated.  The fullerenes are a new class of
              the element carbon in which the  carbon atoms are arranged in ball-like shapes.
              While the behavior of these species is largely unknown there are hints of
              interesting electrical and other properties. In this research new derivatives
              of the fullerenes will be prepared both in order to determine their exact
              shapes and to explore their chemical properties. It is hoped that new polymeric
              materials may result form this project. In a separate but related portion of
              the investigation, cage-like compounds will be prepared in which several metal
              atoms face an interior void. As chemical reactions which are mediated by metal
              atoms often require an exposed metal, a comparison of the properties inside the
              void and  outside the complex will provide valuable information on the exact
              nature of  exposed metal atoms.
