Title       : Collaborative Research in Decision, Risk, and Management Science: Understanding
               Gender Inequality: The Relative Influence of Institutional Power and Gender
               Consciousness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 2,  1996    
File        : a9321126

Award Number: 9321126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan W. Leland                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randy T. Simmons   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberta Herzberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              80        Social Sciences                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Game theorists and some feminist scholars would predict that individuals with
              asymmetric access to institutional power (such as an exit opportunity) should
              claim more resources than those without such access--regardless of the sex of
              the individual.  Other feminist scholars, in contrast, emphasize the ways in
              which socialization and other mechanisms can produce gender-role
              internalization such that men and women of equal power behave differently. 
              Based on this latter research, we would predict interactions between sex and
              institutional power.    To sort out these different arguments, this research
              pilot tests an experimental study of two-person prisoners' dilemma (PD) games
              in which an asymmetric exit opportunity is crossed with sex-of-subject.  In
              some conditions, only men will have the exit opportunity while in others only
              women will have the exit opportunity.  (Same-sex conditions are also explored.)
               The sex of an individual's body, however, does not necessarily match the "sex"
              of his or her psyche.  Thus, in order to understand individual differences
              among women (and among men) the research explores correlation between behavior
              and measures of gender-role internalization (i.e., the "sex" of one's psyche)
              and "gender" consciousness," (i.e., beliefs about proper gender roles).    The
              results of the longer term research program may have important implications for
              the broader policy question of how to lessen gender inequality.  Can gender
              inequality be corrected by changing the balance of institutional power (in this
              case access to an exit option)?  Or, are changes in the socialization process
              also necessary before equal outcomes can be expected?
