Title       : RUI: Low Mach Number Flows in an Infinite Domain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1994       
File        : a9321728

Award Number: 9321728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisette G. de Pillis depillis@hmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvey Mudd College
	      301 E. 12th Street
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9321728  de Pillis    The Navier-Stokes equations are central to the modeling of
              ocean  currents, weather patterns, jet engine noise, waves generated by  the
              movement of an object through a fluid, and many other  physical phenomena.  The
              Navier-Stokes equations can be used to  model compressible, slightly
              compressible, and incompressible  fluid flow.  The equations are complicated
              enough that numerical  as opposed to analytical solution methods must be
              employed.  The  numerical calculation of each type of flow (e.g., compressible 
              versus incompressible) presents its own particular difficulties.   In this
              project, the focus is on the efficient determination of  the solutions to the
              slightly compressible Navier-Stokes  equations in an infinite domain.  These
              solutions represent low  Mach number flow, and are pivotal to the modeling of
              sound  propagation.    In the case of slightly compressible flow, at least two
              time  scales are present in the solutions.  The presence of the two or  more
              time scales generally makes efficient numerical calculations  difficult to
              achieve.  In this project, however, the presence of  multiple time scales is
              actually used advantageously.  Recent  research has shown how certain solutions
              containing multiple time  scales can be expanded into a sum of simpler
              solutions (i.e.,  solutions containing essentially one time scale).  In the 
              analytic portion of this project, the general behavior of this  sum of
              solutions is examined.  The goal of this project is to  develop, implement and
              analyze a numerical solver which makes use  of this understanding of the
              behavior of these solutions.  The  efficiency and accuracy of this new
              implementation will be  compared with that of existing numerical schemes.  This
              solver is  expected to be an improvement over existing solvers in  efficiency,
              accuracy and ease of use.
