Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Iterative Methods for Equations and Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1996  
File        : a9321938

Award Number: 9321938
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl T. Kelley tim_kelley@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9189,9263,EGCH,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321938  Kelley       The principal investigator will design and analyze 
              algorithms for the large systems of linear and nonlinear  equations and
              optimization problems that arise when infinite  dimensional problems are
              discretized.  Objectives include further  development of a new multilevel
              method for compact fixed point  problems, work on globally convergent methods
              for nonsmooth  compact fixed point problems, particularly those that arise from
               parabolic control problems, and analysis of the sup-norm  convergence of
              certain methods based on inner products,  particularly GMRES, CG, and
              primal-dual interior point methods.   The principal investigator will also
              continue work on special  purpose methods for optimization and solution of
              nonlinear  equations. These methods are directed at problems such as 
              optimization of noisy functions, aomputer aided design of  microwave devices,
              and optimal control.       Large systems of equations arise in scientific
              computation  in many ways.  This project is to design and analyze efficient 
              solution methods for classes of very large problems that arise in  many
              applications.  The particular objectives of and algorithms  studied in this
              project are driven by applications and the  principal investigator works
              closely with scientists and  engineers in other disciplines.  As an example, in
              computer aided  design and manufacture of microwave semiconductor devices, such
               as the amplifiers used in radar and cellular communication, the  principal
              investigator's work has been incorporated into software  for analysis and
              optimization of process yield, design of more  efficient devices, and bench
              testing of chips. In the course of  the development of this software, a new
              algorithm was discovered  for the optimization of noisy functions, that is,
              functions whose  values are corrupted by noise or error. Process yield models 
              often have that feature.  One goal of the present project is to  continue the
              work on noisy optimization.
