Title       : RPG: The Role of Race and Class in Exposure to Environmental Hazards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1994     
File        : a9321614

Award Number: 9321614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura Pulido   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1577,9221,9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9321614  PULIDO       As geographers and other scientists become more aware of
              the  spatial distribution of pollution and other environmental  problems, the
              tendency of minority ethnic and racial groups to  have disproportionate
              exposure to many risks has become more  evident.  Unfortunately, much of the
              research on this topic has  tended to provide only "snapshot" views, examining
              relationships  for a limited time period.  As a result, knowledge about the 
              processes through which minority groups are adversely impacted is  limited. 
              This Research Planning Grant will enable a productive  young investigator to
              explore new approaches to this important  problem.  Both micro- and macro-level
              analyses will be examined  through a pilot study of the impacts of abandoned
              toxic-waste  sites on African Americans and Latinos in Los Angeles.  The 
              distribution of toxic-waste sites through the city will be  examined using
              historical records.  In areas where abandoned  sites are located, the evolution
              of land-use, industrial,  residential, and workplace patterns will be studied. 
              This  information will be combined with information about the changing 
              demographic and social patterns of minority groups in order to  better assess
              the nature of minority exposure to toxic wastes.  After research methods have
              been refined through this pilot  study, the investigator plans to conduct
              parallel analyses of the  exposure of these minority populations to other
              environmental  problems, including commercial hazardous-waste facilities and 
              toxic air pollution.       Through the conduct of this project, new insights
              will be  gained regarding the factors that have resulted in many minority 
              groups being exposed to more severe environmental problems than  other groups. 
              Refinement of methods that incorporate a  historical dimension to empirical
              analyses will significantly  enhance theoretical discussions of "environmental
              racism."  This  research planning grant also will provide valuable assistance
              to  a promising young Latino  woman at a critical early stage in her 
              independent research career.  ***
