Title       : The Evolutionary Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1994        
File        : a9321370

Award Number: 9321370
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vassiliki B. Smocovitis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9321370  Smocovitis  One of the most significant but least understood events in
              the  recent history of science is the evolutionary synthesis which  developed
              around the time of World War II.  Under this grant, Dr.  Smocovitis is
              investigating how the synthesis might best be seen in  the context of the
              emerging discipline of evolutionary biology--the  area of biology which is
              frequently thought to be the "central  organizing principle" or "central
              metaphor" of the modern  biological sciences.  This process of discipline
              formation in turn  took place within larger efforts to unify the biological
              sciences  in this period.    Dr. Smocovitis has organized this study in several
              parts.  One  component involves examination of the merging discipline in the 
              context of positivist efforts to unify knowledge. She is examining  the
              question to what extent, and exactly how, the "architects" of  the evolutionary
              synthesis inherited and accommodated these global  efforts to unify knowledge. 
              She is also documenting how positivist  epistemology shaped their vision of
              legitimate science through  methodological concerns such as the adoption of
              experimental  methodologies, choice of study organism, and the application of 
              quantitative methods to the historical science of evolution.  Another component
              of the study involves a look at the emerging  discipline itself through the
              organizational and institutional  efforts to unify and legitimate evolutionary
              studies in the US.   The final component of this study is an examination of
              political,  ethical, and national concerns of the interwar period such as the 
              desire to formulate a meaningful evolutionary world view.  This  project
              promises not only to shed light on this significant episode  in the history of
              western science, but will also make transparent  the historically rooted,
              context-bound, and humanistic features of  scientific knowledge.  ***
