Title       : Conference on New Horizons in Feminist Geography; Lexington, Kentucky: August
               1994
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1994   
File        : a9321163

Award Number: 9321163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24867              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Roberts geg207@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heidi J. Nast  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Ulack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321163  ROBERTS       Feminist geography grew out of the women's movement and 
              other liberatory struggles of the 1960's. Since that time,  and especially
              since the mid-1980's, feminist geographers  have focussed on the relationship
              between feminist  geographic research and social change. As a result of an 
              explosion of recent research, feminist geography has tackled  important and
              difficult questions concerning the  relationship between gender, space, and
              power, and how  social constructions of gender and gender relations vary 
              across space and time. Furthermore, it has begun to  formulate new ways of
              equitably negotiating and representing  difference in pedalogical, theoretical,
              and methodological  terms. Given the volume and pace of this recent research,
              it  is timely to take stock of progress, to identify new  horizons, and to
              chart new directions for feminist  geography. This conference aims to achieve
              these ends  through a focus on three of the most recurrent and important 
              themes arising out of new feminist research: diversity and  difference,
              methological frontiers, and new forms of  representation. Results of the
              conference will be published  in book form.       Feminist geography has
              already had a major impact on  the nature of human geography studies. This
              conference will  provide a timely and intensive opportunity for leading and 
              emerging scholars in the field of feminist geography to  reflect on past
              accomplishments and to structure future  research.  Thus this conference will
              provide new visions of  this important field of study that will not only
              inspire  those scientists actively involved in its study, but will  also
              further the impact of feminist geography on the rest of  human geography.
