Title       : Marine Biotechnology Fellowship: Role of Chromosome- Associated DNA Binding
               Proteins in the Viable but Nonculturable State of Vibrio Vulnificus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1995    
File        : a9321699

Award Number: 9321699
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria P. McGovern vpmcgove@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              McGovern  9321699      Approximately 50% of the active bacteria that can be
              counted  in seawater resist attempts to culture.  One reason may be  that
              bacteria are capable, under natural conditions of  stress, of entering a viable
              but nongrowing state.  The  viable but nonculturable (VBNC) state involves a
              metabolic  program in which the cell remains viable and maintains a low  level
              of metabolism, but cannot be cultured.  Understanding  the factors that govern
              entry into this state may provide a  window of entry into the biology of the
              uncluturable  bacteria of the ocean,  The best characterized system for 
              studying entry into and exit form the VBNC state is the  marine bacterium
              Vibrio vulnificus. V. vulnificus enters  the VBNC state in response to
              temperature downshifts.  Entry  into the VBNC state poses problems at the DNA
              level:  the  chromosome-associated DNA binding proteins (sometimes called 
              "histone-like" proteins) may play an important role in the  VBNC state.  One of
              the these proteins,  HNS, has been shown  to silence transcription in vivo and
              to stabilize and  ordered DNA structure in vitro.  Its pleiotropic effects 
              indicate that this protein plays a role in allowing cells to  sense various
              types of environmental change. HNS is an  abundant, cold-inducible protein that
              varies in  concentration over the course of a cell's growth cycle,  reaching
              its maximal concentration during stationary phase,  a period of relative
              metabolic quiescence.  This project  will test the hypothesis that during a
              temperature  downshift, the V. vulnificus homolog of HNS is induced,  silencing
              expression of genes needed for normal growth and  leading to the VBNC state in
              that bacterium.  Such a system  could account for a significant portion of the
              nonculturable  bacteria present in the ocean environment.    ***
