Title       : Marine Biotechnology Fellowship: Characterization of the Role of Bacterial
               Symbionts in the Protection of Loligo Opalescens Embryos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1995       
File        : a9321532

Award Number: 9321532
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Epel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Melissa R. Kaufman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9321532  EPEL   Current understanding of the defense mechanisms utilized by
              early  embryos to evade environmental threats is rudimentary in comparison  to
              our knowledge of multicellular defense systems, such as the  immune system,
              employed by adult life stages. Strong ecological  selectiv pressures for
              biological devices to resist pathogens and  predators must exist in embryos to
              assure survival of these  critical primary stages in oceanic life cycles. The
              egg capsule of  the Pacificc squid, Loligo opalescens, provides a model system
              to  study such embryo protection processes. These squid deposit their  eggs in
              large communal aggregates in shallow coastal waters such as  in Monterey Bay.
              During their month-long gestation period these  embryos endure little or no
              animal, fungal, or microbial  predations. Initial studies revealed the presence
              of several  distinct bacterial symbionts specifically associated with the egg 
              capsule sheath. These bacteria apparently are secreted from the  accessory
              nidamental gland connected to the squid ovary, which also  contains
              symbioticbacteria. This research project aims to identify  these microbes and
              assess their contribution to the protection of  the squid embryos in the wild.
              By integrating prokaryotic genetics  and molecular biology with more classical
              approaches to ocean  ecology, this research will address questions concerning
              both  marine embryo defense mechanisms and potential therapeutic agents  for
              use in aquaculture and medicine.  Additionally, the molecular  devices
              responsible for the mutualistic relationship between marine  bacteria and the
              eukaryotic host that will be studied may represent  a global phenomenon with
              implications for a wide spectrum of  disciplines including immunology, cell
              biology, and infectious  disease.   ***
