Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The German Controversy Over the Oncomouse
               Patent: A Case Study in the Social and Cultural Repercussions of Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1994      
File        : a9321136

Award Number: 9321136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Rabinow rabinow@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321136  Rabinow  Biotechnology is rapidly revolutionizing biology.  New
              techniques  promise to cure disease and alter genes of plants, animals, and 
              ultimately of humans themselves.  Fears of these humanly engineered  species
              have led American opponents to attempt to block sales of  genetically altered
              foods in supermarkets.  "Animal rights"  activists have also sought to halt
              manipulation of animal genes.   An important topic for Science and Technology
              Studies is to examine  the ways biotechnology has affected societies around the
              world.   Under the direction of Professor Rabinow, Soren Germer is examining 
              the recent German controversy over a patent on a transgenic mouse,  the Harvard
              oncomouse.  The goal of this project is to document the  social and cultural
              repercussions of contemporary biotechnology in  a concrete case and a specific
              national setting.  Two questions  frame this research:  How has the oncomouse,
              as a tangible product  of modern biotechnology, affected contemporary German
              ideas and  practices concerning the relationship between humans and animals? 
              and, What are the particular characteristics of the German  development and
              reception of recent biotechnology?  Mr. Germer is  conducting 12 months of
              ethnographic fieldwork in Munich, Germany,  with the main adversaries in the
              oncomouse controversy -- a group  of biotechnology critics, a group of
              geneticists, and various  patent lawyers -- in order to chart their conflicting
              beliefs and  practices.  He is exploring local competing perspectives on the 
              relationship between humans and animals, on science and technology,  and on
              culture and nature.  The way we classify, think, and treat  animals plays an
              important role in how we define ourselves as  humans. This dissertation
              contributes to the analysis of late-  modern German cultural identity as it is
              reshaped by the radical  changes which science presents.  ***
