Title       : Coenzyme A Analogs as Probes of Enzymatic Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9321371

Award Number: 9321371
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale G. Drueckhammer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321371  Drueckhammer  This project will use synthetic Coenzyme A (CoA) analogs
              to study  fundamental mechanistic questions in enzyme catalyzed reactions of
              CoA esters.  This work  is based on methodology developed in the P.I.'s lab for
              the convenient synthesis of CoA/CoA  ester analogs.  The largest effort will be
              directed at probing the involvement of enolate and/or  enol intermediates in
              enzyme catalyzed reactions of acetyl-CoA and other CoA esters.  Stable  analogs
              of the enolate and enol forms of acetyl-CoA will be prepared, and studied as 
              inhibitors of citrate synthase. The protonation state of these analogs in 
              isotopically enriched  form bound to the enzyme will be studied by NMR and in
              some cases FTIR.  Similar studies  will be conducted with related enzymes,
              including malate synthase, crotonase, and  acetyl-CoA dependent
              acetyltransferases.  This project is expected to provide new insights  into the
              enzyme catalyzed reactions of CoA esters and general principles of enzyme
              reaction  mechanisms.  %%%  Dr. Drueckhammer will study the reactions of
              enzymes which require Coenzyme A for their  function.  Enzymes are catalysts
              which carry out chemical reactions in biological systems.   Understanding how
              these enzymes function is at the heart of understanding biological  processes
              at a fundamental chemical level.  About 4% of all enzymes require coenzyme A 
              (CoA) for their catalytic activity.  CoA serves as a reactant or a reactant
              carrier in these  enzymatic reactions. CoA is also synthesized in biological
              systems by a series of enzyme  catalyzed reactions. In previous work in this
              lab, a method was developed for using the  enzymes which make CoA to make
              altered forms (analogs) of natural CoA.  This research  will use this method to
              make a series of CoA analogs designed to serve as probes for  studying the
              reactions of CoA  utilizing enzymes. This will help reveal how enzymes form 
              chemical bonds to make complex biological molecules from simple building
              blocks, and how  enzymes break down com plex compounds in food to produce
              biological energy.  ***
