Title       : Restrictive Legislative Procedures, Party Bargaining and Political Performance
               in Advanced Industrial Democracies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1997  
File        : a9321089

Award Number: 9321089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145721             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Huber   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321089  Huber    This investigation examines the impact of parliamentary 
              procedures on policy-making processes in advanced industrial  democracies.  The
              project focuses in particular on procedures  that restrict the opportunities
              for elected representatives to  shape final policy outcomes through the
              amendment process.  Such  procedures include confidence votes, delegated
              legislation,  package votes, and guillotines (or timetable procedures).    One
              significant feature of the study is that it is genuinely  comparative.  This is
              important because although existing  theories of parliamentary procedures yield
              predictions that  should be empirically testable across countries, previous 
              empirical research focuses almost exclusively on the U.S.  Congress. 
              Consequently, it is difficult for scholars to defend  claims about the
              comparative properties of legislative rules and  procedures, or to point to
              general theories that can guide the  choice of particular institutional
              arrangements.    A second significant feature is that the study explores
              linkages  between parliamentary procedures and two important aspects of 
              political performance:  the nature of policy outcomes and levels  of cabinet
              stability.  With respect to policy outcomes, the  research will focus in
              particular on explaining how various  institutional structures influence the
              ability of politicians to  adopt new policies (i.e., move away from the status
              quo), and on  explaining whether particular institutional structures encourage 
              policy outcomes that are systematically moderate or  systematically extreme
              relative to the preferences of the median  member of the legislature.    By
              focusing on legislative rules and political performance in a  genuinely
              comparative context, the study will clarify choices  that politicians make in
              designing their rules of parliamentary  procedure.  This final point is
              especially relevant for  individuals in nascent democracies ho for the first
              time must  design procedures that will enable legislatures to pla y more than 
              a symbolic role in the policy-making process.  ***
