Title       : Mechanisms of Reciprocity in the Food Sharing of Capuchin Monkeys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1994    
File        : a9321195

Award Number: 9321195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frans B. M. de Waal dewaal@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory Univ Yerkes Reg Pri
	      
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Reciprocal exchange of goods and services is a universal  characteristic of
              human society.  In animals, so-called  "reciprocal altruism" is a
              much-discussed yet much less  investigated issue.  Evidence accumulated over
              the past two  decades is based almost exclusively on observational  research. 
              Food sharing among capuchin monkeys (Cebus  apella) - one of the few primate
              species in which this  behavior is well-developed - may provide a handle on 
              reciprocal exchange as this behavior lends itself uniquely  to experimentation.
               Available are thirteen adult subjects  (4 males and 9 females), group housed
              in two separate  indoor/outdoor enclosures.  Trained for temporary separation 
              from their group, the monkeys have shown high rates of food  transfer through a
              mesh partition during pair tests in which  one subject received food and the
              other did not.  The  proposed study employs this paradigm to determine the 
              voluntary character of food transfers, and the degree of  reciprocity.  Data
              will concern:  (1) spontaneous social  interactions, including interactions
              over food, in the group  context; and (2) the outcome of pair tests in which
              partner  combination, food type and quality, and other conditions are 
              systematically varied.  Behavior in the social group and in  the test situation
              will be compared in detail.  Results from  this study will show to what extent
              a non human species can  keep track of given and received favors, and develop
              the  sort of expectations and sense of obligation that underlie  human economic
              activity.  As such, the study may shed light  on the origin of a give-and-take
              mentality, and the  psychological mechanisms guiding its expression.
