Title       : Modelling and Dynamic Simulation of Process Safety Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1994     
File        : a9321863

Award Number: 9321863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul I. Barton pib@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Barton - 9321863      Concerns over process safety, advances in
              automation technology, and restrictions on venting to the atmosphere have
              resulted in the installation of increasingly sophisticated automatic protective
              devices on process equipment.  These devices enable a plant to respond quickly
              and accurately to emergency situations with a series of prespecified actions,
              without relying on the performance of the control system, or the training and
              reactions of operators.  Automatic protective devices range from simple
              mechanical devices such as a float and valve arrangement, to complicated
              interlock functions that define relationships amongst several items of
              equipment.  In modern plants these devices are usually referred to collectively
              as the safety interlock system (SIS), and the responsibilities of this system
              also includes alarms and trips.  The SIS is installed in order to keep the
              plant safe, not to produce a product, and has two functions: to protect the
              plant from equipment failures, and to protect against higher level control
              failures or operator errors.    This research will develop mathematical methods
              and software tools for the detailed quantitative analysis of a process and its
              safety interlock system.  It will focus on the enhancement of general purpose
              dynamic simulations software to cope with comprehensive models including
              details of both physical behavior and safety interlocks.  Several tasks will be
              undertaken:  1. Development of a symbolic language and user interface that will
              facilitate the efficient construction of models for safety interlock systems. 
              2. Development of a novel algorithm for the simultaneous solution of the
              differential-algebraic equations derived from the physico-chemical phenomena,
              and the classical propositional logic derived from the interlock system.  3.
              Implementation of these advances in a modern process modeling environment and
              demonstration through a series of detailed examples furnished by industrial
              collaborators.
