Title       : Dissertation Research: Group Foraging and Information Acquisition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1994     
File        : a9321794

Award Number: 9321794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George W. Uetz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10964              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald S. Wilkinson gw10@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9321794  Wilkinson    For her doctoral dissertation, Ms. Janette Wenrick
              Boughman will investigate the maintenance of group foraging in the omnivorous,
              neotropical greater spear-nosed bat.  These bats forage in groups around rich,
              ephemeral food sources, while giving loud vocalizations.  Neither the
              advantages of group foraging nor the functions of these vocalizations are fully
              understood.    Ms. Boughman's research will focus on two areas.  First, she
              will determine if acquisition of information about food distribution from group
              members is a primary advantage of group foraging.  To this end, she will
              analyze social and echolocation calls to determine if these calls provide
              acoustic signature information.  Playback experiments with captive bats will
              determine whether acoustic information is used to discriminate between
              individuals and groups.  Foraging experiments will help to determine the
              function of this information to animals foraging in groups, and measure
              benefits to test relevant group-foraging models.  Second, Ms. Boughman will
              conduct field work to corroborate results of research with captive animals.  To
              this end, she will make observations as a basis for estimating frequency of
              group foraging, foraging success of solitary and group-foraging individuals,
              and weaning success of roost groups.  Field playbacks will test group
              discrimination by bats at foraging sites.    This work will add substantially
              to understanding of how group members discriminate between their group-mates
              and others.  It will provide insight into the influence of vocal communication
              in structuring social systems and mediating complex behavior, and the
              importance of information transfer in maintaining group foraging behavior.
