Title       : Dissertation Research: Hopewell Culture in the Mississippi Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1994  
File        : a9321825

Award Number: 9321825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10935              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincas P. Steponaitis vin@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321825  Steponaitis    Under the direction of Dr. Vincas Steponaitis, Mr.
              Thomas Maher  will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will continue
               his archaeological research in the "American Bottom", a section  of the
              Mississippi River floodplain located East of St. Louis  Missouri. With a focus
              on the Middle Woodland period which dates  from ca 200 BC to AD 300 he will
              work to provide a more robust  ceramic chronology and to anchor it firmly in
              time. To accomplish  this, detailed analysis will be conducted on ceramics from
              the  few well known sites across this region. A series of radiocarbon  dates
              will then be obtained from relevant deposits. On this basis  limited and very
              carefully directed excavation will be conducted  to provide further ceramic
              material and to allow reconstruction  of social organization.    The large
              mound site of Cahokia, located on the outskirts of St.  Louis attests to the
              impressive scale of social complexity and  prehistoric development in the
              northern Midwest. Archaeologists  have termed this the "Hopewell phenomenon"
              and wish to understand  how such a stratified society emerged. The question is
              an  important one since this same basic process appears to have  occurred in
              many parts of the New and Old Worlds. Because of it's  extensive archaeological
              remains, the American Bottom provides  and excellent region to address this
              issue. While much is known  about both the earlier and later periods, the
              Middle Woodland in  the region is still not well understood and it was during
              this  period that the earliest phases of regional integration likely  took
              place. What hampers research most is lack of a good  chronology. It is
              necessary to place sites into chronological  relationship to one another as a
              first analytic step and this  still can not be done with authority. Mr. Maher's
              work will help  to remedy this situation.    This research is important for
              several reasons. It will Provide a  chronological framework of use to many
              archaeologists. It will  increase our  understanding of how social complexity
              develops and  will assist in the training of a promising young scientist.  ***
