Title       : Simulation, Reliability and Optimal Design of Micro-Electro-Mechanical (MEM)
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9321508

Award Number: 9321508
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel C. MacDonald   (Principal Investigator current)
              Palqhat S. Ramesh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Subrata Mukherjee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9321508  MACDONALD  Micro-electro-mechanical (MEM) devices consist of integrated
              movable micro-structures with electronics.  With structural elements having
              high aspect ratios and being in the size range of 0.1 - 100{SYMBOL 109 \f
              "Symbol"}m , significant forces and/or deformations can be obtained with the
              application of low voltages ({SYMBOL 187 \f "Symbol"} 10 volts).  The guiding
              principle here is to fabricate integrated, movable microstructures for
              precision motion and actuation.  Fabrication techniques for MEM structures are
              closely related to very large scale integration (VLSI) technology.  Primary
              application areas are in micro-sensors and micro-actuators.  Possible
              applications of this technology are very diverse.  It is believed that entire
              new classes of mechanical , optical, fluid, thermal and chemical machines can
              be fabricated with MEMS technology.    The research focus is development of a
              better understanding of micro-electro-mechanical (MEM) structures and involves
              simulation, reliability analysis and optimal design.  The research team is
              interdisciplinary, involving an electrical engineer with primary expertise in
              experimental research in the area of nanostructures, two mechanical engineers
              with primary expertise in computer simulation in applied mechanics, including
              optimization problems, and an expert in the area of fracture mechanics.  The
              research team also includes a collaboration between academia and industry.  It
              is expected that the diversity of the research team will lead to a
              cross-fertilization of ideas leading to significant advances in the knowledge
              base in this challenging research area.  In addition, the presence of an
              industrial researcher, who is resident at a university campus, will greatly
              facilitate the process of "technology transfer" to industry.    The project has
              three primary focus areas.  The first is the efficient and accurate simulation
              of static as well as dynamic behavior of MEM structures, subjected to electric
              fields, and hence electrostatic forces .  Nonlinear behavior-geometric, as well
              as, where relevant, material, will be included in the simulation.  A state of
              the are coupling of an exterior boundary element method (BEM) for electrical
              analysis and interior finite element method (FEM) for mechanical analysis, will
              be employed for this purpose.  A second task is reliability analysis of MEM
              structures subjected to cyclic, dynamic loading.  Here, a representative
              problem to be studied is time-dependent crack growth in a vibrating beam and
              its effect on the natural frequencies and mode shapes of the beam.  Finally,
              the third task is optimal shape design of MEM structures. Here, the shapes of
              variable cross-section vibrating beams will be designed to have desired natural
              frequency characteristics.  Every aspect of the research will have a balance of
              experiment and analysis.  Thus, for example, measured frequency versus time
              curves on a progressively cracking beam will be used to solve the inverse
              problem of crack identification, and optimally designed MEM beams will be
              fabricated and their performance tested against beams of other shapes.  ***
