Title       : The Automobile, Telephone, Radio and Electric Light and Power in the Rural
               United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1994     
File        : a9321180

Award Number: 9321180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Kline rrk1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321180  Kline  A common view of the impact of technology on society is one of 
              technological determinism: society must embrace new technologies as  they come
              along.  Historians of technology have long rejected this  simplistic view. 
              Societies not only accept or reject new  technologies, but may also radically
              change the technologies that  they are presented with in order to adapt them to
              their own  purposes.  Rural people, for example, not only used the Model T 
              Ford as urbanites did for transportation but also adapted it to  their own
              culture.  They converted it to use as produce trucks,  they used it to pull
              plows, and they even jacked up the rear wheel  to power washing machines
              (before electric washing machines became  readily available).       The
              transfer of several "modern" technologies to the countryside  enabled a
              sweeping transformation of American rural life in the  20th century.  Dr. Kline
              is studying the interactions between urban  "agents of modernity" and rural
              people in transferring a cluster of  four major technologies to the American
              farm from about 1900 to  1960:  the automobile, the telephone, the radio, and
              electric light  and power.    Of particular interest for Dr. Kline is the
              efforts of farm men and  women to resist, adapt , and construct their own
              version of these  artifacts and systems to meet rural ways of life, instead of 
              passively accepting the products of these supposedly "modernizing"  forces.  In
              this respect, this project is part of an emerging  research program in the
              history of technology that is shifting the  field's traditional focus from the
              "producers" of technology, such  as inventors, engineers, and managers, to the
              consumers and users  of technology.  Yet Dr. Kline is striking a balance in
              this project  between these two approaches by investigating both producers and 
              consumers--"agents of modernity" and rural people--in the hope of  creating a
              broadly based social history of technology that  addresses the themes of
              technology transfer, modernity and  gender.  ***
