Title       : Development and Implementation of a U.S. Program in Marine Biotoxins and Harmful
               Algae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9321244

Award Number: 9321244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107678             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald M. Anderson danderson@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                9321244  Anderson         Marine biotoxins and harmful algae represents a 
              significant and expanding threat to human health and  fisheries resources
              throughout the United States.  This  problem takes many forms, ranging from
              massive "red tides"  or blooms of cells that discolor the water to dilute, 
              inconspicuous concentrations of cells noticed only because  of the harm caused
              by the highly potent toxins contained in  those cells.  Impacts include mass
              moralities of wild and  farmed fish, human intoxication's and death from 
              contaminated shellfish or fish, alterations of marine  trophic structure, and
              death from marine mammals, seabirds,  and other animals.  The nature and extent
              of the problem has  increased considerably over the last two decades in the 
              United States, but unfortunately, our national research,  monitoring, and
              regulatory infrastructure is not adequately  prepared to meet this expanding
              threat. To alleviate this  problem, national and international efforts underway
              to  develop and implement science programs to deal with the many  complex
              issues that are involved.  This proposal seeks funds  from NOAA and NSF for the
              P.I. to assist  in the development  and coordination of these activities.  This
              will involve  continued participation as the U.S. representative at 
              international workshops and study groups convened by ICES,  IOC, WESTPAC and
              SCOR.  Within the United States, activities  will include planning and advisory
              activities in support of  an Ad Hoc Interagency Task Force on Marine Biotoxins
              and  Harmful Algae, compilation of bloom reports through the ICES  Coordinating
              Center for the Exchange of Information on  Exceptional algal Blooms, and the
              organization of a workshop  to formulate a detailed science plan for research
              on the  ecology and oceanography of harmful algal blooms.
