Title       : Misfit Accommodation, Ordering, and Stability in Semiconductor Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1994       
File        : a9321957

Award Number: 9321957
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lourdes G. Salamanca-Riba riba@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  9321957  Salamanca-Riba    The proposed research addresses fundamental
              materials science  issues surrounding the mechanism of lattice mismatch 
              accommodation in semiconductor films, and the effect of lattice  mismatch on
              the formation of ordered phases and the stability of  semiconductor
              heterostructures. Transmission electron microscopy  will be used to investigate
              the mechanism for misfit  accommodation, structural ordering, and stability of 
              semiconductor alloys of different systems and compositions grown  on different
              substrates (buffer layers) to study the effect of  lattice mismatch on the
              structure of semiconductor films. The  misfit accommodation mechanism will be
              studied in systems with  large and small lattice mismatches. Materials will be
              grown using  either molecular beam epitaxy or metal organic chemical vapor 
              deposition. The effects of growth parameters and growth methods  on the
              structure and quality of the films will be investigated to  obtain films with
              low defect density and single phase; special  emphasis will be placed on
              understanding the critical initial  stages of growth.  %%%  Most advanced
              electronic and photonic devices consist of compound  semiconductor
              heterostructures whose structural integrity and  quality are of critical
              importance, and very often determine the  performance and applicability of a
              device technology. In this  context, the accommodation of lattice mismatches
              between the  different layers in a heterostructure and between the film and 
              the substrate, is of fundamental significance. The proposed  research will
              significantly benefit our basic understanding,  control, and general ability to
              achieve improved materials for  devices and circuits needed in the general
              areas of  telecommunications, information processing; and high speed 
              computing.  ***
