Title       : Dissertation Research: Body Size and Proportions in the Late Pleistocene Western
               Old World and the Origins of Modern Humans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1994  
File        : a9321339

Award Number: 9321339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik Trinkaus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    ABSTRACT    P.I. Erik Trinkaus  SBR- 9321339    The question of modern
              human origins remains the center of active debate.  There are currently two
              opposing models for our emergence.  The first, "Replacement," posits that
              modern humans arose first in a restricted region (most likely  within
              sub-Saharan Africa) in the late Middle or early Late Pleistocene, and
              subsequently spread out of Africa, replacing existing archaic human populations
              elsewhere in the world.  This model would deny the Neandertals significant (if
              any) genetic contribution to modern Eurasian populations.  The second model,
              "Regional Continuity," proposes that gene flow among archaic human populations
              was sufficient to prevent speciation, with modern humans evolving gradually
              from a single diverse archaic human stock distributed throughout the Old World.
               This model identifies presumed regional features that persist across the
              archaic/modern human boundary, and the model affords the Neandertals full
              status as ancestors of modern Eurasians.      Fossil evidence suggests late
              archaic sub-Saharan Africans were characterized by a tropically-adapted
              morphology, akin to moderns there.  If the replacement model is correct, the
              first modern humans in cold-temperate regions should be characterized by these
              same features, different from those of European archaics, for example.  The
              regional continuity model would argue that the ecogeographic patterning in body
              size and proportions found today dates back to the Middle Pleistocene spread of
              hominids to mid-latitudes.    Through an examination of fossil post-cranial
              remains, the investigators will test these t wo hypotheses on changing body
              proportions over the last 50,000 years of human evolution.  It also will result
              in the training of an excellent new professional.    *** 
              P\anthro\jfried\9321339.abs                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              !         !         !              D                             6            
              6                                 (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial      
              ?   ?         ?           "             h     es Eis E      R       |         =
                     Jonathan Friedlaender Jonathan Friedlaender                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
