Title       : Dissertation Research: The Dynamics of Disease Spread by Ectoparasites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1994     
File        : a9321590

Award Number: 9321590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Kareiva kareivap@zoology.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Kareiva   9321590       With few exceptions, diseases which are spread by ticks
              are  maintained within wildlife populations, not human populations.  A  similar
              biology is seen for flea-borne diseases; for example,  plague is maintained in
              wild rodent populations without the  involvement of humans.  Perhaps because
              these diseases are  maintained in wildlife populations instead of human
              populations,  little work has been done on the dynamics of these diseases and
              the  flea or tick behaviors that influence the disease dynamics.  In 
              comparison, there is long history of work on the dynamics of human  infectious
              diseases.  Much of this work, however, assumes that  transmission of disease
              occurs via random mixing of infected and  susceptible individuals.  In general
              this is not an accurate  description of animal behavior, and it may be
              particularly  inappropriate for describing the transmission of diseases spread
              by  ectoparasites ( parasites, such as fleas and ticks that live on the 
              exterior of their hosts).       This research project combines both
              experimental and  theoretical approaches to examine the effect of ectoparasite 
              behavior on the dynamics of diseases spread by these parasites.   The study
              system for this project is a species of rodent, Neotoma  cinerea, the fleas,
              Orchopeas sexdentatus and Anomiopsyllus  amphibolus, and the hard tick, Ixodes
              angustus in Western  Washington.  The work involves observations of flea and
              tick  movement within the rodent populations and incorporates the  observed
              behaviors into theoretical models to predict the effects  on disease dynamics. 
              The synthesis of field data and theoretical  studies is especially important in
              epidemiology, because one often  wants to identify quantitative attributes,
              such as thresholds for  the spread of disease.  By combining field studies with
              theoretical  models, this work seeks to develop realistic models and estimates 
              of numerical values of factors that strongly influence whether the  disease is
              epidemic and the disease is  spatial distribution.
