Title       : Dissertation Research: Prehistoric Adaptations to Desert Puna
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1993  
File        : a9321263

Award Number: 9321263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11286              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Meltzer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321263  Meltzer    Under the direction of Dr. David Meltzer, Ms. Elizabeth
              Pintar  will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. Building on  previous
              archaeological research she has conducted in the high  "puna" region of
              northwestern Argentina, she will  conduct test  excavations at four rockshelter
              sites. Preliminary evidence  indicates that all contain archaeological
              materials and likely  span the Archaic period which dates from ca 10,000 to
              3,000 years  ago. Ms. Pintar will conduct small test excavations to determine 
              the potential of each and on this basis select one for more  intensive work.
              Fourteen weeks will be devoted to this latter  stage of the project and should
              result in the collection of large  samples of lithic artifacts as well as
              floral and faunal remains.  On this basis human utilization of and adaptation
              to this harsh  environment can be determined. Pollen obtained from the deposits
               should permit reconstruction of the climate as it changed over  time. Camelid
              remains will be analyzed to assess whether  domestication occurred during this
              period.    The dry highland regions of the Andes pose a challenge for human 
              subsistence. It is known that since the end of the last Ice Age,  climates
              within the region have fluctuated greatly and that at  times aridity was
              greater than today. Ms. Pintar wishes to  understand how human societies at a
              simple technological level  and dependent primarily on hunted and gathered
              foods were able to  subsist. She wishes to reconstruct diet and trace possible 
              patterns of seasonal movement. The rich data base which includes  well
              preserved plant and animal remains should permit her to do  this. She
              postulates that camelid species such as llama/guanaco,  alpaca and vicuna may
              have been domesticated in this context and  served to provide a more reliable
              food source.    This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
               data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light  on human
              potential to adapt to difficult environme nts and will  assist in the training
              of a promising young scientist.  ***
