Title       : Purchase of a Mass Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1994  
File        : a9321988

Award Number: 9321988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277060             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Wilkins   (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Okamura  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program will aid the
              Chemistry  Department at the University of California--Riverside (UCR) purchase
              a high resolution mass  spectrometer dedicated to high performance liquid
              chromatography mass spectrometry-mass-  spectrometry (HPLC-MS) and electrospray
              mass spectrometry analyses using atmospheric  pressure, chemical
              ionization/electrospray (APCI/ESI) interfaces.      The research studies to be
              performed include the following:  (a) Spectroscopy of Linear  Polyenes; (b)
              Establishing Structure/Functional Relationships in a Cytostatic Protein Kinase;
              (c)  Analogies Between Enzyme Active Sites and Receptor Sites; (d) Development
              of New  Membrane-Based Analytical Methods; (e) Synthetic and Mechanistic
              Organic Chemistry; (f)  Thiol/Disulfide Chemistry of the Neurohypophyseal
              Peptide Hormone and Related Peptides.    Mass Spectrometry (MS) is a technique
              used to probe intimate structural details and to obtain  the molecular
              compositions of a vast array of organic, bioorganic and organometallic
              molecules.   The addition of the technique of electrospray extends the range of
              MS to protein and nucleic acid  molecular weights far beyond any other
              technique.  The use of electrospray ionization in  combination with high
              resolution provides the latest techniques available in mass spectrometry.   It
              affords the chemist one of the most powerful tools available for the
              characterization of  compounds.  The acquisition of this capability in mass
              spectrometry is essential for the  prosecution of frontier research in many
              fields of chemistry.
