Title       : Marine Bio-Tech Fellowship: Variation in a Gamete Recognition Protein of Pacific
               Sand Dollars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1995    
File        : a9321243

Award Number: 9321243
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Hellberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9321243  Hellberg    Closely related species of marine invertebrates commonly 
              occur together and often spawn simultaneously, yet hybrids  between these
              species rarely form.  Proteins on the surface  of the gametes control
              species-specific fertilization.  Three lines of evidence suggest that changes
              in these gamete  recognition proteins may be involved in the evolution of 
              reproductive isolation:  1)  non-fertile heterospecific  crosses usually result
              from the failure of sperm to attach  to heterospecific eggs, 2)  closely
              related, reproductively  isolated species often show little overall genetic 
              divergence, and 3) selection promotes the divergence of  sperm-borne gamete
              recognition proteins found in different  species of abalone. This project will
              examine two critical  questions which remain unanswered:  1)  Are interspecific
               differences in gamete recognition proteins greatest in  geographical areas of
              species overlap, and 2)  How variable  are gamete recognition proteins within
              species?  These two questions will be addresses by documenting  nucleotide
              sequence variation of the sperm borne gamete  recognition protein bindin from
              both co-occurring and  isolated populations of Pacific sand dollars.  The  
              project  will focus on members of the genus Dendraster, whose  geographical
              distribution (both overlapping and non-  overlapping regions) and very recent
              origins (1 May) should  facilitate discrimination between alternative
              evolutionary  mechanisms driving bindin divergence.  Finally, the  functional
              significance of both inter-and intraspecific  variation in bindin will be
              examined using pairwise  fertilization assays.  This research project should
              produce  novel insights into the role of the potential for  interspecific
              hybridization in  promoting the divergence of  gamete recognition proteins. 
              ***
