Title       : Behavioral Energetics and Metabolic Competence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9321326

Award Number: 9321326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George W. Uetz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60165              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Watson pwatson@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Female animals generally are selective in choosing their mates.  To understand
              how natural selection shapes this kind of behavior, it is important to find out
              how the mate preferences of females affect the viability of their offspring. 
              The aim of this research is to reveal whether the mate-selection system of
              female sierra dome spiders functions to test the metabolic capacities of their
              mates and ultimately to improve the physiological quality of their offspring. 
              The study will illuminate the functions of female preferences by relating
              physiological and behavioral correlates of male and offspring viability to male
              success in two modes of female-mediated mating competition.    Integrated field
              and laboratory studies of the spider's mating system will examine the
              significance of female-incited male-male competition and direct female choice
              for the acquisition of sires and production of offspring of superior metabolic
              competence.  The spider's sexual-selection system permits these three aspects
              to be studied independently.  Every female's first mate is determined by combat
              between males, whereas the female herself directly assesses secondary mates. 
              Thus, operation of these modes of selection are temporally separated in the
              reproductive life of all females.    The fighting ability of individual males
              will be assessed in nature, during fights on female webs.  The fighting ability
              of these individuals will then be related, in the laboratory, to behavioral and
              metabolic performance before insemination occurs.  Data on metabolic
              performance will be gathered using carbon-dioxide respirometry.    The
              viability implication of differences among individuals in metabolic competence
              can be deduced from bioenergetic principles, so the relevance of female
              preferences for male traits that reveal metabolic competence will be clear. 
              The study will provide unusual data addressing "good genes" models of sexual
              selection, and will provide data needed to tell if it is feasible to study the
              heritability of physiolog ical competence in this species.
