Title       : Computerization, Work Values, and Changing Worklife
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1994        
File        : a9321375

Award Number: 9321375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58372              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rob Kling   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9321375  Kling  This study examines how computer specialists, managers and
              workers'  values shape computerization projects and change working  conditions.
               The key research questions are:  To what extent and  how do work values
              influence the selection and eevelopment of  information technologies in the
              workplace, and how do people  integrate these technologies into their
              worklives?  Research  activities include both theoretical and empirical
              components.   Theoretical components focus on developing an understanding of
              some  of the ethical implications of computerizing work and the ethical  issues
              faced by key participants in computerization projects.   Identification and
              analysis of these issues proceeds by examination  of existing case studies and
              participation in discussion of the  design and site selection for the empirical
              work as well as some of  the field interviews.  Empirical research involves
              surveys and  field interviews of computerized work systems in three 
              organizations.  The organizations will represent three ideal types  of work
              values:  (a) rationalization, streamlining work for  efficiency, organizing
              narrowly defined jobs, and computerizing so  as to reduce workers' discretion;
              (b) flexible professionalization,  organizing work to encourage responsibility,
              initiative taking and  learning, and developing computer systems to support
              enhanced work;  and (c) incremental accommodation, computerizing so as to
              support  new services or activities while minimizing the changes in work 
              relationships.  The investigators will refine and pilot test their  work values
              questionnaire in the two or three organizations  selected, and undertake
              initial field studies.  Results will be  disseminated through presentations and
              case reports. One journal  article will be developed.  ***
