Title       : Optical Dephasing and Phonon Dynamics in Ordered Crystals, Disordered Crystals
               and Molecular Beam Epitaxy Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  1997  
File        : a9321052

Award Number: 9321052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Meltzer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michieal L. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Dennis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9321052  Meltzer  The optical dephasing time of dopant ions will be used as a
              tool to  investigate two-level systems (TLS) in disordered crystalline 
              materials such as mixed solid solutions and polycrystalline films,  where the
              disorder is generally experimentally variable.  These  types of experiments
              will be extended to ordered arrangements of  atoms in a restricted geometry,
              such as MBE grown undoped as well  as rare earth ion doped superlattices.  In a
              second set of  experiments phonon dynamics will be studied with a number of 
              innovative approaches.  These include use of a very short duration  (100 ps)
              pulses to study phonon-phonon interactions in RE doped  fluoride crystals, and
              use of two FIR pulse sources to study the  interaction between two narrow band
              phonon populations.  A third  study will apply coherent and transient
              holeburning techniques to  study the dynamics of the photoionization process of
              transition  metal ion sites in ferrolectric materials.  %%%  Unique optical
              techniques will be applied to study the nature of  disorder in doped crystals,
              mixed solid solutions, and ultrathin  semiconductor layers.  The unique
              techniques include two ultrashort  pulsed lasers which emit radiation at very
              long infrared  wavelengths used for directly generating sound waves in solids,
              and  a special laser which emits visible light which is extremely close  to a
              single frequency.  The latter light source will allow to study  changes in
              absorption induced by a laser very accurately as a  function of light
              wavelength.  A key aspect of this work is that  the degreee of disorder can be
              experimentally varied when preparing  a particular sample material.  This study
              is expected to provide  new sensitive tools for characterizing disorder with
              applications  to more controlled growth of a variety of optoelectronic
              materials.  ***
