Title       : Dissertational Improvement: Conspicuous Coloration in Male Northern Cardinals:
               Possible Benefits Throughout the Year
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1994 
File        : a9321801

Award Number: 9321801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3839               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Sherman pws6@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                              Conspicuous traits, such as vocalization in frogs or insects 
              and showy plumage or bright coloration in birds, are  perplexing because often
              they reduce the survivorship of the  individual because they are costly to
              produce or display.  In this project possible year-round benefits to
              conspicuous  coloration in male Northern Cardinals (Cardinalis  cardinalis), a
              species which has bright plumage throughout  the year will be studied.  One
              experiment will determine  whether coloration influences territory quality
              and/or a  male's ability to pair with an earlier breeding female.  The 
              coloration of males just prior to the breeding season will  be manipulated in
              one of three ways - increase red, control  (no color change), and decrease red.
               If coloration during  the breeding season influences territory quality and/or 
              timing of breeding, then significant differences among the  treatment groups
              will be expected.  If a male's coloration  during the non-breeding season
              affects his ability to obtain  a high quality territory and/or an earlier
              breeding mate,  then the natural coloration prior to the manipulation to be 
              correlated with these benefits will be expected.  The second  experiment will
              test whether red coloration influences a  male's access to food and quality
              roosting sites.  The same  three treatments will be used and will determine
              foraging  efficiency and choice of roost site for males in an aviary.  These
              results should be of interest not only to behavioral  biologists and
              ornithologists interested in sexual selection  but also to evolutionary and
              theoretical biologists  interested in the evolution of costly traits.
