Title       : Photoinduced Electron and Energy Transfer in Molecular Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1996      
File        : a9321413

Award Number: 9321413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $454500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Meyer tjmeyer@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9197,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project of Thomas Meyer, University of North Carolina (Chapel Hill), in the
              Inorganic,  Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program, involves the
              study of photoinduced  electron and energy transfer in molecular assemblies
              that include extended arrays of polypyridyl  complexes of Ru(II), Os(II) and
              Re(I) as chromophores and various redox carriers coupling these  arrays to
              electron donors and acceptors.  The potentials of the latter moieties will be
              chosen to  provide a free energy gradient so that electrons and holes migrate
              away from the initial excited  state metal centers.  The transient infrared and
              Raman resonance spectroscopies will be used to  determine the sites of
              oxidation and reduction in the charge separated excited state.  Systems will 
              be synthesized for study of conversion of single-photon, single-electron events
              into multiple  redox equivalents that are required for catalytic bond-forming
              reactions.  These will be  constructed around a metal oxo center that is
              catalytically active for the oxidation of alcohols  to aldehydes.    The
              conversion of light energy to chemical energy, as accomplished by plants during
               photosynthesis, has largely eluded scientists.  In photosynthesis, a single
              photon stimulates  multiple redox processes that lead to formation and cleavage
              of chemical bonds.  This project  draws upon recent advances in inorganic
              photochemistry to suggest ways that large molecular  assemblies can be
              constructed that will generate a separated electron-hole pair that can be 
              utilized to stimulate multiple redox events.  Studies such as this lay
              valuable, and badly needed,  ground work for ultimately utilizing solar energy
              for chemical processing.
