Title       : Cause Lawyering and the State in a Global Era: A Cross-National Inquiry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1999       
File        : a9818366

Award Number: 9818366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31213              (Estimated)
Investigator: Austin Sarat ADSarat@Amherst  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart A. Scheingold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amherst College
	      
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/542-2000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Democratization and globalization provide novel challenges, opportunities, and
              imperatives for cause lawyers throughout the world.  Both developments bring
              new issues to the fore; provide new resources; and impose new burdens on cause
              lawyers working on behalf of social movements.  Cause lawyers typically push
              for greater democratization of state processes.  Democratization, in turn,
              energizes and legitimates cause lawyering.  Yet as democratization proceeds it
              challenges reliance on rights-based strategies for social change, and, in so
              doing, may require cause lawyers to devise new approaches and work in new
              arenas.

Globalization opens up state processes to far-reaching forces and
              leads to re-configurations of state power.  As these global forces impinge on
              the state, cause lawyering itself is transformed.  New possibilities for
              working within, as opposed to against, the state open up and new transnational
              alliances/networks become possible.  Yet efforts by cause lawyers to take
              advantage of these opportunities embroil them in controversies: Are they being
              co-opted by state actors?  Do international alliances serve primarily to
              advance Western interests and ideas thus promoting neo-imperialism and
              neo-colonialism?

This project will highlight opportunities and challenges
              posed by democratization and globalization for cause lawyering serving
              different causes in different national contexts.  It will examine the way cause
              lawyers influence, and are influenced by, the transformations in modern and
              modernizing states brought on by globalization and democratization.  The former
              typically involves an upward or outward movement of power away from the state,
              the latter an inward or downward movement from the state to civil society.  We
              are interested in investigating the varying roles of cause lawyers in bringing
              about as well as in responding to these changes.

This proposal provides
              support to convene an international conference, drawing together investigators
              from nine nations, to take up these issues. This conference represents the
              culmination of several years of collaborative work in which common theoretical
              concerns have been identified.  Drawing on theories of globalization and
              democratization, each participant will present the results of new research on
              cause lawyering and the state.  AT the conference our focus will be on
              penultimate drafts of papers reporting the results of finished research
              projects.  Findings from these projects will be used to address the theoretical
              interests that drive this project, weave underlying themes of the project
              (globalization, democratization, and the state) through all of the papers, and
              to elaborate hypotheses that emerge from our inquiry.  The overall objective of
              the conference is to insure the coherence of the final product: an edited book
              expected to be published in fall of 2000 or early in the spring of 2001.


