Title       : Food-Web Regulation of Particulate Export Flux in High Nitrate-Low Chlorophyll
               Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a9818770

Award Number: 9818770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439824             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Murray jmurray@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce W. Frost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harilaos Loukos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,1650,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Murray

Understanding the factors that control the magnitude of carbon export
              from the euphotic zone is one of the most important goals of the US JGOFS
              Synthesis and Modeling Project (SMP).  It is assumed that the magnitude of this
              export, and its partitioning between particulate and dissolved forms, is
              determined by the size structure of the food web, but this has never been
              explicitly tested with models and is subject to debate.  A current paradigm is
              that planktonic systems exist in two contrasting states.  Community structure
              is a function of whether the system is in balance (steady state or State I) or
              under the influence of transient events - changes in nutrient input, mixing or
              light - which allow decoupling of phytoplankton and zooplankton growth rates
              (State II).  Export flux and particulate organic matter-dissolved organic
              matter partitioning are hypothesized to be different between these two states. 
              The high nitrate-low chlorophyll (HNLC) regime is one of the most important
              ocean types studied during JGOFS.  Major process studies were undertaken by US
              JGOFS in the equatorial Pacific (EqPac) and Southern Ocean (AESOPS) and by
              Canadian JGOFS in the subarctic north Pacific.  Prior to JGOFS, the subarctic
              north Pacific at Station P was studied by SUPER (Subarctic Pacific Ecosystem
              Research).  The goals of this study are to 1) synthesize and analyze data from
              HNLC regimes worldwide, 2) use a 1-D model to explore the implications of
              different grazing formulations for ecosystem function and particulate organic
              carbon export in HNLC regions, 3) assess the relative importance of particulate
              and dissolved export, including the role of bacteria and zooplankton as
              remineralizers, 4) evaluate the elemental stoichiometric relationships that
              link the various reservoirs, and 5) explore the use of allometric relationships
              for production and consumption as a tool for understanding and modeling
              multiple states in HNLC regions.  The overall goal is to provide a HNLC
              synthesis for the SMP of euphotic zone production, consumption and export of
              carbon and related elements (SMP Element 2), as regulated by variations in
              environmental conditions.


