Title       : High- and Low-Density Glasses and Liquids in the Yttrium Oxide - Aluminum Oxide
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2001  
File        : a9818133

Award Number: 9818133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219190             (Estimated)
Investigator: William T. Petuskey petuskey@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul F. McMillan  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9818133 
McMillan 

This project aims to study liquids and amorphous solids
              in the technologically important system yttrium oxide - aluminum oxide. The
              work involves fully characterizing a new type of liquid-liquid phase transition
              between two liquid phases with the same composition, but with different
              densities and other thermodynamic properties. Spectroscopic methods will be
              utilized to study the structural nature of the glasses, as well as the
              mechanical and thermodynamic properties of the supercooled liquids and glasses.
              A range of Y203-A1203 compositions prepared by quenching or annealing at
              different controlled rates. Techniques of sol-gel synthesis, rapid roller
              quenching, and aerodynamic levitation, will be combined to make samples of low-
              and high-density glassy materials. The liquid-liquid phase transition causes an
              unusually large viscosity change throughout the glass-forming range, which
              greatly affects the fiber-pulling characteristics of yttria-alumina liquids.
              This property is under intense study by an industrial group (Containerless
              Research Inc.), who have commercial applications for the ceramic fibers. These
              have been shown to possess high tensile strength, are compatible with alumina
              at high temperature, and exhibit excellent creep resistance. Collaboration with
              the CRI group was initiated during our prior NSF Selected Grant for Exploratory
              Research award. CRI will continue to supply samples for structural
              characterization. The spectroscopic and calorimetric studies to be carried out
              under the present award will permit understanding of the structural nature of
              the low- and high-density liquids and glasses and their properties. This study
              is relevant to the crystallization behaviour of the laser host crystal yttrium
              aluminium garnet (YAG). The graduate student and post-doctoral associate
              involved in the project will benefit from working on this scientifically and
              technologically important problem, in close contact with the CRI industrial
              group during the collaborative phase of this project.

%%%

These studies
              on yttrium oxide - aluminum oxide glassy systems are relevant not only to the
              crystallization behavior of the laser host crystal YAG, but also to the
              formation of fibres pulled from undercooled melts in these systems. The project
              has significant potential for optimizing the processing of materials used in
              fiber-optics data transmission.



