Title       : Summer Research Participation Program for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9818373

Award Number: 9818373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Taylor                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101935             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur M. Michalek arthur.michalek@roswellpark.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig R. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Roswell Pk Cancer Inst
	      
	      Buffalo, NY  142630001    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The NSF-REU Program at the Roswell Park Cancer institute presents upper division
              science majors pre-graduate school summer experiences. Students will
              participate in a challenging ten-week program with a biological focus. As in
              past programs, special efforts will be made to insure the participation of
              talented disadvantaged and under-represented students and women. Selected
              graduate faculty members of the Roswell Park Division of the University at
              Buffalo serve as major advisors for students admitted to the program. The major
              area of study for NSF Fellows at the institute is in the area of molecular and
              cellular biology of cancer. Under the tutelage of senior faculty, students are
              immersed in a rich research environment. Here they are exposed to both
              cutting-edge research projects and the scientific lifestyle. This experience
              has been shown to be a key factor in a student's decision making process before
              choosing a field of study and formally applying to graduate programs. The
              culmination of this 10-week research experience is the student's poster and
              oral presentations at the Scientific Mini-Conference. It is here that the
              participants present their results to their peers and institute faculty. Other
              summer experiences include attendance at a distinguished lecture series, career
              counseling sessions, and weekend social activities. Participants are not only
              exposed to what a life in scientific research is, but also develop a realistic
              idea of the role basic science plays in medicine.
