Title       : Population, Ideas, and Economic Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2001   
File        : a9818911

Award Number: 9818911
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory N. Price                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150375             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles I. Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research projects outlined in this proposal are motivated by two empirical
              facts: the lack of any clear trend in U.S. per capita income growth rates
              during the last 125 years and the acceleration of world population growth rates
              throughout a million years of history, from rates averaging only slightly more
              than zero to the present rates of around two percent per year. The first fact
              underlies the view expressed by Kaldor (1961) and embodied in many growth
              models that balanced, steady-state growth is a key fact our models should
              match. The second suggests the opposite: at least for the bulk of world
              history, population growth-and presumably per capita income growth as well-is
              anything but steady.
The first project in this proposal will suggest a general
              theory of economic growth in which per capita income growth and population
              growth are tightly linked. As in many recent papers, economies grow because of
              growth in the stock of knowledge. However, the theory goes further to suggest
              that the stock of knowledge grows because of growth in the stock of people, the
              inventors of ideas. Endogenous population growth and the increasing returns to
              scale that results from the nonrivalry of ideas are viewed as the two key
              ingredients of a theory of endogenous growth.
The second project examines the
              extent to which this basic theory can explain quantitatively the two facts that
              motivate the proposal. Several recent authors such as Klenow and
              Rodriguez-Clare (1997) and McGrattan and Schmitz (1998) note that there is
              surprisingly little work designed to examine the quantitative implications of
              the models of new growth theory and to attempt to distinguish among these
              models; this project is a step in this direction. The first application will
              conduct a growth accounting exercise for 20th century U.S. growth using a new
              growth theory framework. Preliminary results suggest that only about 1/4 of
              recent U.S. growth is associated with the long-run component (world population
              growth); the remaining 3/4 seems to be the result of transitory factors that
              mimic the appearance of a balanced growth path. The second application will add
              land to the endogenous fertility/ideas framework and argue that the population
              evidence examined by Kremer (1993) can be understood as one long transition
              path.
Finally, the third project will examine the shape of the production
              function for new ideas, which plays a key role in new growth theory.
              Preliminary exploration of this production function reinforces the notion that
              balanced growth is unlikely to occur.
The results from this proposal raise
              questions about the implicit assumption in much of growth theory, motivated
              partly by the Kaldor stylized facts, that our models should generate sustained,
              balanced growth forever.




