Title       : Interactions in Adsorbed Layers Studied with Infrared Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9818091

Award Number: 9818091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger G. Tobin roger.tobin@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9818091			
Tobin

Chemical adsorption on a metal surface involves
              hybridization between localized electronic states of the adsorbed molecule and
              the extended bands of the metal.  As a result, the electronic properties of
              both the metal and the adsorbate are changed.  This project uses a combination
              of electrical resistance and infrared reflectance measurements on carefully
              prepared thin metal films to explore important aspects of both effects. 
              Adsorbate effects on the electrical resistance of thin metal films are usually
              attributed to scattering of conduction electrons from the adsorbates.  A
              specific prediction of this model - that the ratio of the reflectance change to
              resistivity change should be independent of the adsorbate - has been shown to
              be violated, indicating that other processes are involved.  The present
              research extends that work by exploring the effects of different adsorbates,
              temperature and substrate modifications in order to clarify the actual
              mechanisms of surface resistivity. Modification of the adsorbate's properties
              depends on the electronic structure of the metal, and is sensitively reflected
              in the adsorbate's vibrational spectrum.  Metallic quantum wells provide a
              means of reproducibly and continuously modifying the electronic structure near
              the Fermi level.  Adsorption of CO on Cu/Co quantum wells will be studied in
              order to investigate the effects of the electronic structure modification on
              the vibrational frequency and line width and on broadband reflectance
              changes.
%%%
As solid structures are made ever smaller, the effects of
              surface contaminants become increasingly important.  When a metal film is about
              one hundred atomic layers thick, for example, a single layer of molecules on
              its surface can change its resistance to the flow of electricity by more than
              ten per cent. Such effects can be exploited to develop sensors for chemicals. 
              They can also be detrimental, increasing heating and slowing transmission
              speeds in microcircuits.  This research aims to understand the mechanisms
              underlying these resistance changes.  The prevailing theory attributes these
              changes to scattering of the electrons in the metal by the molecules, much as
              dust on a mirror scatters light, but some predictions of this theory are not in
              agreement with the observed facts.  This research is directed toward the
              measurements of the surface resistance of metal films under the influence of
              incident infrared light in order to provide critical data to resolve this
              discrepancy and to help clarify the understanding of effects of surface
              molecules on the flow of electric current.  This research will engage graduate
              students and post doctoral research associates who thereby receive training a
              forefront area of condensed matter physics and materials science and prepare
              them for employment in technological areas during the next few decades of the
              21st Century. 


