Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Explaining Variation in
               State Lobbying of the Federal Government
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1999  
File        : a9818696

Award Number: 9818696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6581               (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Lowery dlowery@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              State governments have great potential as powerful interest organizations.  Why
              have some states invested the resources to establish organized representation
              in the nation's capital when others have not?  Is Washington representation
              effective?

This Doctoral Dissertation Research project adapts exchange
              theory of private interests to an exchange theory of public interests.  The
              project offers an explanation of why some states mobilize Washington lobbying
              offices and others do not.  It expands prior work by considering environmental
              factors that might affect mobilization.

The study empirically tests an
              exchange theory of interest groups and covers an entire population of interest
              organizations.  The research also tests the relative importance of political
              and economic influences in the establishment of interest organizations. 
              Finally, the project aids the understanding of states as sophisticated
              political actors.

The project develops an event history model explaining
              what factors influence the creation of Washington lobbying offices, and uses
              regression analysis to determine the impact of Washington offices on federal
              funding to individual states.  It uses in-depth interviews to explore
              thoroughly why and how certain factors matter.

