Title       : Collapse and Regeneration in Early Complex Societies: Excavations at Umm
               El-Marra, Syria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9818205

Award Number: 9818205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70536              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn M. Schwartz schwartz@jhunix.hcf.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Glenn Schwartz and his colleagues
              will conduct two seasons of field research at the archaeological site of Umm
              el-Marra, located in the Aleppo region of Syria. The site consists of a large
              Bronze Age tell comprising ca. 25 hectares within an enclosure wall with three
              discernible gates and an "acropolis" ca. 100 meters in diameter located in the
              central part of the site. Dr. Schwartz's previous work has indicated a cultural
              sequence which spans the Bronze Age and contains overlying Hellenistic and
              Roman remains. Umm el-Marra has been identified as the ancient city of Tuba
              which is mentioned in early written archives. The research will focus on the
              Early and Middle Bronze Age, between ca. 2,500 and 1,600 BC.

While
              archaeologists have tended to view cultural development in unilineal terms and
              (correctly) noted a progression in the Middle East and other areas from small
              egalitarian villages to socially stratified chiefdoms to civilizations, states
              and empires the process is not, in fact, so simple. Complex entities rise, fall
              and appear again and, over short time periods, a cyclic model can be most
              appropriate. Umm el-Marra documents such a cycle, a complex stratified society,
              followed by a "collapse" succeeded by another slightly different complex
              entity. Dr. Schwartz wishes to understand this process. Several collapse
              theories have been proposed and the most prominent of which invoke either
              climatic deterioration and local resource exploitation as causes. Likewise
              several theories attempt to explain regeneration. Dr. Schwartz and his
              collaborators will excavate three broad areas which date to each of the stages
              under consideration. On the basis of distribution of dwellings and artifacts
              within and among they it will be possible to reconstruct both environment and
              social organization. 

This research is important for several reasons. It
              will provide a more realistic model of how societies develop and change over
              time. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and assist in
              training students who will participate in the field research.

