Title       : The Interaction Between Electoral Preferences and Party Leaders in Britain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9818582

Award Number: 9818582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman Schofield schofld@wuecon.wust1.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical spatial voting models typically assume that parties are unitary
              actors and adopt pre-election policy positions so as to maximize electoral vote
              (or seat strengths).  Recent work by the principal investigator and his
              colleagues has constructed multi-nomial probit (MNP) models of electoral
              response in a number of European countries, and Israel.  While the models
              accurately capture electoral behavior, it is also quite obvious that parties
              are generally not vote maximizers.  Formal analysis has proposed that parties
              in polities based on proportional representation (PR) adopt pre-election
              policies with a view to pros-election coalition bargaining.  However, such
              models do not explain pre-election party choices in Britain, where explicit
              government coalitions are rare.

This research builds an integrated model of
              electoral and party behavior in the "majoritarian" British polity, focussing on
              the 1992 and 1997 elections.  To construct the MNP model of British elections,
              data on both voter preferred positions and party declarations are required. 
              Survey data, available from the Essex Archive are used to generate sample
              distributions of voter preferences.  Computer coding of party manifestos are
              used to estimate party positions.  Voter intentions are used to estimate the
              MNP model.  Additional monthly Gallup "popularity" data, together with economic
              variables and retrospective/prospective aggregate data are used to refine the
              MNP model of electoral vote.  The electoral model so constructed will provide
              insight into the degree of "strategic" electoral behavior.

Simulation of the
              operation of the pattern of districting (into constituencies) permits an
              estimation of the operator relating party positions to seat strengths.  The
              policy preferences of British Legislators are obtained through questionnaires. 
              These, together with survey data on attitudes of party activists, are used to
              analyze the internal decision problem within each party over the choice of
              party leader and construction of election manifestos.

Related theoretical
              work focuses on the nature of strategic maneuvering by the three major parties
              prior to elections.

The integration of the theoretical and empirical models
              on Britain, together with parallel work on European "multiparty" policies
              improves understand of the nature of the "structural" differences between
              majoritarian and proportional electoral systems.  The combination of
              macro-political models and micro-electoral analysis has the potential to
              contribute substantially to the understanding of democratic decision-making
              under different institutional arrangements.

