Title       : Image Assessment of Perfusion in the Lung: Overcoming Theoretical Obstacles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a9818197

Award Number: 9818197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239156             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne V. Clough clough@nscs.mu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lars E. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher A. Dawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9818197
Clough
Tissue perfusion, i.e., the topographical distributions of
              blood flow, transit time, and volume, is an important determinant of organ
              function.  Functional imaging is the use of imaging modalities to visualize
              and/or quantify dynamic or physiologic activity within living organs.  One
              important application of functional imaging is the detection of vascular
              contrast agents as indicators for estimating perfusion in both conducting
              vessels and capillary exchange regions of an organ.  A variety of imaging
              modalities are applicable, and while based on different imaging physics, the
              estimation of perfusion from the dynamic contrast images has a similar
              theoretical basis regarding the manner in which vascular transport affects the
              signal resulting from the passage of contrast agent through the vasculature. 
              The accuracy and precision of methods used to estimate these perfusion
              parameters depend on the applicability of this theory to the actual transport
              of the contrast agent to and through organ regions.

The objective is to
              evaluate the impact of deviations from common model assumptions on parameter
              stimation methods in models of indicator transport through both vascular tress
              and capillary networks.  This information will then be used to improve and/or
              justify parameter estimation methods, and to simultaneously determine the
              kinematics of flow through organ vasculature.  Analytic and numerical methods
              will be used to model the effects of velocity profiles developed in various
              vascular tree-like models for the purpose of developing a general approach for
              reliably estimating transit times within conducting vessels of organs using
              inlet-outlet image data. Similarly, a computer-simulation model of a capillary
              network will be developed and analyzed for the purpose of developing an
              approach for reliably estimating capillary perfusion using inlet-residue image
              data. Finally, experiments will be carried out to determine the kinematics of
              flow in the pulmonary arterial tree and to evaluate certain assumptions of the
              parameter estimation methods in a real organ.


