Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Applications and Programming Environments for
               Cache-Coherent Distributed Memory Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1999    
File        : a9818308

Award Number: 9818308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jaswinder P. Singh jps@cs.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William Tang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremiah P. Ostriker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9818308
Singh, Jaswinder Pal
Ostriker, Jeremiah
Princeton
              University

Applications and Programming Environments for Cache-Coherent
              Distributed Memory Machines

This research instrumentation enables research
              projects in:
- Parallel Applications and Programming Environments for
              Computational Cosmology on Cache-Coherent DSM Architectures,
- Parallel
              Applications and Programming Environments for Computational Protein Structure
              Determination on Cache-Coherent DSM Architectures, and
- Parallel Workload for
              System Evaluation and their Implications for Software and Hardware.
To support
              integrated application-driven research in the aforementioned projects, this
              award contributes to the purchase of an upgrade to an existing 64-processor SGI
              Origin2000 multiprocessor by the Departments of Computer Science and
              Astrophysics together with the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory at Princeton
              University.  The equipment will be used to continue and enhance the research
              projects listed and to support new projects between computer science and the
              Plasma Physics Laboratory.  The first project, a collaboration between Computer
              Science and Astrophysics, deals with problems particularly challenging for
              parallel implementation due to the combination of interacting models and a
              highly irregular dynamic nature.  The goals are to develop parallel algorithms
              and implementations for a range of computations, to develop generalizable and
              portable techniques preserving locality while providing load balance, to extend
              existing parallel languages; use runtime systems of these languages, to build
              libraries of partitioning techniques and
algorithms.  The second project, a
              collaboration between CS and the School of Medicine at Stanford University,
              with similar goals, simulates inherently slow processes in structural biology.
              The last project will broaden the set of workloads available.  The SPLASH
              suites of parallel applications in critical emerging application areas serve as
              benchmarks for architectural studies, as well as testbeds for programming
              languages and compilers.




