Title       : Exploratory Research and Survey into the Plio-Pleistocene Deposits of the Gona
               Paleoanthropological Research Project Area, afar, Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1999    
File        : a9818353

Award Number: 9818353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127780             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sileshi Semaw   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathy D. Schick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas Toth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This is a proposal to carry out archeological survey in the Gona Study Area to
              search for the makers of the world's oldest known stone tools, and to study why
              ancient humans began making stone implements. Gona is located in the Afar
              region of Ethiopia where more than 3,000 stone tools were excavated between
              1992 and 1994. The stone tools are dated between 2.5 million and 2.6 million
              years, and they were made by the
descendants of the 3.0 million year old
              ancestral human fossil known as "Lucy."  Gona is located about 10 miles from
              the "Lucy" site, and about 50 miles from another site known as Middle Awash
              where scientists recently discovered fossilized bones of prehuman ancestors
              dated close to 4.5 million years. There were no fossilized bones of prehumans
              found with the Gona tools, but there is strong archeological evidence that they
              were made by prehumans who are probably our direct ancestors. The
              Principal-Investigators of the Gona Project have organized a team of scientists
              from the U.S.A., Ethiopia, Spain and South Africa to continue survey and
              excavations to search for the fossilized remains of the makers of these ancient
              tools, to search for stone tools in deposits that are older than 2.6 million
              years, and to look for fossilized animal bones that bear stone tool cut-marks
              as  direct evidence for meat-eating. The Gona stone tools have sharp
              cutting-edges and they were probably used as knives for cutting up animal
              carcasses for meat.
	The 2.5 million year old Gona tools are very similar to
              those excavated elsewhere in East Africa from deposits that are close to 2.0
              million years. The Gona tools were well-made and this  suggests a possible long
              tool-making and tool-using tradition by prehumans prior to 2.6 million years
              ago. Project archaeologists will look for traces of  stone tools in the
              deposits that are even older than those excavated in the
early 1990s.
              Extensive survey will be conducted by Project archaeologists and bone
              specialists in the deposits adjacent to the areas studied between 1992 and
              1994. The Project geologists will study the soil formations at Gona and collect
              volcanic ashes to determine the age of stone tools and fossil bones from new
              areas. Test-excavations will be opened at several areas to sample stone tools
              and fossil bones. Such a strategy of sampling is effective to study the various
              activities conducted by prehumans at
different parts of the ancient Gona
              landscape.  
	The overall goal of this Project will be to explore the Gona
              region for the actual beginnings of tool-making by our ancestors, for fossil
              remains of the tool-making ancestors and for archaeological evidence of
              tool-using behaviors and subsistence activities.



