Title       : Reputation with Hidden Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2001      
File        : a9818981

Award Number: 9818981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30832              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Tadelis stadelis@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Recent developments in the theory of the firm have been devoted mainly to
              investigating the consequences of asset ownership, and deal with well-defined
              tangible assets that can be bought and sold.  It is well known, however, that
              many firms have intangible assets, one of the more important of which is the
              firm's name, or more precisely, the reputation that is conveyed by its name. 
              Most of the reputation literature in economics theory focuses on analyzing the
              role played by reputation in situations where a firm can "cooperate" (e.g.,
              collude with other firms in setting a price, or provide a high quality good to
              a consumer) or "deviate" (e.g., cut prices to capture market shares, or provide
              a low quality good at a low cost); the asset-like aspect of a firm's reputation
              was mostly ignored.  What work had been done was unable to explain how, for
              instance, a firm's reputation might increase (or decrease) in value following
              performance, as is commonly observed in reality.  Nor was there a role for
              observed behavior such as a firm changing its name, a common practice that has
              lately generated some attention. 
	However, the researcher has developed a new
              model treating a firm's name as an intangible asset that has yielded some
              interesting results.  The first result shows that firms will buy and sell names
              in all equilibria.  The second result shows that the very best firms cannot
              "separate" themselves; that is, those who can easily maintain a reputation
              cannot outbid less successful firms in the market for names.  The principle aim
              of the proposed research is to generalize and expand the previous work in an
              attempt to better understand the role of a firm's reputation both as an
              incentive device for firm behavior and as a "separating" device through the
              market for firm names.  Applications of the new modeling approach are likely to
              be useful in understanding phenomena such as franchising and umbrella branding.
               It is also possible that this line of research may eventually shed some light
              on collective reputations and the formation of partnerships.  

