Title       : Effect of Shear on Dinoflagellate Population Growth and Cell Cycle Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1999      
File        : a9818991

Award Number: 9818991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177060             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael I. Latz mlatz@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Latz 9818991

Effect of Shear on Dinoflagellate Population Growth and Cell
              Cycle Dynamics

All plankton experience a dynamic fluid environment due to
              the effects of wind, waves, tides, and currents. Large-scale physical processes
              are known to affect plankton spatial distribution, vertical mixing, and
              nutrient supply. At the small scale of the individual cell, fluid motion
              generated on larger scales is experienced as a laminar shear and is known to
              affect cell physiology and behavior. Growing field and laboratory evidence
              suggests that dinoflagellate population growth is influenced by shear.
              Dinoflagellates are important members of the plankton community and one of the
              most shear-sensitive organisms known. The objective of this project is to
              provide a mechanistic understanding of how shear affects population growth, and
              to identify environmental and physiological factors that cause shear
              sensitivity to vary.

The effect of shear on population growth and cell cycle
              dynamics will be studied in the red tide dinoflagellates Lingulodinium
              polyedrum (=Gonyaulax polyedra) and Gymnodinium sanguineum (=G. nelsonei, G.
              splendens). Although the effect of shear on population growth of both species
              has previously been studied, new preliminary data suggest that the inhibition
              of population growth by shear is variable within a species. In addition, these
              data suggest a different mechanism for the effect of shear on cell cycle
              progression than previously proposed. Laboratory experiments will subject cells
              to Couette flow with quantified levels of fluid shear approximating levels
              found in oceanic turbulence. Three hypotheses will be tested: (1) Shear
              sensitivity is affected by growth conditions; (2) Population growth is
              inhibited by shear levels which are plausible for small-scale turbulence in the
              physically-forced upper ocean; and (3) Exposure to shear interferes with the
              normal progression through the cell cycle. Changes in population growth will be
              measured using daily cell counts and the cell cycle will be resolved using flow
              cytometry and cell volume measurements.

The factors which affect shear
              sensitivity in laboratory cultures may be relevant to field conditions, such as
              during the progression of a dinoflagellate bloom. Therefore, the results
              provide a foundation for future field studies of the effect of turbulence on in
              situ dinoflagellate populations. A mechanistic understanding of the effect of
              shear on dinoflagellate growth inhibition strengthens the argument that
              turbulence is important in regulating population growth in the field.
              Turbulence is a poorly understood environmental factor affecting phytoplankton
              physiology. Ultimately, turbulence may be as important as light and nutrients
              in the regulation of dinoflagellate populations, including red tides and toxic
              blooms.


