Title       : Organization Science Winter Conference: Exploring the Frontiers of Strategic
               Decision Making and Management in Chaotic Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1999  
File        : a9818856

Award Number: 9818856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Olk pmolk@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project orients the practitioners within the Decision, Risk, and Management
              Science (DRMS)
and the Innovation and Organizational Change (IOC) research
              communitites to the
emerging developments critical to strategic management,
              organizational
design, and decision making in today's
turbulent
              organizational environment.  In its fifth year, the
Organization Science
              Winter Conference (OSWC -- a 50 person "think tank"
style conference) has
              resulted in the identification of new research
agendas through
              interdisciplinary approaches.  The conference has become
known for engaging
              leading theoretical ideas, as well as a way for
research to be informed by
              practicing managers. 

The 1999 OSWC topic is "Negotiating the Shoals of
              Chaotic Environments."
Both the academic and popular press suggest that
              organizational
strategies and forms whose roots originate in the Industrial
              Age may no
longer be appropriate as we transition into a new era
              --
Post-Industrial, Knowledge-based. The pace of the resulting
              competitive
landscape has clearly increased, but even more important has been
              the
rise in volatility and environmental uncertainty.  Many believe that
              the
organizational playing field has moved from a complex but
              predictable
environment, to a field more aptly described as chaotic.  If this
              is the
case, then current knowledge in strategic and organizational theory
              is
out of date.  The challenge facing the DRMS and IOC community
              and
practitioners involves the development of new theories, models
              and
methodologies more appropriate for chaotic uncertainty.  
At this year's
              conference we anticipate explorations of the theme from a
wide spectrum of
              perspectives--strategy, decision making, managerial
and organization
              cognition, leadership, organization learning,
complexity theory and chaos,
              information technology, knowledge and
knowing, ecology, political economy,
              etc.  Specific topics likely to be
included are quantifying and measuring
              chaotic environments, strategic
responses and organizational forms for
              turbulent situations, and
managerial implications.

The grant provides
              funding for two new conference initiatives:
(1) sponsorship for one leading
              scholar from Europe and one from Asia who
would otherwise not be able to
              attend, and (2) support related to the
development and writing of a
              'perspective' paper to be published in
Organization Science.
