Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Science, Religion, and the "Unity of Mankind" Debate in
               America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1999     
File        : a9818182

Award Number: 9818182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7997               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Numbers rnumbers@med.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Darwinian theories of human evolution top the list of scientific ideas that
              challenged the thinking of religious Americans in the nineteenth century. The
              sheer volume of historiography of the Darwinian controversies so monopolizes
              our understanding of the historical relationship between science and religion
              that the existence of a heated debate about human origins antedating Origin of
              Species has all but escaped notice. William Stanton told of the rise of
              polygenic theory of racial origins many years ago in his The Leopard's Spots.
              Though he argued that this theory of the separate origins of the various human
              races or "types of mankind" dominated scientific thinking in the decades before
              the Civil War, little attention has been paid to polygenism or the controversy
              around it since Stanton's work.  This dissertation research project picks up
              from Stanton's work and will provide two important correctives to his story.
              First, it will examine his claim that Protestant Americans found polygenism too
              contrary to their theology and understanding of the Bible to favor it in any
              way. The meager evidence Stanton provided cannot support such a broad claim.
              Further doubt arises from the fact that pre-adamism, a theological twin to
              science of polygenesis, was used by certain conservative Evangelicals at the
              end of the century and into the twentieth century to accommodate the growing
              evidence of human prehistory. Second, Stanton's claim that the rise of
              Darwinism cut short influence of polygenism has already been questioned by
              several historians. This study will describe the fortunes of polygenism and its
              opposition well past the advent of Darwinism. This study will also depart from
              Stanton's in methodology. He examined the work of the intellectuals. By means
              of an extensive survey of popular religious periodicals, primarily the weekly
              religious newspapers, the attempt will be made to assess and describe the
              "unity" debate as it was understood by lay people. Polygenism not only
              challenged their conventional views on religion and the Bible, but it also bore
              on some of the most critical social issues of the day, slavery and the "Indian"
              issue, and thus was not contained within an intramural scientific dispute.
              Because the weekly newspapers targeted specific readers this approach will
              reveal the responses of blacks, whites, and natives Americans, northerners and
              southerners, Jews, Catholics, Protestants and their various denominational
              flavors. The objective is to understand what happened to polygenic race theory
              within popular religious culture both before and after the rise of Darwinism.

