Title       : Physiological Activity of the Newly Identified Guinea Pig Gonadotropin Releasing
               Hormone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a9818049

Award Number: 9818049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly S. Rubin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research project will extend the exciting finding from Dr. Rubin's
              laboratory, the recent discovery of a new form of gonadotropin releasing
              hormone (GnRH) in guinea pig (gp) brain.  GnRH is the primary hypothalamic
              signal that regulates the pituitary-gonadal axis and is critical for
              reproductive success.  Prior to this unexpected finding, mammalian (m) GnRH was
              presumed to be the neuroendocrine form of GnRH in all mammals.  The newly
              identified form of GnRH includes a substitution in amino acid 2 which is
              conserved in all 11 known forms of GnRH and has been considered essential for
              binding to and activation of the GnRH receptor.  The relative abilities of
              gpGnRH and mGnRH to stimulate gonadotropin release from guinea pig and rat
              pituitaries in vitro will be evaluated in Specific aim 1 and will provide
              important information regarding the biological activity of gpGnRH.  A specific
              antibody to gpGnRH will be generated in Specific Aim 2 which will enable Dr.
              Rubin to determine the precise localization of this unique form of GnRH in
              guinea pig brain and the eventual evaluation of the presence of gpGnRH in other
              species.  The data obtained in these studies will provide information about
              GnRH receptor-ligand interactions.  This information will be used to direct
              future examination of a potential complementary change in the guinea pig
              receptor and/or mechanisms that might have evolved to compensate for a
              reduction in the biopotency of gpGnRH.  These studies will enhance our
              understanding of the evolution of this essential hormone as well as the
              evolutionary lineage of the guinea pig.   
