Title       : Off-Route Strategies in Non-Visual Navigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a9818545

Award Number: 9818545
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132753             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reginald G. Golledge golledge@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Blades  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Kitchin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Daniel Jacobson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project addresses the effects of learning method on route comprehension of
              visually impaired people, and it will determine if changes in geographic scale
              alter the effectiveness of selected learning media. An understanding of how
              different methods of learning affect route comprehension will allow current
              spatial knowledge acquisition theory and orientation and mobility training to
              be assessed and, if necessary, improved. Traversing space is one of the most
              cognitively demanding tasks faced by visually impaired people, and often
              invokes fear of being lost or disorientated. For these reasons there is a need
              to identify effective strategies of spatial learning that can contribute to the
              mobility and quality of life of visually impaired people.

In the first
              experiment 24 visually impaired people will learn three short routes across a
              University campus (in counterbalanced order). Each route will be learnt using a
              different learning method. The 24 subjects will be divided into 4 groups who
              will learn the route in a different order. The 3 conditions will be (1)
              pointing to places along the route, (2) making a map of the route, and (3)
              verbally describing the route. A further (control) group of ten visually
              impaired subjects will learn the route without any given strategy. Each trial
              will be video recorded. The three strategies selected are "off-route"
              strategies.  Participants' route learning performance will be measured in
              several ways: the number of trials required to achieve successful route
              learning; number of errors made; types of errors; self-reported confidence
              measures; and assessment by independent judges of performance, hesitancy, and
              confidence.

In the second experiment, 16 participants will learn a route 1.4
              miles long through a complex urban environment. Participants will be divided
              into two conditions. In the first condition, they will learn the route using
              the most successful strategy from Experiment 1. In the second condition, they
              will learn the route using no given strategy. Sample sizes in both experiments
              are relatively small due to the difficulty of recruiting visually impaired
              participants, but the number of participants and number of trials will be
              greater than in previous experiments of way-finding and therefore should
              provide definitive results. By collecting data in a small-scale (university
              campus) and a large-scale environment (suburban neighborhood) we may find that
              spatial knowledge acquisition focuses on different cognition tasks at different
              scales. For the development of an effective orientation and mobility training
              program, these tasks may be operationalized via one or more simple
              geographic-based environmental learning procedures.

The research addresses
              important theoretical questions relating to spatial learning and cognition,
              providing further insights into how visually impaired people construct, store,
              and utilize spatial knowledge. In so doing, it will address practical issues
              relating to the improvement of current orientation and mobility training.


