Title       : A New Approach to Testing in the Generalized Method of Moments Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9818695

Award Number: 9818695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Vogelsang tjv2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Timothy Vogelsang
SBR-9818695


This project is concerned with constructing
              a new class of test statistics that can be used to test hypotheses in the
              generalized method of moments (GMM) framework. The statistics in this new class
              do not require direct estimates of the long run variance (spectral density at
              frequency zero) of the moment conditions. It is likely the new approach will
              result in a class of tests that have better finite sample properties than
              currently available tests. This will be an important contribution and should
              positively impact empirical work in macroeconomics and finance for two reasons.
              First, the GMM framework is widely used in empirical work. Applications include
              estimation of business cycle models, stochastic volatility models,
              asset-pricing models, estimation of covariance structures, etc. Second, there
              is considerable evidence that standard tests applied to GMM models have poor
              finite sample properties. Size is often inflated, and power can be low. Thus,
              inference in the GMM framework can be very imprecise. The new approach should
              provide alternative tests that give more precise inference. The tests are
              likely to attract a relatively large club of users because the new tests are
              easy to compute and do not require the practitioner to make such choices as
              kernel, truncation lag, automatic truncation lag approximating models and
              weights, lag lengths, etc. Because inference can be sensitive to those choices,
              the new approach provides practitioners with a simple more robust testing
              framework.

