Title       : Should We Mine the Landfills: An Industrial Stocks and Flows Proposal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a9818788

Award Number: 9818788
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440257             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Graedel thomas.graedel@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Reid Lifset  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The historical reservoir for the materials used by our technological society has
              been virgin stocks (ore bodies, mineral deposits, and the like).  For a variety
              of reasons, those stocks may become inadequate or unavailable at some times or
              places in the future.  Other reservoirs exist, however, a principal one being
              products stored or discarded over the years by corporations and individuals. 
              These latter reservoirs might become very important in the next few decades of
              rapid population growth and resource use, but we know little about their total
              abundance and the chemical and physical forms in which they exist.  In this
              research, we will evaluate current and historical flows of specific materials
              (selected from copper, silver, zinc, cadmium, ABS polymer and construction
              timber), estimate the stocks available in different types of reservoirs,
              especially industrial and municipal landfills.  To do so, we will draw largely
              on information now scattered across a number of data depositories and centers
              of excellence: mineralogical and geological records, economic data, industrial
              association publications, environmental records, and so on.  Historical records
              should permit the assessment to be extended, at least approximately, to include
              the entire 20th century.  The expectation is that there will be seen to be
              substantial utility in material stock and flow information and that a number of
              technological and policy actions may be guided by the results.  In particular,
              it is anticipated that it will be most useful to evaluate non-virgin materials
              reservoirs as potential sources of industrial materials for the next
              millennium.
