Title       : Investigation of Tidal Aliasing and Climate Scale Processes in Sea Ice and Their
               Influence on Oceanic-Atmospheric Heat/Momentum Balances...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a9818645

Award Number: 9818645
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321662             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Hanson hanson@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Leathers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9818645
Hanson


This proposed work is a study of how satellite data can be
              used to improve our understanding of the process by which the movement of the
              arctic and antarctic sea ice cover affects the exchange of heat and momentum
              between the atmosphere and the ocean.  The key variable is differential motion
              of the sea ice:  i.e. convergence, divergence, and shear, which produces areas
              of open water and significantly increases the atmosphere-ocean rates of
              exchange.

The effort is concerned with short-period or high frequency
              variations in the differential motion, that are so rapid that they cannot be
              resolved by successive satellite passes.  The bulk of satellite-derived ice
              motion data is on a three-day time scale with current capabilities extending
              down to one day.   This is insufficient to resolve motions resulting from tides
              and inertial oscillations that have a period less than one day.

This
              proposal uses an imaginative statistical approach to recover the amplitude of
              these oscillations from a data record whose sampling rate is once per day or
              lower.  It is based on the premise that the power of tidal and inertial
              oscillations appears in the statistics of the data record, with the additional
              hypothesis that if the frequency of these oscillation is well-defined (as is
              the case for tides and inertial oscillations) then their effect is limited to a
              specific and predictable part of the observed data record.  The approach will
              be tested by comparing observations from the Weddell Sea Ice Camp, where the
              power of tidal and inertial oscillation was measured directly, with synchronous
              satellite imagery, where the power of these oscillations will be recovered
              statistically.

Potentially the techniques derived from this project will
              allow more accurate determinations of the structure of the antarctic atmosphere
              and oceans by introducing better and more realistic numerical approximations to
              sea ice formation and water mass modification processes that have global
              connections.


