Title       : The Dynamic Response of Sea Ice and Ice-Ocean Models Using Different Sea-Ice
               Rheologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a9818711

Award Number: 9818711
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148080             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruno Tremblay tremblay@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Holland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9818711
Tremblay

Correctly modeling sea ice in global climate models is
              important in order to have realistic high-latitude ocean-atmosphere
              interactions and reasonable fluxes of salt and fresh water associated with the
              freezing and melting of sea ice in different locations. The dynamic component
              of the sea ice model is fundamental to that goal.  The motion of sea ice is, in
              turn, strongly affected by the internal ice forces caused by interactions
              between different ice floes. In the past two decades, various approaches have
              been proposed for modeling those interactions and predicting sea ice motion.
              The purpose of this study is to better understand the differences in the
              behavior of two different sea ice models and to determine whether a different
              formulation of the sea ice interactions leads to significant differences in the
              dynamic behavior of sea ice and coupled ice-ocean models. This project will
              first compare the sea ice trajectories simulated by two (viscous-plastic) sea
              ice models, forced with the same atmospheric and oceanic fields, against the
              buoy drift data from the International Arctic Buoy program and satellite
              derived (SAR) sea ice velocities.  The two models are 1- the standard
              viscous-plastic approach with an elliptical yield curve and a normal flow rule
              (Hibler79) and, 2- a granular material approach with a
Mohr-Coulomb yield
              curve and a double-sliding deformation law with dilatancy included (Tremblay
              and Mysak, 97b and Flato and Hibler92). The two sea ice models will then be
              coupled to the Lamont-Doherty and SCRUM three-dimensional ocean models to
              compare the sensitivity of the coupled models to increased radiative fluxes
              associated with global warming scenario. The completion of this project will
              lead to an improved understanding of the sensitivity of coupled ice-ocean
              models to the sea dynamic treatment.  To get a better perspective, it will also
              be compared with the sensitivity of the sea-ice models to other errors, such as
              in the wind forcing fields.


