Title       : Ice Sheet Configuration and Erosion Patterns in the Northern Swedish Mountains
               from Cosmogenic Radionuclides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a9818162

Award Number: 9818162
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178192             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan M. Harbor   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Elmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Unrealistic simulation of ice sheet inception and decay in mountainous regions,
              uncertainties in reconstructing ice surface profiles, and common failure to
              consider landscape development under ice sheets all contribute to major
              limitations for successful use of ice sheet models in climate research.  For
              example, trimlines and weathering differences have been interpreted as
              indicators of former ice sheet height, but recent mapping in Scandinavia
              suggests that such features may reflect internal thermal boundaries between
              wet-(warm)-based erosive ice and dry-(cold) based-non-erosive ice, leading to
              very different interpretations of ice sheet thickness and height.  The
              Principal Investigators will attempt to resolve conflicting glacial landform
              interpretations for parts of the Fennoscandian ice sheet.  Geomorphologic and
              stratigraphic evidence indicates the Norwegian-Swedish mountains are an
              important area for understanding Fennoscandian ice sheet inception and decay. 
              Glacial morphology in this mountain range reflects cirque glacier, valley
              glacier, and ice sheet erosion at different times and with various intensities
              over the past six million years.  The oldest preserved surface is a potential
              reference horizon against which glacial erosion can be computed to enhance our
              understanding of ice sheet dynamics.  This is critical groundwork for enhanced
              model simulations of the glacial cycle, which would test for general
              circulation models in predicting climate.
This work will be accomplished by
              measuring multiple cosmogenic radionuclides in samples collected from rock
              surfaces in distinct, recently mapped, geomorphic regions.  The results will
              test existing hypotheses of ice sheet configuration and provide new information
              for debates over the age of "preglacial" surfaces that appear to have survived
              repeated ice sheet overriding.  The height of the Weichselian ice sheet and the
              spatial patterns of basal thermal regimes and associated glacial erosion of the
              Fennoscandian ice sheet will be studied.  Insight into landscape development
              and basal thermal regimes will provide new boundary conditions for
              Fennoscandian ice sheet modeling being undertaken by Swedish scientists.  The
              Principal Investigators will field test whether a surface has experienced
              lengthy ice burial with a new application of cosmogenic radionuclides. To be
              successful, the Principal Investigators will collect samples from sites within
              landscapes of different types of glacial histories.  The Swedish Natural
              Science Research Council has funded the Principal Investigators' Swedish
              counterparts for similar work and the two groups will work collaboratively on
              this project.  Recognition of suitable landscape features relies on high
              quality mapping of mountain geomorphology which is a primary area of expertise
              of the Paleoglaciology Group at the University of Stockholm.  Purdue University
              facility and facilities will provide expertise and analytical capabilities in
              glacial geomorphology and applications of cosmogenic radionuclide techniques.

