Title       : Vitrified Liquid Crystalline Films: Material Synthesis and Optical Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2001       
File        : a9818234

Award Number: 9818234
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285156             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaw H. Chen shch@lle.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9818234
S. H. Chen
U. of Rochester

Liquid crystalline
              mesomorphism is characterized by a unaxial (i.e. nematic), lamellar (i.e.
              smectic), helical (i.e. cholesteric), or columnar (i. e. discotic) arrangement
              of molecular through self-assembly.  Because of their unique optical
              properties, liquid crystals (LCs) have found various established and potential
              applications to electro-optics and optoelectronics.  In the now almost mature
              LC display technology, LC materials function in the fluid state where an
              applied field induces molecular orientation with a response time on order of
              milliseconds.  With judiciously designed structural moieties, LCs may also
              function in the solid state via a photonic or electronic stimulus with a
              response time on the order of pico- or femtoseconds.  In addition to these
              switching devices, LCs in thin films can be employed as nonswitching devices
              (e.g. for polarization optics).  With the exception of applications where the
              dynamics of molecular orientation are involved, vitrified LC films with an
              above-ambient glass transition temperature are uniquely suited for the
              fabrication of environmentally robust devices.  The main theme of the proposed
              research is on vitrified LCs following two complementary approaches: 
              glass-foaming liquid crystals (GLCs) and crosslinked LC polymers (XLCPs), with
              the objective of facilitating material processing into macroscopically ordered
              solid films.

Capable of vitrification into well-ordered films with superior
              morphological stability, high optical birefringence GLCs have been successfully
              developed under a current NSF project.  To take advantage of this new emerging
              class of organic materials, GLCs transparent down to 300 nm will be designed
              and synthesized for uniaxially and helically orienting luminophores to generate
              polarized light.  As a complementary material concept, XLCPs of similar
              characteristics will be pursued for a comparative study.  In this approach, the
              high degree of molecular order achieved in the fluid state will be preserved
              via photoinduced polymerization and crosslinking.  In addition to nematic
              materials, novel approaches to gradient-pitch chiral-nematic GLCs and XLCPs
              will be explored for an extensive investigation of polarized photoluminescence,
              including the resonance region where no prior attempts have been made.  A
              comprehensive theory will be constructed for circularly polarized
              photoluminescence by considering light absorption, emission, and propagation in
              periodically structured films.  The general theory will be reduced to linearly
              polarized photoluminescence (from uniaxially aligned luminophores in vitrified
              nematic films and circular dichrosim/circular polarization  (from light
              adsorption and propagation in vitrified chiral-nematic films) as two limiting
              cases.  Experiments will be conducted to quantify the degrees of polarization
              for a validation of theoretical predictions.  Potential applications to
              high-efficiency polarization, polarized light emission, color projection,
              stereoscopic display, and distributed feedback laser ill also be explored.  In
              summary, polarized light is essential to optical information processing,
              display, and storage.  The proposed research aims at the generation of
              polarized light using light-emitting and nonemitting films.  Under the proposed
              program, a new generation of scientists and engineers will be educated in a
              multidisciplinary setting.  New principles will be established for delineating
              optical processes in macroscopically ordered films and for developing superior
              materials instrumental to the advancement of optical information technologies. 
              


