Title       : Dissertation Research: Environmental Crime: An Empirical, Economic,
               Institutional and Legal Analysis of Individual and Firm Sanctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9818838

Award Number: 9818838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11875              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard N. Andrews pete_ andrews@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral Dissertation Improvement research examines the use of criminal
              enforcement proceedings that are used to deter and punish environmental crimes
              and the criminal justice system practice in prosecuting and sanctioning
              individuals and firms for these crimes.  Very little research has been done on
              the criminal justice system's role in environmental enforcement.  This study
              (1) will shed light on whether criminal provisions presently available allow
              the federal government to obtain convictions of, and certain sanctions against,
              particular types of firms or individuals,  (2) help to determine whether or not
              the federal government's actions are consistent with its policy statements
              regarding the exercise of investigative and enforcement discretion, and (3)
              enhance our understanding of the degree to which federal judges follow
              Congress' direction to treat economic and street crimes alike during
              sentencing.  

Lists of environmental criminal prosecutions, civil judicial
              actions, and EPA administrative actions that were initiated from 1990-97 will
              be assembled.  A sample of cases will be drawn from each list and relevant
              documents copied for each sampled case.  A database containing pertinent
              information  (e.g., prior history, violation type, and sentence imposed) and
              firm size will be compiled on each case. This data will be used to construct
              models of criminal conviction and sanctioning of individuals and firms. Civil
              judicial and administrative cases will also be added to this database so those
              models of firms who have fallen outside the criminal justice system can also be
              constructed.

