Title       : Alternative Globalization: Community and Conflict in New Cultural of Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a9818258

Award Number: 9818258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Maurer wmmaurer@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The second-largest Kentucky Fried Chicken franchise in the United States runs
              according to Islamic banking principles, which prohibits interest and replace
              debt-financing with profit-loss sharing arrangements.  Community activists in
              Ithaca and other small towns across America and abroad are printing their own
              money and establishing alternative economic arrangements in the name of
              community values and environmental sustainability.  More and more Caribbean
              countries are abandoning agriculture and tourism development in favor of
              becoming tax havens.  Do these seemingly unrelated events reflect a common
              process?  What do they reveal about contemporary shifts in economic, social and
              political life co-occurring with the new geographies of money and financial
              integration generally labeled under the blanket-term "globalization?"

This
              research focuses on people participating in movements whose visions of
              financial integration provide alternatives to dominant narratives of
              globalization: Islamic banking, offshore finance, and alternative currency
              systems.   Although these people are differently situated, their visions are
              all variations on a theme.  In each case, on-going discussions around money and
              alternative finance emphasize exclusionary notions of community and quasi-legal
              concepts of jurisdictional autonomy.  The problem of "community" and the
              problem of "jurisdiction" exist in a productive tension, since these new
              cultures of finance embrace community and connection while enforcing sharp
              jurisdictional boundaries around themselves.  At the same time, each case
              aspires to more global reach, disseminating its principles and practices in
              order to secure legitimacy and, for some involved, to change the world for the
              better.  This research examines resonances among these apparently disparate
              alternative strategies of dealing with "globalization" to better understand the
              changing nature of jurisdiction, community and conflict in new cultures of
              finance.  Specifically it seeks to answer questions such as: (1) What
              conceptions of money, property and person are implicit and explicit in
              alternative globalizations? (2) What conceptions of time and space figure in
              alternative globalizations and how are they put into play in the practice of
              finance?, and (3) How are these put into play in the construction of community
              and history?

Fieldwork will be conducted in southern California, Ithaca, New
              York, Surabaya, Indonesia, and the British Virgin Islands.  Open-ended,
              semi-structured interviews will be conducted with select groups of people 
              (e.g., founding members and staff of relevant financial institutions, lawyers, 
              businesspeople, legislators, and religious leaders) at each location.  

