Title       : Dissertation Research: Representations of Parenthood: An Analysis of Child
               Custody Laws, the Courts, and Families
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9818801

Award Number: 9818801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7188               (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Powell Powell@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Over the last fifty years, sociocultural beliefs surrounding motherhood and
              fatherhood have changed rapidly. The divorce rate and the number of children
              born to single mothers have increased while more women--especially
              mothers--have entered the work force. These demographic changes in family life
              have resulted in major shifts in the ways Americans conceive of both mothers'
              and fathers' roles. These changes have affected child custody laws, shifting
              them from a maternal preference to a more egalitarian standard: the best
              interests of the child. Evidence also suggests, however, that traditional
              notions of parenthood persist in the legal system. Therefore, social processes
              seem to perpetuate both egalitarian and traditional notions of motherhood and
              fatherhood.	This study investigates cultural notions of parenthood by
              conducting four separate but interrelated analyses to explore notions of
              motherhood and fatherhood. (1) State child custody statutes will be content
              analyzed to explore the extent to which state legislatures define guidelines
              for good parenting. (2) Child custody case law will be examined in a subset of
              states to explore how state appellate courts incorporate notions motherhood and
              fatherhood into their decisions. (3) Judges will be interviewed to examine
              their recent child custody decisions to explore how they view mothers and
              fathers and how these views are reflected in child custody cases. (4) The
              meaning of parenthood in divorced families will be investigated by
              quantitatively analyzing the attitudes of parents in divorced families in the
              National Survey of Families and Households. The contributions of this
              sociological examination of the intersection of family and the legal system
              should be of interest to scholars across many disciplines, including political
              science and law. Further, this study has implications for child custody policy
              as well as other policies that affect families, such as child support policy or
              welfare policy.
