Title       : Nanoplanktonic Protists in Marine Environments: Analysis of Natural Assemblages
               Using Molecualr Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a9818953

Award Number: 9818953
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $433194             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca J. Gast rgast@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Caron  (Principal Investigator former)
              Mark R. Dennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Caron

	NANOPLANKTONIC PROTISTS IN MARINE ENVIRONMENTS: ANALYSIS OF NATURAL
              ASSEMBLAGES USING MOLECULAR APPROACHES

		Phototrophic and heterotrophic
              nanoplanktonic protists (microalgae and protozoa 2-20 um in size) are integral
              components of marine plankton communities. These single-celled, eukaryotic
              microorganisms play major roles as primary producers and micro-consumers in
              pelagic ecosystems. Current methodologies for enumerating phototrophic
              nanoplankton (PNAN) and heterotrophic nanoplankton (HNAN) cannot provide more
              than cursory information on the species diversity, specific trophic roles,
              taxonomic identity or biogeography of these assemblages. There is a clear need
              to apply new methodologies to allow a more thorough characterization of PNAN
              and HNAN assemblages. Molecular techniques and a newly-developed quantitative
              in situ hybridization method will be applied to natural assemblages of protists
              in order to assess nanoprotistan diversity, and to identify and quantify the
              predominantly occurring nanoplanktonic protistan species. The main focus of
              this work will be to obtain sequence information (small subunit rRNA) from
              natural assemblages of protists, to relate these sequences to protistan species
              in natural water samples (morphospecies), and to assess the abundances and
              distributions of target species for which we are continually designing and
              testing oligonucleotide probes. This work will be conducted within the context
              of experiments to examine shifts in species composition of the protistan
              assemblage in response to containment, long-term incubation (24-96 hr), and
              enrichment. Work on the population dynamics of individual taxa will begin using
              oligonucleotide probes developed for species of the heterotrophic chrysomonad
              genus Paraphysomonas and the bicosoecid species Cafeteria roenbergensis, and a
              quantitative in situ hybridization method. The project will provide important
              information on the species diversity of natural protistan assemblages using
              modern molecular biological approaches. Additionally, this work will provide a
              working model system in which to further refine and optimize these molecular
              techniques for routine field applications in microbial ecology.


