Title       : Investigating the Structural Basis of Allosteric Coupling in Gaba A Receptors
               Using Increased Atmospheric Pressure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a9818422

Award Number: 9818422
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Alkana alkana@hsc.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daryl L. Davies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ronald L. Alkana

ABSTRACT

The overall goal of the proposed work is to
              increase understanding of the basic mechanisms involved in communication
              between nerve cells in the brain. The proposal builds on previous findings
              demonstrating that increased atmospheric pressure (hyperbaric exposure) is a
              direct, highly selective blocker of a little explored, poorly defined
              process-allostenc coupling-that modulates the effectiveness of a family of
              neurotransmitters receptors in the brain, called ligand gated ion channels
              (LOICs), that play major roles in nerve-nerve communication. In particular, the
              proposed work focuses on one of these channels. This channel responds to
              gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and is called the GABAA channel. When GABA binds
              to its receptor on the GABAA the channel opens a channel and allows chloride
              ions to enter the nerve cell. The resultant build-up of chloride ions in the
              nerve cell inhibits the cells action and decreases its excitablity. The GABAA
              system is the major inhibitory system in the mammalian brain.

The
              effectiveness of GABA' 5 action in opening chloride ion channels can be
              modulated by several classes of compounds that act at distinct but interacting
              sites on the GABAA receptor. These sites include those for the benzodiazepines,
              barbiturates and neuroactive steroids. When one of these compounds (ligands)
              bind to their respective sites on the GABAA receptor, it causes a conformation
              change in the receptor that affects the ability of other ligands to bind or
              affect the receptor. This process, referred to as allosteric coupling between
              sites, modulates the effectiveness of the primary agonist-GAB A-as well as the
              effectiveness of other allosteric modulators.

The molecular structures and
              functions of the portions of the GAB AA receptor that bind ligands has been
              extensively studied. In contrast, little attention has been devoted to
              understanding the elements that underlie allosteric coupling. The elements
              mediating coupling are difficult to study directly due to a lack of tools.
              Recent behavioral and biochemical findings in our laboratory suggest that
              hyperbaric exposure offers a new approach that can help in studying allosteric
              coupling. Moreover, this work with hyperbaric exposure suggests that there are
              fundamental, previously unrecognized, differences in the manner in which
              binding sites on the GABAA receptor are coupled and that hyperbaric exposure
              can be used to study these differences.

The specific objective of the
              research to be undertaken is to test two hypotheses: Hypothesis 1:
The
              different pattern of sensitivity to pressure antagonism among allosteric
              modulators of GABAA receptor function will provide new insights into the
              structural and functional determinants of coupling. The logic for this
              hypothesis is based on the assumption that the selectivity of pressure
              antagonism results from pressure's ability to block common physico-chemical
              changes underlying coupling and that the sensitivity of these physico-chemical
              changes to pressure reflect similarities in their underlying molecular
              structures. The hypothesis will be tested by systematically investigating four
              predictions regarding the selectivity of pressure antagonism based on known
              functional distinctions in coupling within and between different sites on the
              GABAA receptor using biochemical measures of GABAA receptor function in mouse
              brain cell membranes. Hypothesis 2:
Differences in the structural and
              functional determinants of GABAA receptor coupling identified in
ABSTRACT
              DRAAT 12/4/98

testing Hypothesis 1 reflect differences in the protein
              subunits that comprise the receptor. This hypothesis will be tested by
              determining the sensitivity to pressure antagonism of allosterically modulated
              events using biochemical and molecular biological techniques.

The proposed
              work will increase knowledge regarding the manner in which the effectiveness of
              nerve cell transmission is controlled. The proposed work will lay the
              foundation for future studies that will use hyperbaric exposure in combination
              with molecular manipulations in recombinant cells to identify molecular
              components that mediate allosteric coupling. This information in turn will
              facilitate the development of molecular models of these structures. The
              proposed work will also lay the foundation for future investigations that will
              investigate coupling in other allosterically modulated channels (e.g., NMDA,
              5HT3...). These studies could support known and/or could reveal previously
              unrecognized similarities between allosterically modulated ion channels.
              Finally, future studies will investigate whether differences in coupling
              mechanisms have currently unrecognized physiological and behavioral
              significance. Therefore, the proposed and future work should lead to important
              new insights regarding the role LGICs play in mediating and modulating brain
              function and behavior.

