Title       : Theoretical and Observable Implications of Market Equilibria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2001   
File        : a9818759

Award Number: 9818759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196812             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christina Shannon cshannon@econ.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Christina Shannon
SBR-9818759

Understanding the functioning of markets is
              one of the fundamental challenges in economics. Such understanding requires
              both theoretical work that details the properties of equilibria under a
              va-riety of different market structures or institutions and suggests when
              particular market structures are likely or desirable, and an empirical
              framework in which these theories can be refuted and hypotheses can be tested.
              This project seeks to further understanding of competitive and non-competitive
              markets by studying both theoretical and observable implications of several
              different market structures.   This project has four distinct parts. The first
              two parts focus on theoretical and observable implications of competitive
              markets. The classical Arrow-Debreu model provides a rich theoretical framework
              in which to study many aspects of competitive behavior, and is the foundation
              for much work in modern macro, finance, public finance, and numerous other
              fields. General equilibrium theory is often criticized, however, for lacking
              empirical content. This criticism is typically based on the
              Sonnenschein-Debreu-Mantel theorem, which shows that no properties of
              individual demand beyond continuity and homogeneity are preserved by
              aggregation in market excess demand.   Under her previous NSF grant, the
              investigator showed that, contrary to this view, the general equilibrium model
              does impose testable restrictions on a finite set of observations of prices,
              individ-ual incomes, and aggregate consumption, and they give necessary and
              sufficient conditions for such a finite data set to be rationalizable in a
              Walrasian setting. The first part of this project studies the extent to which
              qualitative properties of competitive equilibria, such as local and global
              uniqueness, comparative statics, and stability of price adjustment processes,
              are refutable with finite data sets. The second part considers similar
              questions in a dynamic general equilibrium economy incorporat-ing financial
              markets. The final sections focus on the observable implications of markets in
              which some agents act strategically. In particular, the third part of the
              project considers whether a finite set of observations can detect imperfectly
              competitive behavior in a general equilibrium set-ting, and the final part
              considers whether such data can provide evidence of complementarities in choice
              problems and in markets.


