Title       : GUIRR: Government-University-Industry Research Roundtable
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9818020

Award Number: 9818020
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Moss tmoss@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 0300      GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Government-University-Industry Research Roundtable (GUIRR), created in 1984,
              provides a unique forum for dialogue among top government, university and
              industry leaders of the national science and technology enterprise. The
              Roundtable is sponsored by the National Academy of Sciences, the National
              Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.  It is guided by a
              Council that sets the Roundtable agenda, addresses some topics directly, and
              oversees the plans and activities of Working Groups appointed to examine
              additional topics in depth.

In recent years, the Roundtable has sponsored a
              number of projects. Stresses on Research and Education at Colleges and
              Universities: Phase II is a study, initiated in 1993, sponsored in conjunction
              with the National Science Board (NSB).  The purpose of this study is to
              illuminate the major sources of stress affecting the academic research and
              education community and to identify possible remedies.  A Final report will be
              available in the fall-winter season of 1998.  Another project, entitled
              Formulating U.S. Research Policies Within an International Context examines
              shifts occurring within the worldwide research enterprise and investigates
              possible new approaches appropriate for domestic researchers.  An international
              colloquium was held in May, 1997. A follow-up report was prepared and published
              in 1998.  The Roundtable is the convenor of the Federal Demonstration
              Partnership (FDP).  The FDP through meetings and the issuance of reports serves
              as an ongoing cooperative effort among sixty-five universities or research
              institutes and eleven Federal Agencies to address means to improve management
              of federally-funded research.  The Roundtable also is engaged in a study of the
              vitality and prevalence of industry and university research collaborations. In
              the fall of 1995, the Roundtable, along with the Industrial Research Institute
              (IRI) and the Council on Competitiveness co-sponsored a workshop at Duke
              University. The final published in early 1997. An outgrowth of this effort was
              a workshop held in Irvine California on March 23-24, 1998, which highlighted
              barriers and the most effective ways to overcome them.  All of these are of a
              continuing nature.  

Future project focus areas include Secrecy and Openness
              in Science, Streamlining Regulatory Restrictions and Minimizing Regulatory
              Costs in Laboratory Settings, Public Stakeholding in Science, and Technical and
              Professional Development of Teachers of Science and Mathematics.

Primary
              core support is received by each of the major federal research and development
              agencies.  In 1993, the Roundtable began to establish an affiliated
              University-Industry Partnership program as a supplemental component of its
              funding.  Currently fourteen partnerships exist.  The Roundtable is seeking to
              add two or three more partnerships over the next three years.  Additional
              support from foundations and states is sought for special activities.

