Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Instrumentation for Experimental Research in
               Machine Learning, Molecular Dynamics, Probabilistic Reasoning, and Software
               Maintenance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1999   
File        : a9818414

Award Number: 9818414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Dietterich tgd@cs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter G. Rudd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregg Rothermel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce D. D'Ambrosio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9818414
Dietterich, Thomas G.
Rudd, Walter G.
Oregon State
              University

Instrumentation for Research in Machine Learning, Molecular
              Dynamics, Probabilistic Reasoning, and Software Maintenance

This research
              instrumentation enables research projects in:

- Experimental Machine
              Learning Research,
- Accelerating Simulations in the Time Dimension,
-
              Probabilistic Methods in Dynamic Environments, and 
- Experimentation with
              Program-Analysis-Based Systems Maintenance and Testing Techniques.

To
              support the aforementioned projects, this award contributes to the purchase of
              dual-processor Pentium II computers and associated networking hardware by the
              Department of Computer Science at Oregon State University.  The equipment will
              support experimental research on four projects.  In the first project, machine
              learning tools will be developed for complex problems such as image analysis
              and language processing.  These tools will help solve related problems faster
              and with higher accuracy.  The second project concentrates in developing faster
              algorithms for complex particle simulations.  These algorithms will make it
              possible to understand and predict the behavior of chemical compounds in
              manufacturing (e.g., adhesives, aircraft parts) and environmental cleanup (e.g.
              contaminant flow in soils).   The third project studies improved techniques for
              reasoning under uncertainty.  These techniques allow building faster and more
              accurate systems for real-time diagnosis and repair of complex systems such as
              automobiles, spacecraft, and factories.  The last project concentrates in
              developing and applying new methods and tools for program analysis to improve
              the testing and maintenance of complex software systems.  These tools are
              expected to reduce the cost and improve the reliability of new and existing
              software systems.   

