Title       : Absorption of Solar Radiation by Strongly Electrified Clouds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2000   
File        : a9818593

Award Number: 9818593
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123959             (Estimated)
Investigator: Petr Chylek pchylek@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Observations of the solar radiant energy incident upon clouds and emerging from
              them indicate that clouds absorb more radiation than predicted by scattering
              theory.  A possible explanation of this discrepancy, called anomalous cloud
              absorption, is that the theory neglects the effects of electrical charges on
              the surface of the cloud drops.  Most drops are in fact charged, the effect of
              which is to introduce a surface current that is neglected in conventional Mie
              scattering theory.  There is no available theory to account for the effect of
              the surface current, although approximate calculations suggest that charged
              drops should absorb more light than electrically neutral drops.  This project
              consists of an experimental and theoretical determination of the extent to
              which the presence of charge affects the scattering and absorbing properties of
              drops.  Initially the scattering phase function of charged drops will be
              measured and compared with that of uncharged drops to determine the extent and
              character of the effect.  The dependence on wavelength, drop size, and charge
              will be assessed.  Next, a theoretical analysis will determine empirically the
              functional form of the surface current needed to explain the observed phase
              functions.  This information will then be used to modify the Mie scattering
              theory to include a surface current term and enable calculation of the
              absorbing properties of charged drops.  The importance of this work is that it
              could both provide a partial explanation of anomalous cloud absorption and
              improve the parameterization of radiative transfer in atmospheric computer
              models. 
