Title       : Optical Dating Tests of Quaternary Sediments from the Central Arctic Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a9818070

Award Number: 9818070
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124293             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn W. Berger gwberger@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Berger
OPP-98-18070


The Arctic region has been predicted to be
              very sensitive to global climatic changes.  Sediments deposited in the Arctic
              Ocean may record signals of past Arctic environmental changes such as growth
              and decay of circum-Arctic grounded ice sheets, meltwater discharges, and
              changes in extent and composition of central Arctic Ocean sea-ice cover.
              However, since recent glaciations/interglaciations (the last several hundred
              thousand (ka) years), these sediments have been difficult or impossible to
              date. Absolute dating of Arctic Ocean sediments has remained largely an enigma,
              and therefore the paleoceanographic and paleoclimatic Pleistocene record of the
              central Arctic Ocean is poorly known.
Radiocarbon (14C) dating is restricted
              to the last 30-40 ka and only recently has high precision dating been
              developed. Oxygen-isotope and paleomagnetic stratigraphy depend on uniform and
              continuous sedimentation.  Oxygen-isotope stratigraphy is problematic because
              foraminiferal abundances are discontinuous in the Arctic. Nevertheless, for
              accurate correlation of the depositional history of the Arctic Ocean with other
              oceans and circum-Arctic lands, numeric dating is essential. For example,
              isolated foraminifera abundance peaks probably represent an absence of
              extensive sea-ice cover, and so it is critical to determine the forams' ages
              for paleoclimatological studies in the Northern Hemisphere.
The Principal
              Investigator will test and develop an alternate, absolute dating technology,
              thermoluminescence (TL)-dating which has a time range of 0-400 ka for
              terrestrial sediments. He will further develop his TL-dating technique at three
              sites in the western Arctic Ocean by broadly testing the signal-zeroing and
              dosimetry assumptions of the feldspar-specific
              infrared-optically-stimulated-luminated (IR-OSL) version of optical dating. 
              The IR-OSL technique has greater inherent sensitivity and precision than TL. He
              will perform zeroing tests with sediments from upper parts of cores distributed
              across the Arctic Ocean and sediments having associated 14C dates.  Also,
              dosimetry tests will be conducted on representative cores. Finally, three
              optical-dating tests will be conducted on sediments from well-dated cores from
              the North Atlantic to provide a baseline comparison from a simpler
              environment.
This project will provide a foundation for: 1) extending
              absolute-dating chronologies for the central Arctic Ocean beyond the range of
              AMS(accelerated mass spectrometry)  14C dating; 2) direct dating of the
              preserved record of the last Arctic glacial/interglacial periods manifested by
              foram abundance peaks; and 3) providing a high-quality chronology for regional
              correlations for Arctic land-ocean correlations. Direct dating of foraminifera 
              abundance peaks on will answer important questions about the history of Arctic
              Ocean sea-ice cover.





