Title       : Macroevolution and the Unity of Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9818397

Award Number: 9818397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57777              (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd A. Grantham granthamt@cofc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College/Univ of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9123,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Evolutionary biology has developed a sophisticated casual theory to explain
              microevolution (changes within species over relatively short time spans). By
              contrast, paleontology has traditionally emphasized descriptive studies of
              macroevolutionary patterns (patterns occurring over millions of years that
              often involve multiple species). Because of their different foci, these
              disciplines remained only loosely connected until the 1970s when a gradual
              rapprochement began. This project examines the growing interconnections between
              paleontology and evolutionary theory in order to test and refine philosophical
              accounts of interdisciplinary integration and the unity of science. The central
              hypothesis to be examined is that even though the neo-Darwinian theory of
              microevolution is not sufficient to explain all macroevolutionary phenomena, it
              is both possible and desirable to more fully integrate the paleobiological and
              microevolutionary perspectives on macroevolution.

This professional
              development fellowship will allow a philosopher of biology to work closely with
              faculty in the Committee on Evolutionary Biology at the University of Chicago.
              Close collaboration with active scientists will allow the PI to develop a more
              refined understanding of complex scientific issues in order to provide a more
              adequate philosophical analysis. Specifically, the PI will examine four areas
              where biologists have worked to unify the micro- and macroevolutionary
              perspectives: adaptive radiation, mass extinction, the evolution of large body
              size, and speciation rates. This research will (1) increase awareness of this
              important area of scientific work within science studies disciplines, (2)
              evaluate the benefits and limits of interdisciplinary integration, (3)
              critically examine the prospects for non-reductively unifying these
              disciplines, and (4) help practicing biologists identify both the potential
              benefits and the obstacles preventing a more integrated theory of
              macroevolution.

