Title       : Dissertation Research: Theory Evaluation in Population Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1999      
File        : a9818095

Award Number: 9818095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7995               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lindley Darden darden@carnap.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Theory evaluation has been an enduring and important topic in the history and
              philosophy of science literature. Philosophers of biology have done some work
              on theory evaluation in population genetics. However, it has been limited to
              the role experimentation plays in evaluation and to general criteria for
              evaluating empirical claims made by models. This dissertation research project
              is premised on the view that there is more to theory evaluation than
              experimentation and the evaluation of empirical claims made by models.
              Differently put, theory evaluation in population genetics is a process which
              occurs throughout theory development, or the process of constructing, testing,
              and revising theories. It includes what philosophers of biology have already
              contributed, but it also includes evaluation criteria that are operative during
              the construction and revision of theories. Theory evaluation is not merely the
              testing of completed theories or aspects of completed theories. This project
              examines theory evaluation in the context of theory development in population
              genetics. The goal is to fill a gap in the philosophy of biology literature.
              The project will  result in an historical and philosophical examination of the
              ongoing R.A. Fisher-Sewall Wright debate in population genetics. The
              Fisher-Wright debate is a theory choice debate that concerns the extent to
              which either Fisher's or Wright's population genetics theories are applicable
              to evolution in natural populations. The debate is currently in its eighth
              decade unresolved. By critically examining the criteria used to evaluate
              Fisher's and Wright's theories during the debate, the project  will attempt to
              construct a philosophical view on theory evaluation in population genetics. The
              Fisher-Wright debate has been discussed in the history of biology literature
              from its inception in the early 1920s to the early 1960s (the death of Fisher).
              In the main, the Fisher-Wright debate has been presented either in the context
              of its role in the evolutionary synthesis of the 1930s through -1950s, the
              unification of numerous fields of evolutionary biology, or as part of Fisher's
              or Wright's scientific biography. It has not been analyzed strictly as a theory
              choice debate. The debate has recently been rekindled in the biology literature
              and indicates that it has been active from the 1920s to the present. A
              preliminary examination of the Fisher-Wright debate has revealed six criteria
              for the evaluation of population genetics theories. Some of the criteria have
              been discussed in previous, and more general, philosophical work on theory
              choice. These criteria include, e.g., internal consistency, generality in scope
              of application, experimental adequacy. Other criteria appear not to have been
              discussed in any historical or philosophical context. These criteria include
              "representational adequacy," "computational tractability," and the criterion
              that theories must "contain experimentally measurable parameters." This project
              is expected  to yield further criteria as well as revealing their hierarchy of
              application.
