Title       : Collaborative Research: Fundamental Investigations of Modeling for LES of
               Atmospheric Boundary Layer Flow Near the Land Atmosphere Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a9818485

Award Number: 9818485
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164175             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Eichinger william-eichinger@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of this research is to study air motion and transport in the
              Atmospheric Boundary Layer (ABL) at spatial scales smaller than the smallest
              spacing of the grids used in Large-eddy Simulations (LES), and to use the
              knowledge gained to improve parameterizations in  LES.  Large-eddy simulation
              is playing an increasingly important role in improving our understanding of
              land-atmosphere interaction at scales that are relevant in the ABL. 
              Understanding of this interaction is important for both climate and mesoscale
              models.  

The studies will be based on field measurements using arrays of
              sonic anemometers and a lidar velocimeter currently being developed.  There
              will be two field campaigns.  One will take place near Iowa City, IA.  It will
              include an array of three-dimensional sonic anemometers and fast-response
              hot-film sensors.  The site consists primarily of a grass field.  Data will be
              collected over a six-week period.  The second field campaign will take place
              near Davis, CA over a one-month period and will use the wind lidar and elastic
              lidar to study the depth of the ABL, arrays of sonic anemometers and standard
              flux-energy balance instrumentation.  

The main result of this project will
              be that LES will be able to simulate turbulence in the atmospheric boundary
              layer more realistically.

