Title       : Scholarships for Archaeological Training for Native Americans and Native
               Hawaiians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1999  
File        : a9818087

Award Number: 9818087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39375              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joe E. Watkins jwatkins@telepath.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc For Amer Archaeology
	      900 2nd St. NE #12
	      Washington, DC  200023557    202/232-8800

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Joe Watkins and the Society for
              American Archaeology will expand their Arthur C. Parker fellowship program
              which provides archaeological training for Native Americans and Native
              Hawaiians. Currently the fellowship provides $1,500 yearly to permit one
              student to participate in a summer archaeological field school or similar
              training activity. The NSF award will permit the size of the award to be
              doubled and thus allow payment of both a stipend and tuition costs. The award
              will also increase the number of yearly scholarships to 4, all at a $3,000
              level for a period of three years. The program is administered by the Society
              for American Archaeology which has established rules for the competition,
              organizes evaluation of proposals and selects the awardees. The Society also
              widely announces the availability of these funds.  The most immediate goals of
              the fellowship are to encourage Native Americans and Hawaiians to pursue
              archaeological careers and also to gain insight and understanding which will be
              useful to the communities in which they reside.

Native Americans and
              Hawaiians are under-represented in the ranks of professional archaeologists and
              in part this is because of lack of familiarity with the field. Unfortunately
              Native American and Hawaiian communities are often at odds with archaeologists
              over who should control cultural remains and how these should be treated. In
              good measure this situation results from lack of mutual understanding in both
              communities. It is essential for the future of archaeology in America that
              links between the two groups be strengthened and that a corps of individuals
              who are familiar with both worlds be developed. The Society for American
              Archaeology program should help to accomplish these goals.

