Title       : A Longitudinal Study of Friendships Among Urban African American, Latino, &
               Asian American Adolescents from Low-Income Families
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a9818860

Award Number: 9818860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201894             (Estimated)
Investigator: Niobe Way nw4@is.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Close friendships among adolescents are known to contribute to cognitive and
              social development, psychological adjustment, and future socio-economic health.
              Adolescents who have difficulties finding or maintaining friendships are more
              likely as adults to be unemployed, be overly aggressive, or to experience
              serious mental health problems. Past research has uncovered many of the
              correlates, consequences, and quality of adolescent friendships. However, two
              constraints produce a limit on understanding of adolescent friendships. First,
              past research on friendships has focused primarily on white, middle class
              adolescents. Second, past research has not been conducted on the contextual
              factors that predict these formative relationships over time. The current
              program of research responds to these limitations by continuing a longitudinal,
              quantitative and qualitative study of friendships among urban African-American,
              Latino, and Asian American adolescents from low-income families. Two waves of
              data were collected in the fall of 1997 and the fall of 1998 when the
              adolescents were in the ninth and tenth grade, respectively. The follow-up
              study seeks to collect two more waves of data during the fall of 1999 and the
              spring of 2001 when the adolescents are seniors in high school and one-year out
              of high school, respectively. Drawing from ecological theories of development,
              the study addresses three sets of research questions: 1) How do contextual
              variables (family relationships, parental attitudes and rules, school climate,
              and neighborhood climate) influence the quality and characteristics of
              adolescent friendships? 2) What are the consequences of the quality and
              characteristics of friendships on psychological and behavioral adjustment over
              time? 3) How do adolescents experience their friendships? What are the gender
              and ethnic differences and age-related changes in their experiences of
              friendships? Why do such differences and changes occur? Understanding the
              mechanisms and factors that enhance or undermine friendships among urban,
              ethnic minority, low SES youth is critical to help such youth grow to be
              well-adjusted and healthy adults.

