Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Cryptographic Algorithms and Systems on
               Reconfigurable Hardware
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1998  
File        : a9818415

Award Number: 9818415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christof Paar christof@ece.wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9818415
Paar, Christof
Worcester Polytechnic Institute

Cryptographic
              Algorithms and Systems on Reconfigurable Hardware

This research
              instrumentation enables research projects in:

- Public-Key Algorithms on
              Reconfigurable Hardware,
- Private-Key Algorithms on Reconfigurable Hardware,
              and 
- Algorithm-Agile Cryptographic Systems.

To support the aforementioned
              projects, this award contributes to the purchase of digital hardware
              development equipment--workstations, a logic analyzer, a pulse/data generator,
              a digital oscilloscope, power supplies, etc. -- by the Department of Electrical
              and Computer Engineering at Worcester Polytechnic Institute. Cryptography is of
              central importance for security in information technology systems.  Due to the
              algorithm independent design paradigm of modern security protocols, high
              flexibility with respect to algorithm choice and algorithm parameters is
              extremely desirable.  At the same time the hardware realization of
              cryptographic algorithms is highly desirable for performance as well as for
              physical security reasons.  In order to overcome the reduced flexibility of
              traditional hardware approaches, the implementation of cryptographic alrogithms
              on reconfigurable hardware (RCHW) is a promising answer.  The research
              conducted through the requested equipment (high-end workstations and a hardware
              development lab) deals with the detailed investigation and implementation of
              the cited research using RCHW.  The VHDL based designs of full-size public and
              private-key algorithms pose challenges to existing automated design tools
              (synthesis and place and route tools) which can only be met with the requested
              high-end workstations.  The physical implementation of algorithm-agile systems,
              such as high performance prototype boards that allow algorithm switch on the
              fly, requires modern hardware development tools.  The required hardware
              development equipment includes a logic analyzer, data and functions generators,
              and digital oscilloscopes.
