Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Enabling Technology for High-Performance
               Heterogeneous Clusters Focusing on Grid Middleware, Fault Tolerance & Sparse
               Matrix Computations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1999  
File        : a9818334

Award Number: 9818334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack J. Dongarra dongarra@cs.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Plank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Padma Raghavan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9818334
Dongarra, Jack J.
Plank, James S.
University of Tennessee

Enabling
              Technology for High-Performance Heterogeneous Clusters Focusing on Grid
              Middleware, Fault Tolerance and Sparse Matrix Computations

This research
              instrumentation enables research projects in:

- Harnessing Cluster Resources
              for Distributed Scientific Computing,
- Fast and Portable Checkpointing in
              Clusters and Clusters-of-Clusters, and
- Tools for Large-Scale Sparse Matrix
              Applications on Clusters.

To support the aforementioned projects, this award
              contributes to the purchase of a 32-node high performance cluster, some
              switches, workstations, and interface to existing clusters and visualization
              lab at
the University of Tennessee.  High-performance, low-latency clusters
              assembled from commodity computers and interconnects are clearly the
              cost-effective alternative to parallel supercomputers.  But the software
              environment on such clusters is primitive at best; there is an obvious need of
              tools for application development and cluster management.  The three projects
              in this proposal address this need.  Their common goal is the development of
              enabling technology for advanced scientific computing applications on
              large-scale clusters and heterogeneous clusters-of-clusters.  The proposed
              instrumentation is for a high-performance networked cluster of workstations. 
              This cluster  will be connected to two small clusters (available in the
              department) to provide a sizable, heterogeneous ``cluster-of-clusters'' with
              visualization capabilities.  This cluster-of-clusters parallel platform will be
              used for algorithm, software and tool development research in the three
              projects.
