Title       : A Confocal Microscope for Developmental and Cell Biological Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2000   
File        : a9818013

Award Number: 9818013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176747             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Skeath jskeath@genetics.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tim B. Schedl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63130    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              AWARD ABSTRACT - 9818013
Confocal Microscope for Developmental Studies - Skeath
              et al.

This award supports the purchase of a laser-scanning confocal
              microscope to follow protein expression in living as well as fixed cells,
              tissues, and developing organisms.  With this new microscope, researchers at
              Washington University will be able (i) to slice thin optical sections through
              thick fluorescent specimens; (ii) to view simultaneously the sub-cellular
              localization of three different molecules within such specimens; (iii) to
              follow in vivo the expression and localization dynamics of multiple proteins;
              (iv) to visualize specimen planes parallel to the light path; and, (v) to
              obtain high resolution 3-D views of all specimens.  The microscope will expand
              the experimental techniques presently employed by the faculty at Washington
              University in St. Louis.  The proposal details five projects where the new
              confocal microscope will have a major impact.  These projects include: (i)
              analyzing the developmental and molecular mechanisms that control the
              generation of cell diversity in the central nervous system of the Drosophila
              embryo; (ii) understanding how interactions between the cytoskeleton and
              related components drive morphological changes in epithelia using the
              Drosophila eye as a model system; (iii) tracking the transcriptional regulation
              and function of muscle-specific genes in mammalian cell lines and mouse
              embryos; (iv) determining how germ cells regulate their decision to enter, and
              their progression through, the meiotic pathway; and, (v) elucidating the
              molecular mechanisms that control fin regeneration and pigment patterning in
              the zebrafish, D. rerio.  A primary scientific and educational goal of the
              acquisition of a confocal microscope is to train researchers in the use of one
              of the most powerful microscopes used in the life sciences, so that these
              researchers may integrate the capabilities of a confocal microscope with their
              research.  To facilitate maximum utility of the microscope, two of the
              principal investigators together with a representative from the confocal
              manufacturer will carry out training sessions on a monthly basis or as demand
              dictates.  These sessions will ensure proper training for those who use the
              microscope.  In this way, the PIs hope to make the confocal accessible to any
              interested party at the university, including post-doctoral researchers as well
              as graduate and, hopefully, undergraduate students.

