Title       : Development of Synthesis, Processing, and Characterization Techniques for Next
               Generation Electroactive Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1998  
File        : a9818179

Award Number: 9818179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry R. Dalton dalton@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9818179
Dalton
Two areas of research activity will be pursued:  (1) The design
              and synthesis of new polymeric electroactive materials relevant to
              electro-optic modulation, optical amplification, and sensor protection; and (2)
              the development and utilization of new forms of spectroscopy that permit
              improved characterization of material electroactivity.  The first area of
              research includes the development of improved theory capable of predicting the
              supramolecular assembly and organization of electroactive polymers, the use of
              such theoretical guidance to synthesize chromophore-containing polymer
              materials that can, with appropriate processing (e.g., electric field poling
              near the polymer glass transition temperature), produce materials exhibiting
              large electro-optic activity, the development of new lattice hardening chemical
              reactions to lock-in processing-induced electro-optic activity,  and the use of
              such polymeric materials for the fabrication of integrated "opto-chips", i.e.,
              integrating VLSI semiconductor electronics with polymeric electro-optic
              modulator circuitry.  Control of supramolecular (nanoscale) architecture will
              also be extended to the development of other technologically important
              polymeric systems including stable polymer materials incorporating
              electroactive dendrimer materials.  Again, new theoretical design concepts will
              be applied to develop materials with controlled nanoscale molecular
              organization and controlled intermolecular electronic interactions.  Polymer
              processing will be used to achieve final material properties necessary for
              practical (ultimately commercial) implementation of materials produced.  In the
              second area of research focus, particular attention will be given to the
              development of new techniques of femtosecond spectroscopy that are particularly
              relevant for the characterization of electroactive polymeric materials.  These
              include techniques for improved measurement of "instantaneous" optical
              nonlinearities necessary for understanding both the magnitude of various
              macroscopic optical nonlinearities and necessary for understanding materials
              response times.  Particularly, focus will be given to development of  the new
              technique of frequency-agile, near-degenerate, multiple-wave-mixing
              spectroscopy and exploitation of the "signal-lattice" detection scheme that
              permits simultaneous measurement of the real and imaginary components of
              various optical nonlinearities.  Information from these techniques will be used
              to evaluate the appropriateness of new materials for various practical photonic
              applications.  Studies will also define photochemical stability of molecules
              and will provide fundamental insight into subtleties of excited energy transfer
              relevant to processes such as light harvesting.
%%%
Previous NSF supported
              research has resulted in new state-of-the-art telecommunication and signal
              processing polymeric electro-optic modulator (PEOM) devices characterized by
              bandwidths of greater than 100 GHz, drive voltage requirements of less than 5
              volts (digital voltage levels), and total insertion losses on the order of 4dB.
               Such modulators are likely to be critical components of future information
              superhighways as well as being used for signal detection, flat panel displays,
              CATV, radar applications, guidance systems, information processing, and signal
              routing in a variety of optical networks.  Polymeric modulators are currently
              being evaluated as components of next generation high bandwidth internet
              communication.  In like manner, improved fiber optical amplification and white
              light harvesting materials have been developed that promise important
              improvement in fiber optic communication.  Very fundamental theoretical
              understanding resulting from this work will likely have far ranging impact on
              the scientific understanding of solid and liquid state materials and will
              likely provide important guidance for the synthesis of materials with
              architectural control at the nanometer level and special properties derivative
              from such organization.
*** 

