Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Public Opinion and
               Corporate Goverance in Celebration, Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9818536

Award Number: 9818536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $958                (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest Yanarella ejyana@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral dissertation Research Support project investigates company towns
              in the United States and explores how they have changed over the past one
              hundred years.  Initially designed by budding industrial manufacturers to
              centralize production operations in a single place, company towns have emerged
              in contemporary times as exclusive suburban hamlets for the upper middle class
              stressing homogeneity, security and community.  Industrial towns centered
              around the extraction and production of a single good, such as the plethora of
              coal towns which dotted the landscape of Eastern Kentucky during the last
              century, have given way to private gated communities whose inhabitants are the
              telecommuters driving the service economy.  The objective in this Dissertation
              is to track these changes in urban form and political economy and attempt,
              using quantitative and qualitative methodologies, to explore the ramifications
              corporate towns as profit-oriented enterprises have on the development of
              viable communities.

The towns chosen for this study are Pullman, Illinois
              -an example of industrial paternalism from the Gilded Age; Radburn, New
              Jersey-the Regional Planning Association of America's ill fated planned
              community constructed on the eve of the Great Depression; and Celebration,
              Florida-the Disney Corporation's attempt at constructing a community based on
              its version of the values of 1950s America.  Each town speaks both to the
              conditions of urban life at the time of its prominence as well as to the
              contemporary modes of political economy and culture informing its
              emergence.

This award allows the Doctoral Dissertation student to undertake
              a mail survey of the residents of Celebration, Florida.  Thus, the comparative
              study will have statistical data by which to compare the communities and which
              will contribute to literatures on public opinion in privately operated
              cities.

This Doctoral dissertation Research Support project investigates
              company towns in the United States and explores how they have changed over the
              past one hundred years.  Initially designed by budding industrial manufacturers
              to centralize production operations in a single place, company towns have
              emerged in contemporary times as exclusive suburban hamlets for the upper
              middle class stressing homogeneity, security and community.  Industrial towns
              centered around the extraction and production of a single good, such as the
              plethora of coal towns which dotted the landscape of Eastern Kentucky during
              the last century, have given way to private gated communities whose inhabitants
              are the telecommuters driving the service economy.  The objective in this
              Dissertation is to track these changes in urban form and political economy and
              attempt, using quantitative and qualitative methodologies, to explore the
              ramifications corporate towns as profit-oriented enterprises have on the
              development of viable communities.

The towns chosen for this study are
              Pullman, Illinois -an example of industrial paternalism from the Gilded Age;
              Radburn, New Jersey-the Regional Planning Association of America's ill fated
              planned community constructed on the eve of the Great Depression; and
              Celebration, Florida-the Disney Corporation's attempt at constructing a
              community based on its version of the values of 1950s America.  Each town
              speaks both to the conditions of urban life at the time of its prominence as
              well as to the contemporary modes of political economy and culture informing
              its emergence.

This award allows the Doctoral Dissertation student to
              undertake a mail survey of the residents of Celebration, Florida.  Thus, the
              comparative study will have statistical data by which to compare the
              communities and which will contribute to literatures on public opinion in
              privately operated cities.


