Title       : Denaturalizing Social Anthropology: Biological Reasoning and Social Inquiry,
               1859-1926
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1999     
File        : a9818167

Award Number: 9818167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henrika Kuklick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In carrying out this project the Principal Investigator will complete the
              research for a book that will specify the reasoning underlying the theory and
              method of functionalist anthropology. Formulated in Britain in the 1920s, the
              functionalist model influenced social scientists of all types throughout the
              world. Not least of the reasons for its importance was its popularity among
              American social scientists, whose global prestige rose dramatically after World
              War II, among whom functionalist theory patterned after the British model was
              the dominant paradigm until the 1960s. Functionalism's history has been poorly
              understood, however.
For functionalists, social anthropology was an autonomous
              enterprise, whereas their predecessors had coupled it to natural scientific
              inquiry. The investigator has previously shown that functionalists' account of
              the emergence of their scheme was revisionist history -- which historians of
              anthropology have mistakenly accepted. Functionalism derived from inquiries
              informed by natural science -- by both Darwinian biogeography and energetic
              physiology. Darwinian precepts suggested that the Australian region was a
              strategic site for anthropological investigations -- the most important of
              these being studies of the Torres Straits Islanders and the Aborigines of
              central Australia conducted at the instigation of A. C. Haddon and Baldwin
              Spencer (both trained biologists) respectively -- the conclusions of which,
              paradoxically, led anthropologists to argue that biological variations within
              the human species were unrelated to behavioral variations. Energetic physiology
              informed the field research method defined by W. H. R. Rivers, the most
              distinguished scientist who participated in Haddon's Torres Straits Expedition,
              whose methodological guidelines gained wide acceptance at the same time as his
              model of the anthropologist as an embodied instrument (a variant of the scheme
              that linked ontogeny to phylogeny) was disregarded.
From individual and
              institutional archival collections, the investigator will reconstruct the
              social and intellectual networks that linked social anthropologists and other
              naturalists from the middle of the nineteenth century through the first decades
              of the twentieth. Her new book should reach an audience that includes both
              anthropologists and historians, as has her previous work. They will likely find
              this project interesting because it describes one resolution of the classic
              debate over the relative importance of nature and nurture in the determination
              of human behavior, a debate which has recently grown as intense as it was a
              century ago -- and which for anthropologists in particular is freighted with
              prescriptive implications for research.

