Title       : Collaborative Research: Using Chemical Weathering and Pedogenesis in Karkevagge,
               Northern Sweden to Investigate Local Landscape Development in a Regional
               Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a9818667

Award Number: 9818667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110180             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin E. Thorn c-thorn@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Darmody  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                           The research will provide comprehensive information on the chemical
              weathering of surficial rock and on soil development in a mountainous arctic
              environment in northern Sweden.  The present work builds on a famous study
              undertaken in the 1950s and extends it into a new realm of scientific
              investigation while simultaneously expanding research undertaken in a single
              valley into a regional framework. The rock portion of the study includes
              detailed investigation of how naturally-occurring surface and near-surface rock
              breaks down chemically, plus the extraction and analysis of machine-polished
              rock disks which were inserted into several different soil categories five
              years ago. Soil development is largely chemically driven, and the
              soil
investigation will provide a rare, perhaps unique, view of soil
              development within the Scandinavian arctic using the American Soil Taxonomy.
 
                         The research offers two important contributions. First, chemical
              processes at the land
surface in cold environments are still poorly
              understood. The present work will make a significant contribution to this
              poorly developed area. Second, climatic forecasts indicate that the most
              dramatic changes in the foreseeable future will be in the high latitudes. The
              chemical signals being evaluated in the present work afford the prospect of
              being excellent indicators of climatically-induced changes at the earth's
              surface. Such indicators of environmental change are critical if people are to
              continue to use fragile arctic environments during periods of climatic change. 
              Several aspects of the research embrace cutting edge techniques such as
              cosmogenic dating, and also include development of what should be an important
              new dating material for radiocarbon dating.
              

