Title       : A Research Ethics Infrastructure for Graduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2001     
File        : a9818359

Award Number: 9818359
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236269             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebeca C. Rufty becky_rufty@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Debra W. Stewart  (Principal Investigator former)
              Tom Regan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Researchers, educators and policy makers are seeking innovative ways to address
              the subject of graduate training in research ethics.  With this three year
              award, North Carolina State University will undertake a modular approach to
              phase in a research ethics infrastructure and related curricula throughout the
              graduate programs.  The project will change campus culture by better preparing
              students and faculty to recognize ethical issues and how they differ from other
              kinds of issues; reason about ethical issues and apply appropriate concepts;
              act in a morally responsible manner; know the ethical responsibilities of
              research in a given field; and use critical thinking when faced with issues in
              research ethics.  An interdisciplinary faculty Committee on Research Ethics,
              representing the sciences, engineering, and humanities, devised the plan and
              will oversee implementation, with help from faculty, graduate students,
              emeritus faculty and industry and public representatives. The infrastructure
              includes campus-wide development and distribution of resources for research
              ethics, including instructional modules, biennial institutes for faculty, and
              lectures by exemplary researchers and mentors.  Each year, the Research Ethics
              Fellows Program will select ten graduate students who, with their faculty
              mentors, will participate in a wide variety of activities, including a formal
              seminar, that will prepare them to assume leadership in applying critical
              reasoning to ethical problems in their fields and to create new resources,
              course offerings, and other activities in the university, on its research
              Centennial Campus, and in the Research Triangle area.  An evaluation plan will
              monitor the extent to which the program becomes part of the university's
              research infrastructure and influences the institutional culture as well as the
              students and faculty who participate.  Development staff will begin to build
              private funding to ensure continuation, potentially in the form of a Centennial
              Center for Ethics.
