Title       : GOALI Project: Comprehensive Model of Molecular Transport and Delivery Through
               the Skin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1999    
File        : a9818160

Award Number: 9818160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193565             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johannes M. Nitsche nitsche@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald B. Kasting  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9818160  Nitsche  Permeation of molecules through skin is a phenomenon central
              to the function of drug patches and transdermally delivered drugs, topically
              applied pharmaceuticals, and a variety of personal cleansing, skin-care and
              beauty-care products.  Better understanding of this process is currently one of
              the
most important factors underlying biomedical advancement and product
              development in these areas.  It is also key to safety issues and the assessment
              of risks associated with dermal exposure to chemicals and drugs.  Strong need
              therefore exists to be able to predict how, and how fast, different molecules
              get through the skin.  Filling this need requires a basic research effort aimed
              at understanding the operative transport processes in microscopic
              detail.

The proposed GOALI project will combine academic and industrial
              resources to develop a comprehensive theoretical model for predicting skin
              permeability, embodying advances difficult or impossible to achieve within
              either type of setting individually.  It is based on collaboration between a
              basic academic researcher
in the field of microscopic transport phenomena with
              demonstrated experience in biological applications (Johannes M. Nitsche, State
              University of New York at Buffalo), and an industrial partner offering uniquely
              extensive research experience, state-of-the-art experimental capability in skin
              transport and ultra-
structural studies, and strong interest in improved
              predictive models (Gerald B. Kasting, the Procter & Gamble Company, Miami
              Valley Laboratories, Cincinnati).  The project will produce theory and
              computational techniques to predict both the basic permeability properties of
              the epidermal barrier, and the permeability properties of hair follicles and
              sweat ducts, which penetrate through this surface barrier and provide a
              shortcut to deeper tissue and the body's circulation.  A distinguishing feature
              of the proposed theory is physical realism, via the incorporation of extensive
              information and experimental data on tissue structure and material properties
              at the microscopic scale.  This level of realism will ultimately make it
              possible to predict how fast a given drug or chemical will penetrate through
              the skin given only its identity (molecular structure) and a specification of
              how the application or exposure occurs.

The permeability model resulting
              from the proposed project will be relevant in some degree to most transdermal
              drug delivery systems, topically applied drugs and skin-care products currently
              in use, under development or under contemplation. It will also be applicable to
              the risk assessment process for a variety of
chemicals and products that
              contact the skin.
