Title       : Alkane Oxidation Catalyzed by Mononuclear Non-Heme Iron Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a9818492

Award Number: 9818492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pradip K. Mascharak mascharak@chemistry.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,9183,BIOT,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research on alkane oxidation by Dr. Pradip K. Mascharak of the
              Chemistry Department, University of California - Santa Cruz.  A series of 
              non-porphyrin ligands with biologically relevant donor groups will be
              synthesized and used to prepare iron complexes that will functionalize C-H
              bonds.  Some of these ligands have been patterned on bleomycin, iron complexes
              of which have been shown to have monooxygenase activity.  A second subset of
              ligands contains strong field donor groups to stabilize hypervalent iron
              centers implicated in model complexes.  The third subset of ligands can
              accommodate ligand-based radicals.  All the ligands are pentadentate and will
              afford distorted square pyramidal Fe(II) and Fe(III) complexes that form low
              spin peroxo Fe(III) complexes when reacted with dioxygen or peroxides.  It is
              this highly oxidizing species that is expected to promote rapid
              functionalization of alkanes and alkenes under mild conditions. Systematic
              alteration of ligands will be used to find optimal conditions for oxidation of
              various alkanes.  Reaction rates, product distributions, and stability of the
              catalytic species will be considered.  The reaction pathway will be probed
              using kinetic isotope effect studies, radical trapping, and stereochemical
              product analysis.  Various spectroscopic techniques (Raman, X-ray, EPR,
              Mossbauer) will be used to determine the structural and electronic features of
              the intermediates.

The goal of this research is to design new non-heme
              mononuclear iron complexes that catalyze alkane oxidations and that can also be
              used to probe the details of the reaction pathways.  Alkane oxidation is an
              important process because methane and other saturated hydrocarbons are abundant
              and have great potential as starting materials for many essential chemicals,
              yet are resistant to reaction.  Students involved in the project will learn a
              wide variety of skills in synthesis and instrumental analysis and will gain
              experience in an interdisciplinary effort that bridges biology and industrial
              catalyis.
