Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Experimental Infrastructure for Indexing,
               Retrieval and Robust Presentation of Multimedia Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1998  
File        : a9818289

Award Number: 9818289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aidong Zhang azhang@cse.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rohini Srihari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 6840,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9818289
Zhang, Aidong
Srihari, Rohini K.
State University of New York at
              Buffalo

CISE Research Infrastructure:  Experimental Infrastructure for
              Indexing, Retrieval, and Robost Presentation of Multimedia Data

This
              research instrumentation enables research projects in:

-  Consistent and
              Robust Retrieval, Transmission and Presentation of Multimedia Data
- 
              Multimedia Image annotation, Indexing and Retrieval, and 
-  Multidimensional
              Data Mining and Applications in Large-Scale Multimedia Databases

This
              research instrumentation grant contributes to the purchase of a high
              performance storage system to establish an experimental infrastructure for
              conducting research on multimedia information management and retrieval.  The
              requested instrumentation enables three projects which require high-capacity
              machines with large memory and huge disk space:  supporting customized
              multimedia presentations in distributed environments; multimedia data
              annotation, indexing and retrieval; and data mining and applications in
              large-scale multimedia databases.  The first project establishes an underlying
              framework and develops techniques for ensuring consistent and robust retrieval,
              transmission and presentation of multimedia data.  Experimental research will
              be conducted on concurrent presentations of heterogeneous multimedia data,
              robust end-to-end transmission protocols, incorporation of user interactions
              and delay effects in synchronizing strategies.  The second project investigates
              the integration of text and photographic information in both the indexing and
              retrieval stages of a large-scale picture retrieval system.  Experimental
              analysis will be conducted to demonstrate the utility of these techniques.  The
              third project investigates multi-resolution clustering approaches on vast
              amount of multi-dimensional data generated from real-life images.  The
              peformance of the clustering approaches will be studied and the effectiveness
              of these approaches will be demonstrated through different types of
              distributions of data.  
