Title       : Assessing Research and Development Projects' Impacts on Scientific and Technical
               Human Capital Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2002  
File        : a9818229

Award Number: 9818229
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316171             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Bozeman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Juan D. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1094,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Studies of innovation have established the importance of close coupling in
              knowledge transfer networks for successful innovations in the economy. They
              show that the flow of people from one organization, firm, or group to another
              is key in the process of knowledge exchange. However, there is not much
              systematic, detailed knowledge of the interactions of research contexts and the
              career paths of individuals, and the actual impact paths which these
              individuals create as they move to new positions.  The proposed research will
              address this issue by mapping the career paths of researchers against features
              of the research projects they worked in. Beginning with at least 20 projects in
              the U.S. and France, most from university settings but a few from government
              laboratories, the investigators will test several hypotheses about the
              connection between the characteristics of team oriented R&D projects and the
              diffusion of scientific and technical human capital via the "projects'
              graduates."  The key research question is: "What characteristics of
              team-oriented R&D projects affect the long-term careers of persons involved in
              those projects and, in turn, the human resources capacity available for
              creating knowledge and spurring technology development?"  Prior case studies by
              these investigators show that human resources development in R&D projects often
              provides opportunities for scientists, engineers and technicians to move into
              entirely new work contexts and specialties (including, among others, technology
              development in industry, equipment development, technique and craft, and new
              fields of science). Thus, the diffusion of human capital often sets new
              directions for scientific research and technology development. The proposed
              research seeks not only to map these processes but also to determine the ways
              in which the management structure, content and linkages of R&D projects lead to
              different sorts of human resources and capacity outcomes.  The research design
              is multi-field and multi-national, focused on projects in two broad,
              multidisciplinary scientific fields and in two nations. Following work with
              Department of Energy funded projects, the team will examine energy and
              environmental projects, including both basic research projects and more applied
              projects. Following the recent research focus of its French collaborators, the
              team will examine research in biotechnology and life sciences.  The research
              will have two major components. Phase I will consist of intensive case studies
              of projects originating between three and ten years ago, in order to learn as
              much as possible about their structure, management style, personnel and
              results. Phase II uses questionnaires and interviews to determine the career
              trajectories, level of human capital endowments, productivity and network
              linkages of "project graduates." This approach will contribute to understanding
              the ways in which experiences in those focal projects have affected the career
              paths and contributions of participants.  Results will include individual and
              joint publications and a joint workshop.
