Title       : Informing Contingent Valuation Methods With Internet Surveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9818108

Award Number: 9818108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sandra L. Schneider                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239998             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Weimer dewr@troi.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alok K. Bohara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol L. Silva  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Berrens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hank C. Jenkins-Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9818108
Weimer

Estimating the values consumers place on passively consumed
              goods, such as the existence of unique natural resources, can only be done by
              posing to them hypothetical questions intended to elicit their willingness to
              pay for changes in these goods.  These questions are administered through
              contingent valuation (CV) surveys.  Recent years have witnessed both an
              expansion of the use of CV surveys, especially in environmental damage
              assessment, and the development of ever more sophisticated methods for
              conducting them.  Nevertheless, a number of fundamental methodological issues
              remain unresolved.  One barrier to faster progress in resolving them is the
              high cost of administering CV surveys through person-to-person, mail, or
              telephone interviews, which hinders the use of alternative CV instruments
              within a single study to determine which instruments are more reliable.  This
              research project takes advantage of the relatively low cost of administering CV
              surveys through the Internet to address several methodological issues within
              the context of a study of people's willingness to pay to reduce emissions of
              greenhouse gases.

The most profound methodological question addressed by the
              project is whether the Internet could eventually replace the telephone for
              administering CV surveys.  It does so by making use of a data base of
              cooperative respondents being developed by Harris Black International to
              conduct parallel Internet and telephone CV surveys.  Beyond the question of
              whether the Internet could be a replacement technology for telephone CV
              surveys, the project uses Internet surveys as a tool for exploring several
              methodological issues relevant to telephone surveys.  Specifically, the project
              addresses the impact of budget allocation questions and information provision
              on measured willingness to pay by comparing CV surveys administered through the
              Internet.  The variation across budget allocation questions allows for
              investigation of ways of structuring instruments to encourage respondents to
              answer willingness to pay questions more in line with the way they make
              decisions to purchase market goods.  Several of the instruments utilize the
              interactive capabilities of the Internet to allow respondents to select and
              consult information that would be impractical to provide through telephone
              interviews.  These comparisons of instruments, which will be based on data from
              6,000 respondents, may also demonstrate the viability of the Internet as a
              relatively low cost research tool for the development of better CV and other
              survey instruments.


