Title       : Micromagnetism and Microstructure of Ferromagnetic Thin Film Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2003  
File        : a9818296

Award Number: 9818296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299832             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernst Bauer ERNST.BAUER@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9818296
Bauer

The goal of this project is the microscopic understanding of
              (1) the interrelation between the microstructure of ultrathin film systems and
              their magnetic properties and (2) of the dependence of these properties upon
              parameters such as film thickness, surfactant, temperature and magnetic field
              strength, using the novel technique of spin-polarized low energy electron
              microscopy combined with magneto-optic Kerr effect measurements. The study
              focuses on the following problems: (i) the influence of grain structure and 
              roughness of the interface and of the clean or adsorbate-covered surface on the
              magnetic domain structure, (ii) the interlayer coupling between ferromagnetic
              layers through nonmagnetic or antiferromagnetic spacers, (iii) the influence of
               the microstructure on the domain wall motion and (iv) the dependence of the
              domain structure and of the wall motion on the geometry of the magnetic system
              in submicron dimensions. The results are important not only for the basic
              understanding of ferromagnetism in reduced dimensions but also for the
              development and optimization of magnetic recording and sensing devices.  
              
%%%
In the past all electronic devices were based on the fact that the
              electron has a charge. In recent years great efforts were made to develop
              devices which make use of the fact that the electron also has a spin. This has
              lead already to new high density information storage media and sensors based on
              ultrathin metallic films. Still higher storage densities and smaller sensors
              are needed in the next century. To reach this goal the dependence of the
              properties of spin systems upon their microstructure must be better understood
              because they are intimately coupled. This can be best achieved using the novel
              method of spin-polarized low energy electron microscopy which images
              simultaneously spin distribution and microstructure. The study will not only
              contribute significantly to the development of the new high technology
              "spintronics" but at the same time trains students for this economically
              important field.
***


