Title       : The Effects of Land Management on Fire Regimes and Landscape-Scale Vegetation
               Patterns in the Mountain Ranges of Southern California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1999  
File        : a9818665

Award Number: 9818665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Franklin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
The terrestrial ecosystems of southern California are subject to periodic
              wildfires, but fire regimes have been altered historically by fire suppression,
              and a shift from natural lightning ignitions in summer to human-caused ignition
              sources and catastrophic fires during extreme fire weather. An altered fire
              regime has a profound influence on vegetation structure, composition and
              landscape pattern, and wildfire hazards for humans. In the proposed research, a
              computer model that simulates landscape dynamics (LANDIS, developed by David
              Mladenoff and others) will be used to predict the effects of changes in fire
              frequency, intensity and size on plant community succession, and on the
              resulting patterns of vegetation composition and structure at a regional scale
              in southern California. These changes to the fire regime may result from fire
              suppression, anthropogenic ignition, land use change, climate change, or
              interactions among these. They could result in local loss of plant species or
              communities (that are otherwise thought of as widespread, not rare), changes in
              habitat pattern with potentially negative effects on animals with limited
              dispersal ability or specific habitat requirements, and feedbacks to the fire
              regime (a more, or less, flammable landscape).

Simulation modeling is used
              to predict changes over spatial and temporal scales for which experimentation
              is impossible and monitoring data are sparse in space and time. The following
              will be addressed through modeling experiments: Do increased intervals between
              fires lead to large-scale changes in forest and chaparral species dominance and
              landscape age structure? Where do the predicted changes occur? The model
              results will be evaluated by a) testing for the significance of the difference
              in landscape patterns metrics resulting from replicated model runs; b)
              comparison with fire history maps; and c) comparison with site-specific
              patterns of vegetation dynamics reported in the literature and determined
              through re-survey of vegetation plots first surveyed in ca. 1930. Model
              predictions can yield recommendations for geographicallystratified long-term
              monitoring of future ecosystem dynamics.

