Title       : The Relationship between Welfare Benefit Levels and Premarital Childbearing in
               Context: The Role of Structural and Normative Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a9818686

Award Number: 9818686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy C. Butler amy-c-butler@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a study of welfare benefit levels and premarital childbearing.  It
              examines the extent to which the relationship between welfare benefit levels
              and premarital childbearing depends upon social and economic context.  Contexts
              are defined to include normative climate (stigma associated with nonmarital
              childbearing, stigma associated with welfare receipt, positive role models in
              the community); the extent to which contraception and abortion are options for
              young women (availability, acceptability, and affordability); and economic
              opporotunties (through parents, potential husbands and employment).  To date,
              researchers have implicitly assumed that the relationship between welfare
              benefits and premarital childbearing is constant across contexts. The current
              study examines three categories of contextual factors that may condition the
              effect of welfare benefit levels on premarital childbearing.  The hypotheses
              are tested using longitudinal data from two sources: the Panel Study of Income
              Dynamics and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. These data are
              supplemented with information on context from the General Social Surveys, the
              Current Population Surveys, and the decennial Censuses.

This study will
              improve our understanding of ways in which social policy interacts with
              cultural and economic forces to alter the structure of the family in
              contemporary societies. It will also increase our understanding of the ways in
              which economic incentives influence young women's decisions about childbearing
              and marriage.

