Title       : Collaborative Research: Glacial Valley Profile Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2000  
File        : a9818251

Award Number: 9818251
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Anderson rsand@rupture.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne P. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative proposal by the Principal Investigators at the
              University of California-Santa Cruz and University of Washington.   The
              Division of Earth Sciences (Geology and Paleontology) is contributing about
              one-third of the funding. Our understanding of how glaciers carve and sculpture
              alpine landscapes is poor. Although significant progress has been made on
              developing the physics of abrasion and sculpturing of glacial beds, glacial
              erosion into landscape models has largely been ignored.  This void in our
              knowledge base is due to the difficulty in developing a model that captures
              the: 1) growth and decay of the glacier; 2) generation and temporary storage of
              meltwater within the glacier; and 3) spatial distribution of erosion over the
              bed.  The Principal Investigators will make field measurements on the Bench
              Glacier in the Chugach Range of south-central Alaska and develop a model to
              determine how glaciers function as agents of landscape erosion.  They will
              focus on the evolution of the long valley profile which is a logical step after
              the modeling of cross-valley profile evolution recently done by Harbor. 

The
              Principal Investigators' field program will provide data sets relevant to the
              timing, spatial distribution and magnitude of erosion over the glacier bed. 
              They will use a straight one-dimensional model and incrementally add more
              complex factors such as climate forcing and topology of the glacier.  They
              will: 1) document the mass balance profile; 2) measure the pattern of surface
              speed in time and space using multiple reflectors on the ice; 3) measure the
              water and sediment output using acoustic sensors for river stage; and 4) make a
              combination of sampling and turbidity measurements for suspended sediments. 
              Sliding speed and water balance data will guide modeling of timing and pattern
              of erosion, while annual sediment yield will provide an integral constraint.
              The sediment yield complicates the relationships, but a three-year monitoring
              program will minimize variations in storage.

The staggered finite
              one-dimensional glacier model will vary in extent and thickness through time,
              driven by variations in the mass balance profile or the meteorological
              constituents that dictate precipitation and melt patterns. This approach will
              allow the Principal Investigators to incorporate important feedbacks in the
              system, including evolution of the valley shading as the valley deepens, and
              reduction of melt rate if the ice surface becomes mantled with debris. They
              will focus on water balance in the glacial system as water pressure modulates
              sliding. The instantaneous erosion rate is dictated by a glacial erosion rule
              that is tied to the calculated local sliding rate and the erodibility of the
              bed.  

The Principal Investigators will use their model to explore the
              formation of overdeepening valleys and hanging valleys.  This glacier valley
              evolution model will have broad applications because it is critically needed to
              address climate-erosion-uplift feedbacks in mountain range evolution. It will
              also provide the history of sediment and water flux from glaciated terrain,
              which modulates chemical weathering, terrace development and basin filling in
              regions downstream. A model of glacier-tributary interactions, required for the
              hanging valley problem, will provide the basis for studying jokulhlaups which
              are poorly understood hazardous phenomena. 



