Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Research in Networked Information Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1998  
File        : a9818338

Award Number: 9818338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anand Tripathi tripathi@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vipin Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zhi-Li Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shashi Shekhar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jaideep Srivastava  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9818338
Tripathi, Anand
Zhang, Zhi-Li
University of Minnesota - Twin
              Cities

CISE Research Instrumentation:  Research in Networked Information
              Systems

This research instrumentation enables research projects in:
-
              Scalable and QoS-Aware Multimedia Systems
- Agent-Based Distributed
              Computing
- High Performance Geographic Information Systems, and
- High
              Performance Data Mining

To support the aforementioned projects, this award
              contributes to the purchase, consisting mainly of a CISCO Catalyst 5505 network
              switch, two Sun Enterprise, and various Sun Ultra, by the Department of
              Computer
Science and Engineering at the University of Minnesota.  This
              instrumentation will support research in new paradigms, system architectures,
              and algorithms for network computing involving distributed multimedia systems,
              mobile Internet agents, geographic information systems (GIS), and data mining
              and information search over the Internet.  The research in distributed
              multimedia systems is investigating scalable server
architectures,
              specification of QoS measures, and mapping of QoS measures to resource
              allocation and scheduling decisions.  The research in agent-based Internet
              computing focuses on programming abstractions and their underlying mechanisms
              for secure and robust agent-based computing.  Several agent based applications
              are being investigated by this project, including a multimedia based active
              mail system.  The research activity in GIS is investigating parallelization and
              other approaches for efficient execution of range query and map overlay
              operations.  This research, together with the activities in distributed
              multimedia, is addressing QoS problems for the presentation of graphics and
              images resulting from GIS queries.  The research in data mining is
              investigating parallel algorithms for large data sets obtained from various
              Internet sites.  The synergy among the various activities of these projects is
              realized through several
focal-point applications.  These applications are
              related to agent-based multimedia mail system, Digital Earth initiative, and
              the Sky Survey project.


