Title       : Financial Econometrics and Forecasting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9818662

Award Number: 9818662
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244054             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis X. Diebold fdiebold@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This Accomplishment Based Renewal is warranted because of the impressive
              methodological and substantive contributions made under the previous NSF award
              (SBR 95-20966) to macroeconomics, finance, labor economics, and agricultural
              economics.  This renewal focuses on the connection between financial economics
              and forecasting.  The research deepens and refiner that connection from an
              econometric perspective, as it advances:
(1) measurement (e.g., new methods
              and results for both parametric and nonparametric estimation of asset return
              volatility)
(2) models (e.g., for the sources of long memory in asset market
              information arrival, with implications for asset return volatility
              dynamics)
(3) tools (e.g., for multivariate density forecast evaluation,
              calibration, and structural change detection)
(4) substantive knowledge (e.g.,
              can crash probabilities be assessed from options and related derivatives
              markets and successfully modeled as functions of observable fundamentals,
              resulting in a workable "early warning system").

The research on crash
              probabilities. fundamentals and derivatives markets is especially significant. 
               For obvious reasons, a growing number of very recent papers focus on early
              warning systems for currency crises.   Most of that literature focuses either
              on leading indicator methods, which convey information about crash
              probabilities even if those probabilities are not explicitly modeled, or
              explicit probability models such as the logistic.  This project takes a
              different, complementary, and powerful approach, which makes use of the rich
              market-based information contained in options prices to infer market-assessed
              crash probabilities. 
