Title       : Exploration of the Potential of Dilute-Solution Polymer Dynamics Measurements
               for Detection of Dynamic Spatial Heterogeneities in Glass-Forming Solvents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2001  
File        : a9818585

Award Number: 9818585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284940             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Schrag schrag@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9818585
Schrag
The proposed experimental studies will explore the potential of
              dilute-solution polymer dynamics measurements for the detection and
              characterization of dynamic spatial heterogeneities in glass-forming solvents
              at temperatures well above the glass-transition temperature.  Preliminary data
              suggests that these spatial heterogeneities probably control the short-time
              polymer dynamics.  The proposed studies fall in three general categories. 
              First, measurements will be carried out to enable comparison of the relaxation
              time spectrum breadths for several polymers initially in glass-forming solvents
              (dilute-solution conditions), with the relaxation time spectrum breadths for
              the same polymers as unentangled melts.  (Preliminary data suggests that there
              are major differences: a given polymer appears to be much more flexible in melt
              form.)  Second, the shortest polymer relaxation time, together with the
              effective viscosity of the solvating liquid, will be determined as functions of
              polymer molecular weight (low M) and concentration for as many different
              polymer/glass-forming liquid combinations as time, instrumental limitations,
              and personnel permit.  Third, examination of time-temperature superposition
              parameters and effective high-frequency oscillatory flow birefringence and/or
              viscoelastic properties for the same dilute polymer solutions as functions of
              polymer molecular weight (low M) and concentration will provide additional
              important information regarding the spatial dimensions of apparent dynamic
              heterogeneities in these liquids.  The above chain dynamics information will be
              obtained from oscillatory flow birefringence and/or viscoelasticity studies
              employing unique custom instrumentation.  All of the above, taken together, may
              provide reasonable estimates of correlation lengths and correlation lifetimes-
              and hopefully their temperature dependences- for glass-forming
              liquids.
%%%
These studies should determine whether or not apparent "polymer
              flexibility" obtained from dynamics studies of polymer solutions is actually a
              reflection of dynamic spatial heterogeneity in the solvent.  If it is, as very
              preliminary results suggest, it should provide a simple and convenient method
              for obtaining "cluster size" and "cluster-lifetimes" for such liquids, and may
              result in a much improved understanding of the role of polymer additives in
              lubricants and motor oils, enabling the development of substantially improved
              products.  In addition, for polymers with large numbers of short branches, it
              may markedly improve branching characterization by means of
              chain-dynamics-sensing experiments.  This work will be the thesis research for
              graduate students specializing in polymer chemistry.
***   

