Title       : Fractional Equipment for Cell and Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9818124

Award Number: 9818124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77295              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Sasek sasek@ulm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann M. Findley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Hecht  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana - Monroe
	      700 University Avenue
	      Monroe, LA  712090001    318/342-1010

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9818124
abstract

	This multi-user proposal is a request for basic equipment
              needed for fractionating and analyzing tissues in cell and molecular biology
              research and teaching. The equipment includes:

1. An ultracentrifuge for the
              fractionation and isolation of very small subcellular structures, cell
              proteins, viruses, DNA, etc.
2. A highspeed refrigerated centrifuge and rotors
              for preparatory separations and isolation of larger cell parts.
3. A UV/Vis
              spectrophotometer with temperature-controlled sample chamber for enzyme
              studies, chemical analyses, and DNA analysis.
4. A homogenizer to process
              tissue samples quickly and with high sample-to-sample uniformity.
5. A
              research-grade water purification system to produce high-quality water
              necessary for sensitive bichemical tests, tissue culture, and for DNA
              analyses.

Three faculty members will be the major users of the new equipment
              to extend the range of their current research by making it possible to perform
              analyses currently not possible. Improved capabilities and new
avenues of
              research will also be tied to better training of undergraduate and graduate
              students. In microbiology courses and in plant, animal, and cell physiology
              courses, important laboratory
techniques to isolate and separate subcellular
              structures and molecules will be possible. In particular, these courses will be
              able to include many of the modern techniques used in molecular biology
              and
biotechnology. 

Sasek is studying the effects of ozone stress on
              plants. Ozone, an important component of air pollution, is a significant threat
              to human health as well as plant productivity. Ozone pollution in the future
              may
also interact with rising CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere and global
              warming. The new equipment would make it possible to characterize important
              plant defense mechanisms and repair processes. One major goal is to determine
              the range of sensitivity in different genetic lines. This will contribute to a
              better understanding of plant responses to  multiple stresses.

Findley is
              studying the microsporidia, a large group of highly-specialized single-celled
              parasites that live inside the cells of various animals. Many are important
              pathogens that are not well understood. The new equipment will allow current
              research to be expanded to include more physiological studies and metabolic
              analyses to  characterize the organisms better. In particular, it will be
              possible to conduct a range of studies at several different developmental
              stages in the life cycle, further contributing to an understanding of the
              effects of parasitism on the host cell.

Hecht is conducting research on
              retroviruses of hoofed animals (sheep, goats, etc.) to study the evolutionary
              history of the viruses. The new equipment will make it possible to explore
              fully most of the important molecular biology techniques necessary to
              characterize certain genetic sequences. The movement and transmission of
              particular viral sequences is being investigated to identify those viruses that
              are ancient and therefore found in many breeds and species versus those that
              are modern and still actively spreading. This approach is also valuable for
              better understanding the spread of other important viral diseases.

NLU is
              the primary institution serving the Lower Mississippi Delta, one of the most
              impoverished economic areas in the country. One of the University is most
              important contributions has been to improve the situation of the local
              population and communities by helping to bridge cultural and economic gaps. The
              ability to provide modern, up-to-date research and teaching opportunities in
              biological sciences is crucial to
maintaining a positive impact not only for
              biology majors but also for many pharmacy and allied health-science students
              served by the department. The improved infrastructure also impacts many
              under-represented groups in biology. As an open admissions university, NLU
              serves the needs of a diverse community, thereby providing access to a higher
              percentage of under-represented groups than are often found at selective
              admissions universities.

