Title       : Chemical Process Simulation in Singular Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1999      
File        : a9818130

Award Number: 9818130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122629             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angelo Lucia lucia@egr.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Robust and rapid algorithms for solving equations relevant to chemical process
              simulation will be developed.  Singularities frequently occur in chemical
              process models.  These singularities can dramatically alter the performance of
              equation-solving methods commonly used in chemical process simulation.  Many
              current simulations based on Newton's method fail in singular regions and must
              be restarted.  This study will address the effects of singular points on
              important equation-solving aspects such as reliability, rates of convergence,
              and computational efficiency.  This work is concerned with the development of a
              novel and intelligent complex domain methodology for process simulation in
              singular regions centered around a unified theoretical and computational
              framework for (1) identifying singular regions, (2) converging to singular
              points using quadratic approximation, and (3) determining one or more solutions
              to process model equations.  The proposed approach is capable of finding
              path-disconnected solutions from a given singular point and is computationally
              efficient.  Theorems that provide rigorous theoretical guarantees of a path
              existence, placing initial values in a given basin of attraction, and global
              convergence will be proved.  The theoretical and algorithmic architectures will
              be developed in tandem, will address all types of singular points, and will be
              implemented as a set of portable Fortan 77 programs.  Simulation problems such
              as distillation, reaction engineering, and general process flowsheet examples
              will be used to verify all theoretical developments.  The algorithms developed
              may have application to improving chemical process simulations.
