Title       : Figuring Science: Metaphor, Narrative, and the Cultural Location of Scientific
               Revolutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9818930

Award Number: 9818930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77999              (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Bono   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project has as its objective reexamination of the problem of scientific
              change and its relationship to social and cultural contexts. The project will
              go beyond Thomas Kuhn's famous account of change in science, and will focus
              attention upon how the scientific, the social, and the cultural interact and
              mutually define each other. It will examine the largely neglected role of
              metaphoric processes and narrative structures in science and argue that they
              mediate the relationship among social, cultural, and technical dimensions of
              science.

This project will seek to transcend the normative, but misleading,
              account in which metaphor is relegated to, at best, a temporary and marginal
              role in science, as an element of immature scientific speculation that mature
              science systematically excludes. On the other hand, it will emphatically deny
              simplistic claims that scientific concepts are "just metaphors" and that
              scientific explanations are "merely stories."  Rather, this project will argue
              that metaphors and narratives play an important and largely unacknowledged
              cultural and cognitive role in science: they are arguably cultural tools that
              enable scientists to define procedures and interpretive strategies allowing
              them to engage nature meaningfully. In this view, "cultural" and "social"
              explanations of science are anything but attacks on the integrity, power, and
              dignity of science. Rather, the project hopes to show how the very process of
              doing science is both social and cultural work and that it is dependent upon
              narratively-produced metaphoric models to uncover features of the natural
              world. Rather than producing an array of arbitrary, equally valid, and
              "relativistic" scientific theories, it is argued that, through the mediation of
              metaphors, cultures allow scientists to grasp aspects of nature that constrain
              and partially determine theory. Without culturally produced, inherited, and
              transformed metaphors, the very ability of science to uncover and explore new
              dimensions of the natural world would be threatened.

Empirical research in
              psychology and cognitive sciences has in recent years validated the central
              role played by metaphor in cognitive processes including in the production of
              "schemas," "models," and "categories" essential to reasoning and
              problem-solving. Metaphor, and tropes more generally, have also enjoyed renewed
              interest in theoretical discussions within the humanities and the interpretive
              social sciences. Going beyond these approaches, the project takes as its task
              careful delineation and concrete exemplification of the cognitive, cultural,
              and historical operation of metaphors and tropes within science understood as
              the product of social, cultural, and technical practices. It proposes to do so
              through a combination of theoretical analysis in dialogue with relevant
              literature on metaphor, narrative, and science and case studies drawn both from
              the early modern period and twentieth-century science.

