Title       : Studies of Dynamic Phenomena in Industrial Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a9818534

Award Number: 9818534
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192287             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn Ellison gellison@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research project involves theoretical and empirical research
              into the workings of a number of specific industries. The studies are intended
              to improve our understanding of the industries involved, and, more broadly, to
              help assess the relevance of a number of economic theories of strategic
              behavior.
     One empirical study is a study of mutual funds. The project
              will involve analysis of the turnover of managers of mutual funds and of the
              behavior of fund managers. The main goal is to see whether managers' desires to
              avoid getting fired may distort their portfolio decisions. More generally,
              mutual funds provide a nice opportunity to explore "career concerns" in a real
              world setting. Another object of study is the pharmaceutical industry. Here,
              the focus will be on strategic actions which firms take as their patents are
              about to expire and they face impending generic entry. Another study will look
              at data from a large number of industries to try to understand the dynamics of
              how Silicon Valley-style concentrations of individual manufacturing industries
              arise, decline and move.
     On the theoretical side models of two dynamic
              phenomena will be developed. The first is the evolution of quality standards in
              communities. It will focus on how standards, which are set in a decentralized
              manner, tend to evolve over time (with the prototypical example being the
              dramatic slowdown over the last twenty-five years in the economics publication
              process). The second concerns the frequency of computer software upgrades which
              (along with improving the quality of the products) create incompatibilities and
              cause some users to incur unwanted training costs.

