Title       : Evidence and Uncertainty in Human Reasoning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2001   
File        : a9818849

Award Number: 9818849
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210863             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Krantz dhk@psych.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Although some decisions are made on the basis of simple direct
evaluation of
              "gut" feelings, or the utilities of the various
alternatives, many decisions
              involve conflicting feelings; and the
conflict-resolution process often takes
              into account evidence about
some uncertain events.

A typical example would
              be the conflict faced by a college student who
has an important exam the next
              day but wants to quit studying to
spend some time with friends.  In the
              process of resolving this
conflict, many students consider the uncertain event
              that they will do
well in the exam even if they stop studying now.  Evidence
              relevant to
this event includes how difficult the exam is expected to be and
              how
much preparation the student has done all semester in this course. 
              If
the exam is only somewhat important, and the evidence leads the student
to
              feel pretty sure of doing well without further studying, the student
will
              probably decide to quit studying.  Even if the exam is highly
important, a
              student who is very sure of doing well will probably
quit studying.

For
              some decisions, part of the evidence consists of estimated
probabilities
              derived from scientific models.  A physician may
consider estimated
              probabilities of recurrence of cancer before
recommending therapy, or a
              homeowner may take account of earthquake
probabilities in deciding whether to
              reinforce the foundation.

The present research is based on a recently
              developed theory of
decision-making under uncertainty.  The core idea is that
              people
categorize uncertain events (e.g., "pretty sure" or "very sure"
of
              doing well on the exam), and that such categorization is based on
various
              kinds of evidence (sometimes including probabilities
estimated from scientific
              models).

The research has two main branches.  One focusses on
              decision
situations involving conflict.  We study how decision rules
              change,
depending on value of goals (for example, a student may use a
"pretty
              sure" rule for a somewhat important exam, but a "very sure"
rule for a highly
              important one) and how evidence is used to
categorize the uncertain events. 
              Our preliminary findings suggest
that different evidence weightings are used
              for different abstract
categories  of uncertainty.  This part of the research
              also examines
people's justifications for their decisions, in order to
              understand
better how justifications relate to actual decision rules
              underlying
choices.

The second branch of the research focusses on evidence
              judgment, in
isolation from the ultimate decision--for example, the
              judgments
that a detective or a scientist might use in forming or
              confirming
hypotheses.  We are interested in the difference between
              initially
generating a hypothesis and confirming it; in how people react
              to
conflicting evidence; in how people use base rates and
              relative
likelihoods as evidence; and in the process of selecting
              relevant
evidence when it is obscured by irrelevancies.

To summarize, the
              major goals of the research include testing and
developing a rather new theory
              of decision making; studying how
scientific probability estimates can be used
              in policy decisions;
and delineating the differences between exploratory use
              of evidence
in formulating hypotheses versus hypothesis confirmation. 
