Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Political Implication
               of Motivation to Control Prejudice Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9818714

Award Number: 9818714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Milton Lodge mlodge@datalab2.sbs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	My proposed research focuses on a major point of contention in political
              science, that is, the measurement of racial attitudes (Kinder 1986; Sears and
              Kinder 1985; McConahay 1986). [In layman's terms, an attitude is a feeling
              (usually positive or negative) about something.]  I attempt to find a measure
              of attitudes about minorities that does not suffer from social desirability
              bias.  Unbiased measures of attitudes toward minority groups are important to
              improve understanding and prediction of opinion toward public policies related
              to the minority groups in question.
	I propose a cognitive approach to address
              the problem of obtaining a true measure of people's attitudes toward minority
              group members.  Using the accessibility of attitudes as an indicator of
              people's attitudes towards group members, I hope to develop a less biased
              measure of public opinion about minority groups.  Specifically, I examine
              African-Americans and immigrants - Hispanic-Americans and Asian-Americans.  I
              do this by expanding Fazio's individual difference scale which measures
              people's motivations to control their prejudiced reactions of blacks to these
              other groups (Fazio, Jackson, Dunton and Williams 1995; Dunton and Fazio 1997;
              Fazio and Dunton 1997).  Fazio effectively demonstrates that controlling for
              this variable allows more accurate predictions of people's overall attitudes
              toward minorities and opinions about related political events.  Consequently,
              we should be better able to predict sentiment toward public policies related to
              minorities.  Public sentiment on policies dealing with minorities is largely
              determined by attitudes toward the group and its members (Schneider and Ingram
              1993; Sniderman, Brody and Tetlock 1991; Kinder and Sears 1985).  This is an
              important contribution in light of research showing the importance of public
              opinion in shaping public policy (Page and Shapiro 1992).  Thus, this
              individual difference measure of motivation to control prejudiced reactions is
              developed to provide results in conjunction with non-reactive measures. 
              Consequently, this self-report scale will provide a better understanding of
              people's racial attitudes without the complications of implementing
              non-reactive measures.  I subsequently examine how these attitudes affect
              policy opinions.
	I propose to use this new measure to expand on a relatively
              unstudied area in political science -- public opinion about immigrants and
              immigration policy.  First, I determine people's general attitudes toward
              different immigrant groups.  Second, I test whether people's stereotypes about
              a group influence opinions about policies related to that group and immigrants
              as a whole.  [Additionally, I investigate differences in these opinions when
              one group is made salient in subjects' minds.  In other words, I examine
              whether exposure to hispanics versus Asians in juxtaposition with the ambiguous
              term, "immigrant," significantly affects opinions on immigration policy.] 
              Third, I explore a self-report measure that asks individuals to take the
              perspective of a group member to determine people's racial attitudes (Barsalou
              1989).  Examining the differences between individuals' responses when asking
              them to relate their personal opinions and those of a typical group member
              should reveal prejudices.  Finally, I hope to answer the previously unanswered
              question of who or what associations come to mind when individuals answer
              questions about immigration policy.  [For instance, the National Election Study
              asks only general questions about immigrants and immigration policy and does
              not denote specifically the group to which it refers.]  In short, I investigate
              who people are thinking about when they hear the term, "immigrants," and how
              that influences opinion on policies related to them.
	In sum, I propose to
              develop a better measures and, therefore, understanding of attitudes minorities
              and minority-related policies.

