Title       : Regional, Intertemporal, and Sociodemographic Heterogeneity in Willingness to
               Pay for Climate Change Mitigation Policies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2002   
File        : a9818875

Award Number: 9818875
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192485             (Estimated)
Investigator: Trudy Ann Cameron tcameron@econ.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,9278,EGCH,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The upcoming US presidential election may well be (in part) a referendum on
              climate change mitigation.  The willingness of the voting public to incur
              substantial costs in order to prevent climate change will be a key political
              "variable" that is likely to receive considerable attention from both parties. 
              Consequently, it is important to gain some understanding of how individuals
              formulate their subjective conceptions of future climate prospects both with
              and without mitigation.  One relevant consideration is the possibility of
              systematically differing opinions across different sub-populations.  Another is
              the manner in which people respond to climate predictions according to the
              source of the information.  Third, it is crucial to know how these opinions
              translate into individuals' willingness to pay for climate change mitigation in
              terms of higher prices or taxes.

The research plan is as follows:  (1)
              Survey people about their beliefs concerning future climate change risk if
              mitigation is not pursued; (2) See whether (and how) their beliefs about
              climate change are affected by a set of "expert" opinions to which they may
              choose to attend; (3) See how these adjusted beliefs about climate risk
              translate into willingness to support alternative climate change policies, and
              (4) Employ formal economic theory in a quantitative model to convert this
              degree of support (as a function of risk perception) into a useful input for
              formal cost-benefit analysis for climate change policies.
	
The data for the
              proposed study will be gathered by a combination of two different methods. The
              first method is an innovative online survey.  This is a dramatically less
              expensive way to conduct preliminary surveys when a vast array of survey
              versions is required to accommodate an orthogonal design with extensive
              geographical specificity, albeit at the cost of sample selectivity according to
              access.  The online survey will involve liaisons with approximately 25 faculty
              collaborators at geographically dispersed universities to assist in recruiting
              suitable samples of students to participate in the survey.  To counter the
              selectivity problems of the online survey, the study will also use an analogous
              mail survey for a general population sample. The pooled data can be used to
              test the representativeness of the online survey and to generate inferences
              that can be extended more confidently to the general population.

The main
              surveys will go into the field between 9/99 and 8/00. In addition to the costs
              of the final field surveys themselves, research funding will be used to
              support: (1) survey instrument revision with input from external reviewers,
              focus groups and pre-tests, (2) identification of additional faculty
              collaborators to assist in recruiting students for the online survey, (3)
              completion of an inventory of "expert" opinions on climate change prospects,
              (4) programming upgrades for the online survey (i.e. Java applets for response
              selection and click mapping for information choices), (5) translation of survey
              into Spanish and French, since geographical coverage includes at least the US
              and Canada, (6) adaptation of the online survey to an analogous mail survey
              instrument.  



