Title       : Inference and Performance Problems Related to High Variability Phenomena in
               Measured Data Network Traffic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9818076

Award Number: 9818076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sidney I. Resnick resnick@orie.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A cooperative arrangement between Cornell University and AT&T Labs-Research
              allows Cornell's Professor Sidney Resnick to visit AT&T Labs-Research to
              collaborate with Dr. Walter Willinger and others at AT&T Labs-Research on
              problems related to (i) providing an in-depth understanding of the dynamic
              nature of today's data network traffic and (ii) exploiting the newly-gained
              insights for the economic design and effective and efficient management of
              modern high-speed communications networks.  The work focuses on the dual themes
              of how to construct and fit models that can account for empirically observed
              data network traffic characteristics such as high-variability, heavy-tails,
              long-range dependence, self-similar behavior.  Phenomena exhibiting heavy tails
              and/or long-range dependence, although departing in marked fashion from
              classical assumptions of Gaussian distributions, finite variances and
              short-range interactions, have been frequently noted in a broad array of fields
              such as insurance, economics and finance.  These phenomena
have recently
              attracted renewed interest due to their ubiquitous presence in traffic
              measurements from today's data networks and especially because they often play
              havoc with established network and traffic engineering methodologies that are
              based on conventional (i.e., telephony-based) wisdom. As a result, this
              networking application opens up a variety of new and fundamental research
              topics at the intersection of applied probability and statistics and provides
              unique opportunities for close collaborations between mathematicians and
              engineers to work on technically challenging problems that are, at the same
              time, highly relevant in practice.   This GOALI project is jointly supported by
              the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of 
              Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
