Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Instrumentation for Experimental Prototyping of
               RF Low-Power Microsystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1998  
File        : a9818316

Award Number: 9818316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishna Shenai shenai@eecs.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9818316
Shenai, Krishna
University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC)

CISE
              Research Instrumentation: Experimental Prototyping of RF Low-Power
              Microsystems

This research instrumentation enables research projects in:
-
              Computer Aided Design (CAD) Tools and Modeling of Low-Power RF Devices and
              Technologies,
- Circuits and Architectures of Low-Power RF Microsystems,
- RF
              CMOS Technology Development and Optimization, and
- Application of Electronic
              Visualization (EV) and Virtual Reality (VR).

To support the aforementioned
              projects, this award contributes to the purchase of a probe station, a
              precision parameter analyzer, DD system power supply, a test system, and
              mixed-signal test systems by the Department of Electrical Engineering and
              Computer Science at the University of Illinois-Chicago.

The equipment
              requested in this project will enable fundamental and applied research in RF
              microsystems for communications and logic.  First, at the technology level, is
              the need for improved device characterization and
modeling.  Existing digital
              models sacrifice small-signal accuracy and require extensive curve-fitting in
              parameter extraction.  Our approach applies parameter techniques to account for
              reflections and interconnect parasitics.  In optimizing and developing devices
              in the deep submicron regime, the resolution of the HP 4156B is necessary. 
              Second, at the systems level, increasing mixed-signal functional integration is
              posing challenges to signal integrity, with noise contributions occurring in
              interconnects, the substrate, and within devices.  Detection of these
              picosecond transients requires equipment with a wide bandwidth and low noise. 
              The combination of the E2900A as a stimulus source and the 54616TC as a monitor
              will enable
real-time detection of signal degradation.  HP power supplies will
              provide extremely clean biasing for sub-1V device operation.  The Cascade
              Summit RF probe station is the foundation of the test environment, enabling
              on-wafer measurement of device characteristics and signal integrity, free from
              package parasitics.  The HP-IB interfaces will automate the measurement process
              for more efficient use of the equipment.




