Title       : Gordon Conference on RNA Editing to be held on January 24-29, 1999 in Ventura,
               California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1998  
File        : a9818556

Award Number: 9818556
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonatha M. Gott   (Principal Investigator current)
              Maureen R. Hanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9818556 Gott and Hanson     
The Gordon Conference on RNA Editing will take
              place January 24-29, 1999, at the Doubletree Hotel in Ventura, California.  RNA
              editing is the co- or post-transcriptional modification of RNA; it results in
              the insertion, deletion or substitution of nucleotides. RNA editing can
              therefore correct, extend, or diversify the information encoded within the
              corresponding genomic sequence and can dramatically alter the function of the
              modified RNA's.  Equally significant is the cellular regulation of many of the
              RNA editing processes which provides for developmental, tissue-specific and
              metabolic fine-tuning of protein function and biochemical pathways. Our
              understanding of molecular mechanisms underlying RNA editing and their
              biological occurrence has reached a critical stage where cross-fertilization of
              hypotheses and experimental approaches is essential for focus in the next
              decade of research.

Despite the diversity of organisms wherein editing
              occurs and the apparent dissimilarities in sequences which are modified, 
              investigators of RNA editing share questions and experimental goals.  Important
              to the understanding of every editing system is a basic description of the RNA
              substrates that are modified by these processes. Similarly, questions of
              general interest concerning the mechanism, specificity, fidelity and
              processivity of RNA editing can be addressed with a combination of biochemical
              and molecular biological techniques coupled with the development of in vitro
              editing systems. In this regard the cis-active regulatory elements and the
              relevant trans-acting factors are being evaluated at both the molecular and
              genetic level. Understanding the structure and function of these factors at the
              level of common or divergent features among the different editing systems is an
              important goal of this Gordon Research Conference. Still other editing systems
              have yet to advance to in vitro systems . This conference will foster
              advancement in these systems also.  The biological significance of RNA editing
              will be emphasized  throughout the conference.

