Title       : Two Projects on Dynamics of the Law
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9818689

Award Number: 9818689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228118             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne A. Scotchmer scotch@garnet.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research consists of two projects that examines different aspects of the
              dynamics of law.  The first project investigates whether it can reasonable be
              claimed that case law eventually settles down to uncontroversial rules, whether
              California judges are more activist than judges elsewhere, and what determines
              whether a case eventually becomes influential in legal rule making.  Legal
              scholars differ in their beliefs on the extent to which courts are bound by
              earlier judges' decisions ("precedent").  Although there have been several
              empirical studies of judicial activism a the highest level, the Supreme Court,
              and much theoretical reasoning about the motives of judges, there has been
              little statistical analysis of how precedent operates in practice.  This has
              largely been due to the absence of a data set.  The research will use one of
              the primary tools for legal research, Shepard's editing marks, as a data base
              for understanding how case law evolves in practice at the more prosaic level of
              appellate courts.

Intellectual property is an incentive system with many
              well-known defects. Project two explores alternative procurement mechanisms
              that bypass patents and asks whether, when burdened with realistic
              institutional restrictions, the alternatives are really an improvement.  It
              also examines the technological reality that research is cumulative, and how
              research exemptions in intellectual property law affect the division of profit
              among generations of innovators.  Finally, the study investigates the degree to
              which the firms in a patent race can untangle each other's private information
              on the value of the investment and their relative efficiency, simply by
              observing each other's investment behavior.
