Title       : Socioeconomic Structure of Bronze Age Pastoralists on the Samara River, Russia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2001  
File        : a9818527

Award Number: 9818527
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273520             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Anthony anthonyd@hartwick.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hartwick College
	      
	      Oneonta, NY  13820    607/432-4200

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. David Anthony will lead a
              multinational team and conduct three seasons of archaeological excavation and
              follow-up analysis in the Samara oblast, an administrative region of ca. 54,000
              square km in the middle Volga region of Russia. The Samara oblast lies at the
              ecotone between the forest-steppe (to the North) and the treeless steppe (to
              the South) and thus, because of the sensitivity of its vegetation to climate
              change, provides an excellent venue to study the human environment
              interactions. During preliminary work in the region, Dr. Anthony and his
              colleagues have located a number of sites which date to the Bronze Age period.
              They will now conduct extensive lateral excavation in a series of them.

In
              the opening centuries of the Late Bronze Age (LBA) between 2,000 and 1,700 BC,
              a complex of broadly shared traits -- similar subsistence strategies, ceramic
              and weapon types, house and settlement types and ritual practices - spread
              across the Eurasian steppes. For the first time a bridge of broadly similar
              cultures occupied the steppes from the borders of China to the edges of Europe.
              It is from this base that the cultures which later had a major impact on both
              historic Europe and China arose. This LBA phenomenon is of great interest to
              archaeologists because widespread settlements appear suddenly with no apparent
              antecedents. Although the preceding Early and Middle Bronze Age cultures are
              known from burial mounds, settlements have not been located. A number of
              hypotheses have been proposed. Some speculate that long distance trade,
              especially in copper, necessitated the development of sedentary communities;
              others believe that still unproven climate change permitted either the
              development or increased reliance on agriculture which in turn required people
              to abandon a nomadic pastoralist way of life. Data is lacking however to
              support either of these scenarios.  Although archaeologists believe that
              pastoralism played an important role during the Bronze Age, no pastoralist
              sites have been excavated and at no sites has careful dietary reconstruction
              been attempted. Dr. Anthony and his team will focus on the transition to the
              Late Bronze age and through isotopic analysis of both earlier and Late Bronze
              age human skeletons document dietary change. Excavation at a large settlement
              as well as a series of smaller presumed pastoral sites will permit further
              reconstruction of diet as well as social organization. Coring of lake sediments
              and analysis of pollen and other botanical material contained therein will
              provide information on climate change.

This research is important for
              several reasons. It will generate data of interest to many archaeologists. It
              will increase understanding of human environment interactions and further
              international scientific collaboration. Because several US graduate students
              are included in the project the educational impact will be significant.

