Title       : U.S.-Egypt Workshop on Sustainable Coastal Development, Cairo, Egypt, April 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1998   
File        : a9818372

Award Number: 9818372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chryssostomos Chryssostomidis chrys@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford A. Goudey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 5944,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9818372
Chryssostomidis

Description: This award is to support a US-Egypt
              Workshop on Sustainable Coastal Development, to be held in Cairo, Egypt, in
              April 1999.  The Principal Investigator is Professor Chryssostomos
              Chryssostomidis, of the Department of Ocean Engineering, Massachusetts
              Institute of Technology (MIT) who is also the Director of the Sea Grant College
              Program at MIT.  A co-organizer is Mr. Clifford Goudey, Marine Advisory Leader,
              MIT Sea Grant College Program, and Project Director, Center for Fisheries
              Engineering Research, MIT.  The Egyptian organizer is Dr. Ekram M. Amin,
              President of the National Institute of Oceanography and Fisheries (NIOF) in
              Cairo, Egypt.  The objectives of the five-day workshop are: (1) review and
              discuss the current knowledge regarding land-based and open-ocean aquaculture;
              (2) identify potentially productive areas for collaborative research; and (3)
              initiate research proposals aimed at sustainable development through the growth
              of aquaculture.  The scientists plan to visit some of the major academic and
              government research sites and facilities in this field in Egypt. 

Scope: 
              This project will bring together 12 well known American scientists from
              different institutions who are experts in various aspects of aquaculture with
              their counterparts in Egypt to develop an agenda for joint research in areas of
              mutual interest.  The US organizers have extensive background in the
              development of research activities on fisheries in the United States.  The
              Egyptian organizer, Dr. Amin, is the head of the main research organization in
              this field in Egypt, and has over two decades of research experience as a
              marine biologist.   The NIOF has the primary responsibility for developing
              Egypt's coastal resources.  A workshop proceedings will be published covering
              the presentations and the recommended areas for joint US-Egypt research
              projects.  This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting binational
              workshops that are likely to increase collaboration in areas of mutual
              interest.  This workshop is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund
              Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
              carry out cooperative activities. 

