Title       : US-Pakistan Cooperative Research: Sustainable Homestead
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9818201

Award Number: 9818201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30900              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Nejat Veziroglu veziroglu@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 5943,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9918201
Veziroglu

Description: This award will support a collaborative
              research project between Professor T.Nejat Veziroglu, Director, Clean Energy
              Research Institute, University of Miami, Miami, Florida, and Dr. Parvez Akhter,
              Director General, the National Institute for Silicon Technology (N.I.S.T.) in
              Islamabad, Pakistan.  The two teams plan to conduct a pilot research project
              for the conceptual design and testing of a "sustainable homestead", in which
              electricity, fuel, thermal energy and lighting needs of a home would be met by
              a sustainable or renewable energy source, such as solar energy.  The idea
              involves designing hybrid solar collectors, which converts insulation to heat
              and electricity.  Heat is then stored in thermal storage tanks, while the
              electricity is to be used for normal electric requirements to produce hydrogen
              and oxygen, or to be stored in electric batteries.   The hydrogen produced will
              be used as a clean fuel for other requirements.  In the theoretical study, the
              relations between the operational characteristics and efficiency of each
              sub-system and the supply and demand system will be obtained.  The theoretical
              investigation will be expanded to generate a program for optimizing the cost. 
              In the experimental investigation, the designs for the solar, thermal,
              electrical, hydrogen, oxygen, sunlight, control and safety sub-systems of the
              "sustainable homestead" will be carried out and built within a homestead in
              Pakistan for tests and evaluation of the subsystems and the overall system.
              

Scope:  This project will support collaboration between two scientific
              teams with complementary qualifications and institutional facilities in a
              multidisciplinary research effort.  The US scientist has been a leader in
              research on renewable energy sources, especially hydrogen energy, while the
              Pakistani side has long experience in the design, manufacture and utilization
              of solar photovoltaic cells.  The problem to be addressed, proving the utility
              of renewable energy sources in distributed system of users, is important. 
              Small distributed systems for meeting energy needs are more economical and
              environmentally more benign than large power systems with the required
              distribution systems to far-flung areas as in Pakistan and in many other
              developing countries.  This project will fit well within a larger project
              entitled "Solar Park" which the Government of Pakistan has authorized as a
              practical demonstration of utilizing renewable energy on a large scale.  One
              junior US scientist from the University of Miami and one from N.I.S.T. will
              participate in the project.  The project fits well within the objectives of the
              Division of International Programs.


