Title       : Studies of the Role of Sea Ice in Arctic Tropospheric Ozone Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a9818257

Award Number: 9818257
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397394             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul B. Shepson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

9818257
Shepson

This project is focused on studies of the
              atmospheric chemistry of tropospheric ozone production and removal.  Ozone is
              both a necessary component of the atmosphere that helps regulate its' ability
              to oxidize and remove potentially hazardous pollutants, but is also toxic to
              the human respiratory system and to vegetation.  Thus there must be a
              reasonably delicate balance of ozone in the troposphere.  However, it appears
              that ozone has increased significantly over the past century.  This is of
              concern not only because ozone is toxic, but also because it is an important
              "greenhouse" gas.

This project will investigate the surprising observation
              that at polar sunrise, ozone is completely removed in the Arctic marine
              boundary layer.  This observation points out that our current understanding of
              tropospheric ozone is quite incomplete. Researcher have recently obtained
              evidence that this process may be initiated by oxidation of halide ions in the
              Arctic Ocean ice/snow pack, to produce molecular halogens (Br2 and Cl2) that
              then volatilize into the atmosphere. They then photolyze to initiate a free
              radical chain mechanism that results in destruction of ozone near the surface. 
              During the Polar Sunrise Experiment 1998, striking evidence was obtained that
              formaldehyde (HCHO) is produced photochemically in the snow pack, and then
              volatilizes, and that this process is responsible for the relatively high
              levels of HCHO in the marine boundary layer at sunrise in the Arctic. This is
              quite important, as HCHO photolysis represents one of the most important
              sources of free radicals in the relatively dry polar atmosphere.  This project
              will pursue in detail the hypothesis that much of the gas phase photochemistry
              that occurs actively at sunrise in the Arctic is initiated at the air/snow/ice
              interface.  To do this, it is necessary to set up an ice camp on the Arctic
              Ocean surface, near Alert, N.W.T., as a key component of the Polar Sunrise
              Experiment 2000.  This project will conduct measurements of key reactive trace
              gases, and measure the fluxes of these gases from the surface, over a period
              covering early February (continuous darkness) through April (continuous
              sunlight) in the winter/spring of 2000. 

This project represents an exciting
              first step in the process of examining the role of air/snow/ice interfacial
              photochemistry and its impact on important tropospheric gases such as HCHO and
              O3.  This work also ties directly to efforts to improve our understanding of
              the role of snow surface chemistry and physics on ice core concentrations and
              the associated historical 

