Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Wireless Networks for Delivery of Multimedia
               Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1999    
File        : a9818356

Award Number: 9818356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Athina P. Petropulu athina@artemis.ece.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maja E. Bystrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Moeness G. Amin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 4096,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9818356
Petropulu, Athina P.
Maja, Bystrom
Drexel University

CISE Research
              Instrumentation:  Wireless Networks for Delivery of Multimedia Services

This
              research instrumentation enables research projects in:
- Channel Equalization
              / Multipath Mitigation
- Efficient Transmission Schemes for Low Bitrate
              Transport of Digital Video over Wireless Channels, and
- Interference
              Rejection in Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum Communications.

To support the
              aforementioned projects, this award contributes to the purchase of equipment by
              the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Drexel University for
              research in the area of delivery of multimedia services over wireless networks.
               The facility to be implemented consists of one mobile base receiver station
              and three mobile transmitters.  Its goal is to create a realistic wireless
              communications environment by providing  remote, multi-point signal
              transmission of various formats such as voice, video, and data, as well as
              providing for signal reception and analysis.  The proposed testbed will be used
              to evaluate spread-spectrum and mobile system models, as well as to implement
              and evaluate current
algorithms developed by the PI's for wireless
              communications.  Examples of the areas under development are: Channel
              equalization/multipath mitigation, code development, rate allocation and
              service guarantees for spread spectrum systems, and interference rejection in
              direct sequence spread spectrum communications.  The research projects listed
              above involve two faculty from Drexel University and one faculty from Villanova
              University.  In addition to promoting research, the proposed facility will
              enhance the education and training of both graduate and undergraduate students.
               Furthermore, it will initiate collaboration between both faculty and students
              of Drexel and Villanova Universities.


