Title       : Control & Performance Trade-offs in Multihop Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a9818913

Award Number: 9818913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $671044             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony Ephremides tony@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. S. Corson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leandros Tassiulas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4095,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              All-wireless and, possibly, all-mobile communication networks are likely to
              operate in the future for both commercial and military applications, as a
              result of increasing pressure for communication while
``on the move.''  Such
              networks differ from traditional ones in fundamental ways since they may not
              share the fixed, ``wired'' communication infrastructure.  They are refereed to
              as ``multihop wireless networks".
They may arise as alternative means of
              providing personal communication services, or as specialized networks that are
              ``stand-alone'' or are weakly coupled to the general infrastructure. The
              researchers propose to study the fundamental principles of operation and design
              that are unique to these networks,
and to develop a prototype design for a
              bi-level (two tier) multihop architecture that will be based on these
              principles.

Specifically, the researchers plan to address the following
              questions and to study the associated performance trade-offs that pertain
              mostly to layers 2-4 in the networking architecture:
a) what routing
              algorithms are well-suited to variable  connectivity environments?
b) what
              address and mobility management methods are appropriate? how are they coupled
              to routing in this     context?
c) what multicasting methods are possible?
d)
              what should be the role of power management as a network control parameter to
              conserve battery energy?
e) what are the fundamental trade offs between
              ``push" and ``pull" communications in asymmetric network     architectures?
f)
              what is the best utilization of path diversity for reliability and efficiency
              under channel impairment     conditions?
g) what resource allocation
              approaches are appropriate?

By leveraging other support, the researchers
              intend to implement some control policies developed as a result of this
              investigation in an existing network testbed, and use this experience as an aid
              in developing a design model for multihop wireless networks.  This testbed
              exists in the Hybrid Networks Laboratory of the Institute for Systems Research
              at the University of Maryland and leverages the existing equipment and
              human
resource facilities available at the lab.


