Title       : Party Systems, Economic Change, and Electoral Volatility in Latin America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9818501

Award Number: 9818501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianne C. Stewart                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60136              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Roberts KenRob@UNM.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Democratic regimes in contemporary Latin America have been plagued by
              exceptionally high levels of electoral volatility and the demise of many
              traditional political parties.  Previous research has suggested that this
              volatility can be attributed largely to the region-wide economic crisis of the
              1980s; yet, volatility has increased in the 1990s during a period of
              generalized economic improvement.  Despite insights from research on European
              politics, there is no study which fully explores the impact of political
              institutions and social cleavages on electoral volatility in Latin America. 
              Likewise, there is little understanding of why traditional party systems would
              survive and adapt to the exigencies of a new era in some countries while
              decomposing in others.

	The main objectives of this project are to identify
              the sources of electoral volatility in contemporary Latin America and to
              explain why some parties and party systems have adapted more successfully than
              others to the new era of market liberalism.  The project begins with a pooled
              time series regression analysis of aggregate electoral volatility in both
              presidential and legislative elections in 16 Latin American countries since the
              onset of the most recent wave of democratization in 1978.  This statistical
              analysis provides a test of three basic theoretical explanations of electoral
              volatility:  (1) the economic voting model, which associates electoral
              volatility with aggregate economic performance; (2) institutional arguments
              which link volatility to party system attributes or unstable rules-of-the-game;
              and (3) structural explanations which associate electoral stability with the
              organizational "closure" of class cleavages.

	The second part of this
              project complements the large-N statistical analysis with a more detailed
              comparative analysis of two cases of party system decomposition (Peru and
              Venezuela), one case of adaptation (Chile), and one intermediate case
              (Argentina).  The comparative design focuses attention on the political
              characteristics of the "critical juncture" in which nations with
              labor-mobilizing party systems make the transition from a state-led to a
              market-oriented model of development.  Party system adaptation or decomposition
              is hypothezied to be a function of the distribution of political costs and
              rewards during this critical juncture and reinforcement or diffusion of
              established sociopolitical cleavages.  Public opinion surveys from each of the
              four countries will be used to measure gross (that is, individual-level)
              electoral volatility and identify changes in the social or class composition of
              support for different parties.  This combination of quantitative and
              qualitative research methods should shed new light on the erosion, adaptation,
              and transformation of representative institutions in Latin America, while
              enhancing scholarly understanding of the conditions for democratic stability.

