Title       : Prisons and Crime Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  2001   
File        : a9818897

Award Number: 9818897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148079             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bert Useem useem@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne E. Piehl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond Liedka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Scholes Hall, Room 102
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The precise effect of incarceration on aggregate crime rates is under
              contention.  While many claim that prison population growth and crime rates
              inversely related, others maintain that there is no effect of increasing
              incarceration because offenders are replaced by others.  Other analysts argue
              that prison population growth actually generates crime by breaking sown
              important social networks or damaging the ability of individuals to participate
              in legitimate activities.  This research tests these competing positions and
              develops a more textured understanding of the relationship between
              incarceration and crime.  It improves upon the existing empirical literature in
              several ways.  In contrast to previous efforts, this study: (1) permits the
              relationship between incarceration and crime to vary with the level of
              incarceration; (2) differentiates among the various uses for a prison cell; (3)
              recognizes that the flow of inmates into prison may have a different effect
              than the stock of current inmates; and (4) takes into account the other major
              correctional policies (probation and parole).  In addition, the analysis
              profits from improved statistical approaches for cross-sectional time-series
              data: random effects and multi-level models.  is possible that there is some
              truth.

Data will be compiled from the National Corrections Reporting
              Program, which collects individual level information from states on each
              admission to prison, each release from prison, and each release from parole.  
              Additionally, crime rates collected by the Federal Bureau of Investigations
              will be augmented with supplemental information on probation and control
              variables from a variety of governmental sources. Special attention is paid to
              two issues of current policy relevance-s the effect on crime of incarcerating
              large numbers of drug offenders; and the disproportionate high imprisoned rates
              of African Americans and Hispanics relative to their number in the
              population.

