Title       : Universities in the Information Age: Changing Work, Organization, and Value in
               Academic Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a9818028

Award Number: 9818028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300444             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer Croissant jlc@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Rhoades  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allen Buchanan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheila Slaughter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1092,9139,9179,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This small grant for training and research will support the development of an
              interdisciplinary graduate training program examining the changing nature of
              university work.  In the 1990s the interactions of changing social processes
              and priorities, such as the increasing commercialization of research, with
              developments in information technology are reshaping the work of
              university-based scientists and engineers.  This program will examine these
              interactions and explore the ethical issues they raise.  The program core
              consists of two courses, a once-a-year substantive seminar and an ongoing
              (every semester) research seminar.  Participants in these courses will include
              doctoral students majoring in the program, as well as other graduate students
              in science, engineering, and social and informational sciences interested in
              completing a masters or a minor or elective coursework in the area.  Beyond
              this core work, students' programs of study and research will be
              individualized; faculty from numerous departments have agreed to cooperate with
              this effort.  A three-day capstone seminar as well as a special lecture series
              will be used to highlight research ethics issues raised in the training
              program.  NSF funds will be used to support three graduate students and a
              post-doctoral fellow each year over the three years of the award, and the
              program expects to work with a total of 15-22 students over that period. 
              Besides the student and faculty research projects that will be associated with
              this effort, successful incorporation of aspects of this program into graduate
              training at the university will provide a model for other universities with
              interests in incorporating interdisciplinarity into graduate education.   
