Title       : Collaborative Research: Development, Validation and Improvement of a Coupled
               Biological/Chemical/Physical Model for the Arabian Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1999       
File        : a9818708

Award Number: 9818708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173440             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raleigh R. Hood raleigh@hpl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,1650,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Hood
9818708

This project outlines three research tasks designed to develop,
              validate, and improve a biological/chemical /physical model for the Arabian
              Sea. A focus of the research is to understand the Arabian-Sea carbon cycle,
              which requires that biological and physical processes be properly represented.
              To understand a problem of this complexity requires the development of a
              hierarchy of models that vary in dynamical complexity.  The present approach is
              to begin with a dynamically simple system, to compare its solutions carefully
              with available data, identify model deficiencies and to develop and test
              various hypotheses for overcoming them.

The investigators initial system
              will consist of three components: a 51/2-layer physical model, a 4-compartment
              (NAHD) biological model, and a chemical model that simulates carbon and oxygen
              cycling. The system has the advantage that it is computationally very
              efficient. Consequently, the scientists will be able to carry out extensive
              test runs, and hence can carefully assess the influence of individual
              processes. Versions of each component model have already proven successful at
              simulating observations in the Arabian Sea and elsewhere, and this prior
              success gives the researchers confidence that the coupled system will also
              produce useful solutions. The initial system will be gradually improved and
              expanded as the investigators identify deficiencies and modify the model to
              correct them.

The central goal of the U.S. JGOFS Synthesis and Modeling
              Project (SMP) is to synthesize observational data into a set of models that can
              be used for prediction. Here, the investigators will bring together a group of
              scientists with the collective expertise necessary to achieve this goal for the
              Arabian Sea. Specifically, Sharon Smith contributes her knowledge of Arabian
              Sea biological and chemical fields, Raleigh Hood and Don Olson contribute their
              expertise in biological and chemical modeling, and Julian McCreary contributes
              his modeling experience of physical processes in the region. Each Principal
              Investigator thus performs an important function in the overall research
              effort.

In this effort the researchers will test fundamental hypotheses
              concerning the factors that control biogeochemical fluxes in the Arabian Sea.
              This region was selected to be the location of one of the four U.S. JGOFS
              Process Studies because of its strong monsoonal forcing and large seasonal
              oscillations, and indeed the project acquired the most complete seasonal and
              spatial resolution of carbon cycling among the four Studies. These field
              observations, in combination with concurrent ONR measurements, historical data
              and new satellite ocean color observations, thus provide an ideal data set for
              developing a coupled model that can respond realistically under a wide range of
              oceanic conditions. Consequently, the investigators expect that the results
              will be readily generalizable to other regions of the World Ocean.



