Title       : Marriage, Parenthood and Earnings: The Division of Labor in US Households
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2001  
File        : a9818486

Award Number: 9818486
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shelly J. Lundberg   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elaina Rose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

This project investigates the relationship between household roles and labor
              market experiences for both men and women in the U.S., and the determinants of
              changes in that relationship over the past three decades. Marital status and
              the presence of children have always played prominent roles in economic
              analysis of women's labor market experiences, but there has been no parallel
              treatment of male household roles, and joint household decisions have received
              little attention. The dramatic changes in marital and fertility behavior during
              the past several decades, and the converging time-use patterns of married men
              and women demand a new, more symmetric analysis of the division of labor in
              U.S. households.

The principal objective of the project is to provide a
              comprehensive study of the theoretical and empirical relationships between
              parenthood, marital status, and earnings for both men and women. The project
              will: 1. Use family longitudinal data from the PSID to describe and analyze the
              time paths of wages, hours worked, and earnings for men and women over the past
              few decades. The focus will be on joint and individual responses to changes in
              household roles-marriage and divorce, the birth and aging of children-and we
              estimate random effects and fixed effect models to control for selection into
              marriage and parenthood. 2. Will develop both unitary and non-unitary models of
              family decision-making and their implications for joint household labor supply
              and investment responses to childbearing. 3. Will develop empirical measures of
              joint household responses and to analyze their determinants in the context of
              the theoretical models. 4. Will examine in detail the route from child and
              marriage-related changes in time allocation and investment to changes in wages,
              including the determinants of the ""family gap"" in women's wages. 5. Will
              investigate the causes of intertemporal changes in the apparent effects of
              household roles on the economic status of men and women, using cross-cohort
              changes in selection into and responses to marriage and child-bearing. 6. Will
              compare our results for U.S. families with equivalent estimates from another
              developed country.

Preliminary work from a pilot sample of married couples
              from the PSID indicates that the consequences of childbearing for women's wages
              are extremely variable, and that husbands' responses to the birth of a first
              child are statistically significant, diverse, and strongly related to the labor
              supply behavior of their wives. In households in which the mother experiences a
              substantial interruption in labor market activity, maternal wages decline by 23
              percent and paternal wages and hours worked increase following the birth of the
              first child, while in households in which the mother remains attached to the
              labor force, there is no significant decrease in the mothers' wages and the
              market work of fathers decreases.

This proposal outlines a set of six
              projects using three longitudinal data sets that will provide a wideranging
              analysis of the empirical relationships between marital status, parenthood, and
              economic outcomes. First, it will extend the pilot study to utilize the full
              PSID sample, include second and subsequent children, and examine heterogeneity
              in responses to parenthood by cohort, skill level, age at first childbearing,
              and other characteristics. Second, it focuses on the interdependence of
              responses by mothers and fathers and suggest a new approach

