Title       : Toward a Km-Scale Neutrino Observatory: Digital Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a9818083

Award Number: 9818083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George F. Smoot smoot@cosmos.lbl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5115      ANTARCTIC AERONOMY & ASTROPHYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9818083
Smoot

	This project consists of the development and construction of
              one string of fifty digital optical modules as the prototype for a
              next-generation neutrino detector array in the glacial ice at South Pole
              station.  It is jointly supported by the NSF's Office of Polar Programs, the
              Division of Physics, the Division of Astronomical Sciences, and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical
              Sciences.
	Neutrinos are produced by extremely energetic events in the
              universe, but interact only weakly with matter and thus require very large
              detector volumes.  When an interaction does occur, it produces Cerenkov
              radiation in the visible range which can be tracked from the sequential arrival
              times of the light burst at different optical modules within the ice.  Critical
              to the proper analysis and identification of neutrino events is the data
              acquisition, local signal processing, and information transfer from deep remote
              sensors to the surface analysis facility which may involve a path length of
              several kilometers.
	The current array of analog optical modules has
              disadvantages in that dispersion and attenuation degrade the signal quality. 
              Optical fiber cable would preserve waveform information, but is costly and
              subject to damage during the installation of the module strings.  These are
              frozen in the ice to depths of several kilometers and cannot be recovered for
              repair.
A string of digital optical modules will be robust and reliable, and
              should provide high quality data from which complex events can be characterized
              with accurately reconstructed tracks.  Operation of the fully instrumented
              string will be a cost-effective demonstration of the feasibility of
              implementing a full-scale neutrino telescope based on state-of-the-art digital
              system architecture.
***


			

