Title       : Analysis of Information Technology Ethics Issues by High School Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9818211

Award Number: 9818211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219195             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne Anderson-Inman lynneai@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Willard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,2840,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              As information technologies are becoming important tools in schools and in
              mainstream society, families and schools will bear an important responsibility
              to assist young people in gaining the moral reasoning, motivation, and control
              to engage in ethical behavior while using these new technologies. The objective
              of the proposed study is to investigate how high school students analyze issues
              related to the ethical use of information and communication technologies,
              including the Internet. The study will examine ethical issues pertaining to
              copyright infringement, computer security violations (hacking), disrespectful
              speech (flaming, harassment, violation of privacy), and accessing or publishing
              potentially harmful material (pornography and hate literature). The study will
              seek to determine the factors that influence students' analyses of scenarios
              that describe inappropriate acts, such as students' developmental
              characteristics, life situations (gender, amount of computer use), knowledge of
              the law, the nature of the act (type of victim or amount of harm), and the
              reasoning process that students engage in, in making their determinations. 
              Knowledge gained through the study will provide the basis for the development
              of effective environmental, instructional, and intervention strategies to
              assist students in gaining the moral reasoning, motivation, and control to
              engage in ethical behavior while using new technologies.  The subjects for the
              research will be 200 high school students who have had Internet access through
              home or school for a period of at least one year. The study will make use of
              three standardized measurement instruments for the measurement of
              cognitive-moral development, empathic tendencies, and self-understanding. An
              information technology ethics questionnaire will be developed for the purposes
              of this study. The questionnaire will be designed to investigate various
              aspects of students' evaluation of the appropriateness of the acts that involve
              the use of information technologies, their knowledge of rules, and their
              reasoning process. Both quantitative and qualitative data will be gathered
              through the questionnaire. The analysis of the data will reveal potential
              relationships between cognitive moral development, empathic tendencies,
              self-understanding and the subjects' analysis of various information
              technology-related acts.
