Title       : Structural and Functional analysis of Lytic Organelles and Lytic Enzymes in
               Aleurone Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a9818047

Award Number: 9818047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell L. Jones rjones@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1132,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
 
This proposal describes experiments aimed at an understanding of vacuolar
              function in plants using cereal aleurone cells as a model system.  Barley
              aleurone cells have several types of vacuoles; the organization and function of
              these organelles is dramatically different in abscisic acid (ABA) and
              gibberellic acid (GA) treated cells.  Aleurone cells become highly vacuolate
              following incubation in GA; ABA treated cells do not undergo extensive
              vacuolation.  Vacuoles in ABA-treated aleurone cells have relatively few lytic
              enzymes and a pH near neutrality, whereas vacuoles in cells incubated in GA
              have elevated levels of lytic enzyme and a pH of  ~ 5.5 or below.  GA and ABA
              also regulate programmed cell death (PCD) in aleurone cells. Extensive cellular
              remodeling accompanies cell death in plants; the formation of lytic vacuoles
              may be a key feature of this process in aleurone cells.  A cell biological
              approach which focuses on lytic enzymes and the compartments in which they
              reside is highly suited for unraveling the subcellular changes that accompany
              death.  This project will test the hypothesis that GA and ABA alter the
              subcellular location of key lytic enzymes as well as the pH of the organelles
              in which these enzymes are located, thereby affecting cell death (PCD). 

              
This project focuses on the roles of cysteine proteases in aleurone cells.
              The hypothesis to be tested is that intracellular location and
              posttranslational processing of proteases play a key role in regulating PCD in
              the aleurone cell.  Previous experiments show that proteases accumulate in the
              vacuoles of  GA-treated aleurone cells, but in ABA-treated cells only inactive
              precursors of these proteins accumulate. In the case of the cysteine protease
              aleurain, GA regulates the posttranslational processing and subcellular
              location of the enzyme.  Aleurain is found in the protein storage vacuole in
              GA-treated cells, but in a different vacuole-like organelle in ABA-treated
              cells. This novel observation indicates that GA both activates and changes the
              subcellular localization of degradative enzymes, providing an attractive model
              for the hormonal regulation of PCD in aleurone cells.  The PI proposes that 
              GA-induced delivery of aleurain to the protein storage vacuole is one of a
              series of events that leads to the formation of a lytic environment and cell
              death.  There are at least three vacuolar compartments in this cell: the
              protein storage vacuole, the secondary vacuole and the aleurain containing
              vacuole.  Experiments are aimed at understanding the function and biogenesis of
              these organelles. Other questions include:  Do vacuoles function as autophagic
              organelles where cellular components are degraded?  If autophagy occurs in
              aleurone vacuoles, how are cellular components delivered to the vacuole?  An
              understanding of the mechanisms by which GA initiates the transformation of the
              aleurone layer from a storage tissue to secretory gland and finally to a dying
              tissue will provide insights into several fundamental questions in plant
              biology.

