Title       : Empirical Analysis of the Steps to War
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a9818557

Award Number: 9818557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Vasquez vasqueja@ctrvax.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul D. Senese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The main purpose of this project is to test a new explanation of the process by
              which states go to war with one another.  This explanation, which has been
              published and elaborated previously, is tested systematically with the new
              Militarized Interstate Dispute data of the Correlates of War project and the
              updated crisis data from the International Crisis Behavior project.  These
              data, however, do not meet always and fully the needs of the project,
              especially with regard to territorial and non-territorial issues under
              contention.  Therefore, the project requires relability and validity tests of
              data, cleaning of certain data, and, where necessary, new data
              collection.

	After testing propositions derived from the explanation, it is
              appraised and then reformulated and made more precise, as appropriate.  The
              steps to war explanation assumes that there are several paths by which war
              breaks out.  It attempts to delineate the typical path by which the strongest
              states in the modern global system come to war.  It conceptualizes the war
              process as emerging out of the interactions (and foreign policy practices) of
              states, with global systemic factors and domestic political factors playing
              important ancillary roles.  It is claimed that war between equals is brought
              about by each side taking a series of steps that increasie hostility and make
              the issue(s) at hand more intractable.  This involves disputants in a series of
              crises, one of which escalates to war.  The published explanation specifies
              which steps are thought to increase the probability of war and which
              characteristics of crises (and disputes) make them prone to escalation.  This
              project systematically tests these specifications with particular emphases on
              the role of territorial (versus non-territorial) disputes, the making of
              alliances, military buildups, repetition of disputes, and global norms.  To
              investigate these specifications, we employ maximum likelihood estimation
              techniques suitable for the analyses of binary, ordinal, nominal, and duration
              level dependent variables.  In addition, since some of our propositions imply
              reciproval causation and, thus, a need for more dynamic forms of statistical
              analyses, we utilize simultaneous equation models as well.  Finally, we use
              two-step estimation procedures designed to model the potential presence of
              sample selection effects.

	The project is the first systematic test of a new
              explanation of war and, as such, it expans the theoretical foundation of
              scientific work.  It seeks to find the "causes" of war in something other than
              power and power distributions, which are the emphasis of most political science
              explanations of war.  By focusing on something other than "power," the project
              hopes to increase scientific knowledge about other important political
              variables and their role in bringing about war.  Testing the steps to war
              explanation increases the knowledge base of the field on the impact of foreign
              policy practices, especially with regard to how various steps and combinations
              of steps increase the probability of intense conflict.  The project also hopes
              to make a significant contribution to the quality of data in the field on the
              types of revisions sought (territorial, policy, regime, miscellaneous) by
              challengers in militarized disputes. 

