Title       : Framing Technical Decision-Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a9818178

Award Number: 9818178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218671             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene I. Rochlin armsis@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd R. La Porte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This grant will support a program of research-oriented training of three
              doctoral students per year over a three-year period on methods for and
              approaches to the study of emergent socio-technical systems in problem areas
              where potential consequences are high and technical, institutional, and policy
              choices are all disputed. The program is designed to provide them with a
              greatly enhanced range of perspectives and potential tools to apply, in a
              research setting that supplies both context and purpose to their education.
              Depending upon circumstances and the past history and training of individual
              students, the program will provide either one or two years of support, so that
              between six and nine graduate students total will be trained. The coordinated
              research will focus on issues that crucially depend upon the mastery both of
              sufficient technical and scientific expertise and on case-oriented,
              actor-centered approaches to modifying, extending, and complementing the tools
              of public policy and organization theory most often used to analyze similar
              situations and problems.

The training will focus both on articulation of the
              perspectives of actors within and without the formal decision-making process
              and the identification and analysis of the functional and operational
              implications of these perspectives. Methods drawn from political science and
              organizational sociology will be complemented with others, such as cultural
              analysis, organizational ethnographies, and participant observation, drawn from
              more actor-oriented social science disciplines, Theories and methods adapted
              from social constructivism and narrative and discourse analysis will also be
              taught to anchor the fieldwork and ethnographies.

The initial issue focus
              will be on greater understanding of two policy arenas with histories of
              contentious debate and lack of resolution for which the elements of risk and
              uncertainty remain open and troubling: the design of an operating system for
              the disposal of high-level nuclear wastes; and the management of excess
              weapons-grade plutonium. Preliminary work in this domain has already uncovered
              three different contextual settings among technical and policy elites, each of
              which is internally coherent, each of which generates plausible outcomes, and
              each of which generates different sets of policy recommendations and
              preferences. These conflicting views create a turbulent environment not only
              for policy-making overall, but for choices and specifications of organizational
              and institutional design. Other cases drawn from work such as air traffic
              control and electrical utility operation under deregulation will also be used
              as exemplars for the training, and will provide promising avenues for future
              research.

The purpose of this project is to offer students from a wide range
              of disciplines and varying intellectual backgrounds the tools to better
              understand the importance and relevance of studying actor beliefs, cultures,
              networks, and interactions, and the degree to which the organizations and
              institutions that emerge will incorporate, represent, or code, these currents
              as constitutive or operational elements. The blending of narrative and
              actor-centered methods of analysis with more familiar institutional,
              structural, and behavioral methods should offer new insights into the ways and
              means by which present as well as future organizations and institutions reflect
              and interpret their social and political environment, or fail to.


