Title       : Social Conformity Versus Autonomy: Social Order, Threat and Political
               Intolerance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9818635

Award Number: 9818635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley Feldman stanley.feldman@ccmail.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The nature and determinants of political tolerance have been a major focus of
              theory and research in political science for the last 50 years.  Typically,
              empirical research on intolerance has examined peoples' willingness to deny
              civil liberties to particular groups.  In the 1950s and 1960s, it was common to
              examine attitudes towards communists and other left-wing groups.  By the 1970s,
              research was demonstrating that an exclusive focus on left-wing groups (or any
              other specific groups) underestimated intolerance for many people.  A new
              methodology - the least-liked group approach - was developed to assess
              intolerance with dislike toward the group held (relatively) constant.  This
              approach is used in much recent research.  Whether all people react to the same
              group or to a disliked group of their choosing, this group-centered approach
              ignores the substantial, positive correlations of intolerance across groups. 
              Although there is still a considerable group-specific component, there also is
              a strong tendency for those who are intolerant of one group to be intolerant of
              many others.
	This inter-group consistency in intolerance is important because
              it provides another perspective on the phenomenon and its determinants.  What
              accounts for these individual differences in intolerance?  The answer to this
              question, I argue in this resarch, is a fundamental conflict between the values
              of social conformity and personal autonomy.  This value conflict arises as
              people deal with the problem of how social order should be maintained.  Does a
              stable social order emerge from the free interactions of autonomous
              individuals, or must we require people to conform to a common set of social
              values and conventions?  This dimension of social conformity-autonomy is
              evident in major cross-national studies of values and should be a central
              component of peoples' beliefs about politics and the nature of political debate
              in society.
	In addition to providing a theoretically based analysis of stable
              individual differences in intolerance, this approach yields new insights about
              the nature and impact of perceived threat.  Recent research shows that
              perceived threat is one of the major predictors of intolerance but it is not
              entirely clear what perceived threat is.  It is either measured very broadly
              (by a series of paired adjectives describing the group) or operationalized as
              threat or belligerence.  I argue that another aspect of perceived threat is
              threat to the stability of the social and political order.  Moreover, this
              dimension of threat should be particularly salient to those who value social
              conformity more than autonomy.  There, thus, should be a strong statistical
              interaction between the social conformity-autonomy dimension and perceived
              threats to the social and political order.
	The research proposed here tests
              the predictions of this new perspective in four experimental questionnaire
              studies, two with college students and two with non-random samples of adults
              from the New York metropolitan area.  The two student studies concentrate on
              the measurement of the social conformity-autonomy dimension and demonstrations
              of its effects on a wide range of political beliefs and attitudes.  The student
              studies also pretest experimental materials for the adult studies.  The two
              adult studies further validate measures of social conformity-autonomy in more
              representative samples and test hypotheses about the effects of threat on
              intolerance.  Using constructed news stories about political groups, the first
              study contrasts threats to the political order with threats of violence.  The
              second study examines the joint effects of two types of threat to the political
              order:  threats directly from a political group and more general threats from
              increasing social and cultural diversity.  The two experimental studies provide
              a closer look at the nature of political threat and the role of social
              conformity-autonomy in moderating the perception and effects of threat.
 

