Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Realistic Computer Graphics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1998  
File        : a9818344

Award Number: 9818344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80082              (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Thompson thompson@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9818344
Thompson, William B.
Cohen, Elaine
Utah University

Realistic
              Computer Graphics

This research instrumentation enables research projects
              in:
- Locomotion Interfaces,
- Virtual Prototyping,
- Perception of Spatial
              Organization in Large-Scale Synthetic Environments, and
- Realistic Computer
              Graphics for Natural Scenes.

The award supports the acquistion of a system
              for generating and projecting high quality computer graphics.  The equipment
              supports research projects involving immersive interfaces and realistic
              computer graphics.  Four projects are taking advantage of this resource. 
              Improved locomotion interfaces are being developed, allowing a user to walk
              through a virtual environment.  Work on haptic interfaces for computer aided
              design (CAD) is being extended, with particular attention to the integration of
              visual and haptic displays to better convey a sense of the complex geometries
              involved in most mechanical designs.  Methods are being developed for more
              accurately conveying a sense of distance, scale, and speed in computer
              generated imagery.  Because current techniques have great difficulty producing
              images of objects which appear to be far away and/or of significant size this
              important work may contribute to the field.  Finally, an analysis of how to
              generate realistic looking synthetic images of outdoor scenes is being
              initiated.  To be successful, all four of these efforts require the graphical
              rendering power and high resolution display capabilities being made available
              as part of this infrastructure acquisition.




