Title       : In Situ and Theoretical Analysis of Zooplankton Patch Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2001      
File        : a9818661

Award Number: 9818661
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cabell S. Davis cdavis@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carin J. Ashjian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott M. Gallager  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Beardsley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Davis 9818661

In-situ and Theoretical Analysis of Zooplankton Patch
              Dynamics


Zooplankton patchiness is a well-known phenomenon. Although patch
              spatial structure and its corre-lation with environmental variation has been
              well described, and theoretical explanations for it have been proposed, direct
              measurement of how patches form and persist has not been possible to date
              because of technological limitations. The investigators will conduct a focused
              field and modeling study to quantify the struc-ture, dynamics, and controlling
              mechanisms of dense copepod patches in eastern Cape Cod Bay. Using a
              combination of numerical modeling, high resolution biological and physical
              mapping, and in-situ behav-ioral observations, they will directly test the
              hypothesis that the patches form in a three-step process: 1) upward swimming
              enhances near-surface abundance, 2) surface convergence together with increased
              up-ward swimming rate further enhances abundance, and 3) high abundance in the
              convergence zone increases interneighbor detection rates which lead to
              increased aggregation behavior. During the field program, mea-surements will be
              made during different phases of the tidal cycle to examine formation of the
              patches due to the tidally driven convergence. Measurements of patch
              persistence after the convergence has dissipated will be indicative of the role
              of biological aggregation behavior in maintaining the patches. Direct in-situ
              observations of various components of copepod swimming behavior will be used
              together with environmental (CTD, fluorescence, attenuation, downwelling light)
              and fluid velocity data to determine parameter values for patch formation
              models. Patch formation in convergent flow will be modeled using a combination
              of two approaches: 1) high resolution 3-D numerical models of the region to
              quantify tidal and subtidal flow and convergence and 2) process models of patch
              formation and swarming that incorporate convergent flows. These calculations
              will be compared with the actual measurements of how the 3-D patch structure
              varies over time. The proposed work will shed new light on mechanisms of patch
              formation and maintenance in zooplankton.


