Title       : JGOFS-Synthesis: The Role of Phytoplankton Community Structure in Determining
               Particulate Elemental Composition, Carbon Fixation, and Bio-Optical Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1999   
File        : a9818790

Award Number: 9818790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111487             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Lizotte   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Oshkosh
	      800 Algoma Boulevard
	      Oshkosh, WI  549013551    414/424-1234

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,1650,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Lizotte 

		Phytoplankton community structure and biogeography have been
              identified as key gaps in the knowledge needed to progress from current ocean
              biogeochemistry models (with generic phytoplankton parameterizations) to more
              explicit models. In particular, deviations from generic phytoplankton
              descriptions may be greatest during episodic blooms of a few species, and in
              some regions these episodic events are associated with rapid flux of
              particulate carbon to the seafloor, distinct biogeochemical processes (e.g.,
              N-fixation, carbonate precipitation, dimethylsulfide production), or shifts in
              elemental composition of particulate matter. Thus, future biogeochemical models
              may need to shift parameterizations to reflect biogeographic regions and/or
              seasonal blooms. During the JGOFS era, High-Performance-Liquid-Chromatography
              (HPLC) methods for characterizing phytoplankton pigments were used widely, and
              these data sets can be used to make a first-order approximation of
              phytoplankton community structure. This project will analyze HPLC pigment data
              sets collected worldwide to develop algorithms (on event, regional, and global
              scales) for estimating phytoplankton community structure. The estimates of
              phytoplankton community structure from HPLC pigments will be compared to
              microscopy and flow-cytometry data, when available, to test the validity of
              these new algorithms. Drs. Lizotte and DiTullio will compile and synthesize
              data sets to study biogeographical distributions of phytoplankton. They will
              also extract subsets of the data for samples dominated by single taxonomic
              groups (e.g., diatoms, coccolithophorids, picocyanobacteria, Phaeocystis spp.)
              to determine whether other phytoplankton-related parameters are correlated with
              community structure. The ancillary data sets compiled for phytoplankton-related
              parameters will be those most useful for developing SMP biogeochemical models
              and for remote sensing of phytoplankton biomass (e.g. particulate carbon,
              nitrogen, and absorbance; carbon:chlorophyll a ratios; photosynthetic rates;
              photosynthesis-irradiance parameters and quantum yields; nutrient utilization
              indices and ratios; light attenuation; reflectance ratios; and water column
              stability).


 

