Title       : Mechanisms of Stress Regulation in the Female
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9818440

Award Number: 9818440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Herman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Exposure to stress elicits a characteristic activation of glucocorticoid
              secretion by the adrenal gland.  Glucocorticoids act to mobilize bodily
              resources, promoting physiological and psychological adaptation and thereby
              enhancing survival.   The glucocorticoid stress response exhibits a profound
              sexual dimorphism, marked by significantly greater secretion in females than in
              males.  At present, neuronal circuits underlying this gender difference are
              poorly understood. To address this critical issue, the present proposal uses a
              rat model to study the impact of gender and female gonadal steroids on central
              nervous system control of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocortical stress axis.
               Objective 1 shall test the hypothesis that estrogen mediates increases in
              stress excitability through defined actions on anatomical pathways controlling
              adrenocortical secretions. Objective 2 will document connections between
              estrogen-receptive and adrenocortical regulatory cell populations, and use
              intracranial administration to identify specific central sites of estrogen
              action. This set of experiments will provide the first detailed analysis of how
              cross-talk between adrenocortical and gonadal hormones is accomplished within
              the central nervous system. Knowledge of the neurocircuitry mediating estrogen
              effects on stress hormone secretion will advance understanding of the role of
              gonadal steroids in brain function, and provide novel insight as to how stress
              is processed differently in male and females. 
