Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: A High-Performance Computing and Imaging Facility
               for Research in Image Understanding and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1999   
File        : a9818212

Award Number: 9818212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim L. Boyer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Flynn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terrence M. Caelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9818212
Boyer, Kim L.
Flynn, Patrick J.
The Ohio State University

CISE
              Research Instrumentation:  A High-Performance Computing and Imaging Facility
              for
Research in Image Understanding and Analysis

This research
              instrumentation enables research projects in:
- Perceptual Organization and
              Image Annotation with Machine Learning
- Advanced Object Recognition:
              Free-Form Objects and Large Modelbases, and
- Intelligent Image
              Compression.

To support the aforementioned projects, this award contributes
              to the purchase of high performance computing, data acquisition, and display
              facilities: several Pentiums, switches, disks, backup tape drives, image
              analysis workstations, scanners, digital video disk, digital cameras, printers,
              monitors, etc.  The research constitutes a cooperative effort of the Department
              of Electrical Engineering and the Center for Mapping at Ohio State University. 
              The equipment enables studies in image and video understanding and
analysis,
              specifically the research projects cited.  Work in computer vision and image
              analysis is highly computationally intensive, owing to the large datasets and
              complex algorithms involved.  All of this computing activity is sandwiched
              between the data acquisition (imaging) step and the display or other
              dissemination of results.  The facility will provide a flexible and powerful
              testbed for the development
and implementation of distributed algorithms for
              image and video understanding, based on Bayesian network formalisms, as well as
              the acquisition of high-quality digital imagery and video.  To this end, the
              facility incorporates a commodity supercomputer (Beowulf cluster) and image
              analysis workstations with sufficient storage and network bandwidth to handle
              the demands of image and video processing datasets and algorithms.
Because
              many of the applications studied involve high resolution aerial imagery, (near)
              real-time demands, or motion, this capability and flexibility is crucial.  To
              maximize the utility of the installation, many input sources and image storage
              facilities, such as digital cameras and camcorders, framestores, satellite
              digital video receiver, and 3D scanner are included.


