Title       : Dissertation Research: Construction of the Human Genome Diversity Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9818409

Award Number: 9818409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11975              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Hilgartner shh6@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              As the prominence of population genetics and studies of human diversity grows,
              issues concerning the science and politics of human genetic diversity research
              promise increasingly to confront policy makers, funding agencies, institutional
              review boards, scientists, and communities of potential research subjects. This
              dissertation research addresses these issues through a case study of the Human
              Genome Diversity Project. The Diversity Project, first proposed by population
              geneticists and evolutionary biologists in 1991, aims to archive a global
              sample of human genomes that would permit studies of both evolutionary and
              medical relevance. However, since its inception, the Diversity Project has been
              surrounded by controversy, and it still largely remains in the planning stage.
              The debates about the Diversity Project reflect deeper issues concerning the
              science and politics of group membership, definition, and voice. To illuminate
              these issues, the dissertation research project explores three key aspects of
              the controversy: the scientific debates about the nature and boundary of
              groups; the moral, social and technical debates about the ethics and validity
              of group consent; and the moral and social debate about whether and how
              Diversity Project subjects should participate in planning and implementing the
              Project. Ethnographic and interviewing methods will be used to investigate the
              extent to which these debates were intertwined, and how they interacted with
              the complex politics of North/South relations, race, and participation in
              contemporary liberal democracies. In so doing, the project will contribute to
              an emerging area of inquiry in science and technology studies that aims to
              provide detailed empirical analyses of the ways in which scientific knowledge
              and moral and social orders are "coproduced." The research will also add to the
              scholarly debate about the relationship between race and science by exploring
              the complex relations between scientific practices and the definition of
              categories of 'race.' Finally, the project will shed light on the public and
              scholarly discussions about minority participation in scientific research,
              group consent, and the nature of racial, ethnic and group identities in
              contemporary liberal democracies.
