Title       : Peptide Modulation of Amino Acid Transmitters in Neuroedocrine Arcuate Nucleus
               Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a9818441

Award Number: 9818441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony Van den Pol anthony.vandenpol@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Neurons of the mediobasal hypothalamus act to control the endocrine system.  By
              secreting factors into the median eminence that are carried to the anterior
              pituitary gland, these neurons regulate hormone release form the thyroid,
              ovary, testis and adrenal gland.  Many different neurotransmitters are present
              in the mediobasal hypothalamus, several of them were first discovered in this
              important brain area.  Neuronal communication to these neuroendocrine neurons
              is therefore critical in conveying information from the rest of the brain to
              this final common pathway regulating hormonal balances.  Of the dozens of
              neurotransmitters found here, two amino acid transmitters, glutamate and GABA,
              appear to be responsible for almost all actual synaptic activity, and when
              their receptors are blocked, synaptic activity is generally eliminated.  A
              number of hypothalamic peptides have been shown to play a very important role
              in endocrine regulation.  The general scientific point addressed here is that
              neuroactive peptides in the mediobasal hypothalamus act primarily to modulate
              the activity of the amino acid neurotransmitters.
Dr. van den Pol will study a
              new hypothalamic peptide neurotransmitter called hypocretin,  which increases
              neuronal activity.  Hypocretin is synthesized only by neurons in the
              dorsolateral hypothalamus and perifornical area, a part of the brain intimately
              involved in the regulation of body weight and energy balance.  Nerve cells that
              make hypocretin send long axons to the mediobasal hypothalamus, suggesting they
              may signal this brain region.   Dr. Van den Pol's laboratory will use rat brain
              slices in vitro and synaptically coupled cultures to study the mediobasal
              hypothalamic cells that are influenced by this new transmitter and its
              mechanism of action.  To accomplish this, they will use digital imaging and
              electrophysiology.   To test the hypothesis that hypocretin acts by modulating
              GABA and glutamate neurons of the arcuate neurons, other transmitter actions
              will be blocked and the effect of hypocretin on GABA and glutamate mediated
              electrical activity will be determined.  They will also investigate if
              hypocretin's mechanism of action involves intracellular calcium. 
Results
              obtained from these studies could contribute to elucidate the role of
              hypocretin in feeding, maintenance of weight and body temperature and in the
              regulation of the endocrine and autonomic nervous system.  It will also advance
              our knowledge on how neurotransmitters work. 


