Title       : Site Summer Workshops in Theoretical Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9818892

Award Number: 9818892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74969              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Sargent sargent@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth L. Judd  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides partial assistance with travel expenses of participants in
              the annual Summer Workshops on Economic Theory conducted each summer by the
              Stanford Institute of Theoretical Economics (SITE). This six-week collection of
              workshops brings together prominent scholars as well as younger economists for
              presentation and discussion of their current research. This workshop series is
              now in its 29th year and continues to serve as an international forum for the
              study of innovative topics in economic theory and mathematical economics.
              Stanford University provides full administrative support and facilities for the
              program. Some topics considered for inclusion in the 1999 workshops such as
              general equilibrium, are long-term interests of SITE. Others, such as empirical
              work based on theoretical models, computational methods, and issues in local
              public finance, represent new directions that SITE has taken in recent years
              and expects to continue in future years.

General equilibrium models continue
              to be of great importance and interest in economic theory, and are frequently
              used in other fields, such as public economics and macroeconomics. Originally
              Arrow and Debreu considered competitive markets for a complete set of state
              contingent commodities, and symmetric information. This is an unrealistic
              description of actual market economies that explains the continuing interest in
              incomplete markets. SITE's aim is to encourage research that seeks theoretical
              explanations of market incompleteness, without which we lack a proper framework
              for analyzing the effects of policies designed to remedy the consequent
              inefficiencies. Computation is playing an increasingly important role in
              economic analysis. Economists and mathematicians are developing algorithms to
              compute equilibria of increasingly complex economic models.

SITE has
              selected computational theory and practice for special emphasis because it is
              an increasingly active field in mathematical economics. For example, solution
              methods for dynamic stochastic competitive equilibrium models were developed;
              methods from the numerical functional literature are being applied to dynamic
              models, algorithms for convergence and errors have been evaluated; and there is
              also active work on computational methods for dynamic economies with many
              agents.

