Title       : Collaborative Research: The Biogeochemistry of DMS and Related Compounds in a
               Chemically Stratified Antarctic Lake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9818140

Award Number: 9818140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99876              (Estimated)
Investigator: Giacomo R. DiTullio ditullioj@cofc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              OPP 98-15998 P.I. J. Priscu
OPP98-18140 P.I. G. DiTullio
Dimethylsulfide (DMS)
              is the dominant volatile sulfur compound emitted from the ocean and may
              represent up to 90% of the sea-to-air biogenic sulfur flux.  It has been
              hypothesized that cloud formation caused by condensation nuclei associated with
              products of DMS oxidation can directly counteract warming effects of
              anthropogenically produced CO2.  Despite the global importance of DMS and
              related sulfonium compounds, and the significant role of aquatic systems in DMS
              production (particularly in south polar regions), the sources and sinks of DMS
              and associated sulfonium compounds remain equivocal.  Our proposed
              
multi-investigator field and laboratory research will examine the
              biogeochemistry of water column and sedimentary DMS/DMSP
              (dimethylsulfoniopropionate), and the role of associated compounds (e.g.
              dimethylsulfoxide, dimethylated polysulfides) in Lake Bonney.  Lake Bonney is a
              relatively simple (no turbulence, no grazers and little atmospheric exchange)
              aquatic system and therefore provides a highly tractable environment for
              investigating microbially mediated cycling of biogenic sulfur.  Preliminary
              data suggest that maximum levels of DMS precursors occur in the
              deep-chlorophyll layer of the lake, a zone dominated by cryptophyte algae.  In
              addition, DMS concentrations in the aphotic waters of Lake Bonney are among the
              highest recorded in a natural aquatic system.  These observations indicate that
              precursors produced by trophogenic zone phytoplankton sink to the aphotic
              waters and sediments where they are microbially decomposed to DMS and other
              sulfur compounds.  The proposed research will define the sources and sinks of
              DMS and associated compounds and relate them to overall ecosystem function.  A
              model of biogeochemical transformations of organo-sulfur compounds in Lake
              Bonney will be developed.  

