Title       : Reusable Modeling Components for Simulating Land Use, Transportation, and Land
               Cover
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1999   
File        : a9818378

Award Number: 9818378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439357             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Waddell pwaddell@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan H. Borning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marina Alberti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott G. Rutherford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0000908   Urban Problems                          
Program Ref : 1057,1349,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***
9818378 
Waddell
This Urban Research Initiative (URI) project develops a
              new approach to assess two particular linkages that are central to the
              development of more sophisticated and integrated urban dynamic models in the
              domain of interactions between the human, built, and natural environments.  In
              particular, the linkages between land use and transportation, and between land
              use and land cover will be investigated, with focus on the development of
              reusable modeling components that provide flexibility in analyzing common
              problems.  The specific research questions that will be probed using the
              modeling components address how resolution and scale of space, time, and
              behavior affect the result of the analysis. 

Land use patterns interact
              strongly with many other properties of urban areas, including transportation
              patterns, social capital, air and water quality, and stresses on natural
              ecosystems.  This interaction is complex, e.g., land use patterns strongly
              affect transportation patterns, which affect air quality and other
              environmental factors, which in turn affect land use patterns.  Similarly, land
              use, land cover, and environmental stressors are strongly interdependent, and
              developing a land use-land cover model provides a foundation for modeling
              urban-environmental interactions.  Despite these complex interactions, in most
              urban models land use is considered an exogenous variable, that is, the land
              use patterns are simply input into the model without accounting for feedback.
              

In this research, modeling components will be developed by extending the
              UrbanSim land use simulation model, and adding generalization of the underlying
              data structures and behavior using object oriented programming methods.  The
              results of the project will be twofold.  First, a set of reusable modeling
              components will be produced for the development of integrated models of the
              dynamic interactions between the human, build, and natural environments.  The
              software and documentation will be freely available via the Internet.  Second,
              these modeling components will be applied to develop integrated land
              use-transportation models and also land use-land cover models.  A key aspect of
              this research will be the cultivation of partnerships with metropolitan
              Planning Organizations that will participate in the design and testing of the
              models developed within this project. 
***



