Title       : Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Catastrophic Global Warming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2000      
File        : a9818642

Award Number: 9818642
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100956             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony C. Fisher fisher@are.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   The investigators propose to study the effect of irreversible investment in
              pollution abatement capital, irreversible stocks of greenhouse gases,
              avoidable, and potentially catastrophic, damages, and future learning about the
              nature of damages, on the optimal rate of emission of greenhouse gases.
              Abatement capital is said to be irreversible if resources once invested cannot
              be re-used for consumption or re-invested in other forms of capital. The stock
              of greenhouse gases is said to be irreversible if it cannot be reduced through
              abatement and if it does not decay naturally (climatologists report that about
              13-18 % of the total carbon dioxide emitted will remain in the atmosphere for
              several thousands of years). Damages are avoidable if the probability of
              damages depends on the stock of greenhouse gases and catastrophic if there are
              sharp jumps in the damage function. Given these features of the economic
              environment and the possibility of learning about damages in the future, the
              investigators propose to analyze whether or not policymakers should change the
              rate at which greenhouse gases are being emitted today. It is reasonable to
              conjecture that the presence of irreversible capital should lead to lower
              investment today and that irreversible stocks of greenhouse gases and
              avoidable, and potentially catastrophic, damages should induce higher
              investment. Learning about future damages should reinforce these results.
    
              Previous studies have found that, perhaps counter to intuition, irreversible
              stocks of greenhouse gases have either a zero or positive effect on the desired
              level of emissions today. In preliminary work the investigators show that this
              result is driven by the definitions of irreversible capital and irreversible
              stocks of greenhouse gases, and an implicit assumption that the risk of damages
              is not avoidable. The investigators develop a theoretical model and suggest
              different definitions that imply a stronger irreversibility effect for the
              stock of greenhouse gases and a weaker effect for capital. Adding avoidable
              risk to the model strengthens these results. The theoretical model does not
              allow agents to act on new information on the nature of damages. A numerical
              model, a parameterization of the theoretical model, that allows agents to act
              on new information about the nature of damages, suggests that, with unavoidable
              risk, irreversible capital leads to a decrease in investment while irreversible
              stocks of greenhouse gases lead to an increase. Avoidable risk counters the
              effect of irreversible capital and strengthens the effect of irreversible
              stocks of greenhouse gases.
     The investigators propose to build on this
              work in three important ways: (i) by introducing learning into the analytical
              model; (ii) by developing estimates of cost or production functions for
              reducing emissions and ambient concentrations of greenhouse gases, and also an
              estimate of the catastrophe probability function to use in simulations; and
              (iii) by adapting and extending a large scale, empirically realistic simulation
              model (Nordhaus' DICE model), to incorporate the novel features of their
              analytical model and their illustrative simulations. This will provide credible
              estimates of the relative magnitudes of the irreversibility effects associated
              with capital, the stock of greenhouse gases, and avoidable risk, and yield
              implications for current policy on control of greenhouse gas emissions.


