Title       : Nucleus Accumbens Dopamine and Work-Related Response Costs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2000  
File        : a9818430

Award Number: 9818430
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164668             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Salamone salamone@psych.psy.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Previous studies involving response choice tasks or various schedules of
              reinforcement have demonstrated that the effects of nucleus accumbens dopamine
              (DA) depletion interact strongly with the work requirements of the task.  Rats
              with accumbens DA depletion are impaired on behavioral tasks characterized by
              high levels of work output, and on choice procedures. Accumbens DA depletion
              causes animals to shift their relative response allocation in the direction of
              the task with lower work requirements.  On lever pressing tasks, rats with
              accumbens DA depletion appear to have deficits in maintaining the high work
              output necessary for emitting large numbers of responses. Although it is
              difficult to identify precisely the behavioral functions that are affected by
              accumbens DA depletion, the current working hypothesis for this research is
              that accumbens DA depletion reduces the propensity for expending energy or
              effort. A series of experiments is proposed to determine if rats with accumbens
              DA depletion have problems responding to delayed or intermittent reinforcement,
              or if their central problem is responding to large work requirements, including
              force requirements.  It is hypothesized that rats with accumbens DA depletion
              do not have "anhedonia" (i.e., a lack of emotional response to food); indeed,
              rats with accumbens DA depletion remain directed towards the acquisition and
              consumption of food provided that the work requirement is relatively low.
              Instead, it is thought that rats with accumbens DA depletion have "anergia"
              (i.e., less likely to work for food).  This function can be conceived of as a
              higher-order sensorimotor process, which is very similar to the concept of
              "activational" aspects of motivation. This research could identify mechanisms
              in the brain that  regulate energy expenditure, and modulate how effort is
              allocated into various response alternatives. 

