Title       : Walrasian Asymmetric Information Economies: Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9818844

Award Number: 9818844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alberto Bisin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the research is a unified analysis of general economies with
              asymmetric information that encompass both adverse selection and moral hazard.
              While the analysis of welfare properties of these economies is developed by
              contract theory, a unified view of their equilibrium properties is far from
              established. The literature contains in fact various different approaches and
              notions of equilibrium, and stresses many specific themes of great conceptual
              interest, but which are very difficult to connect and compare for lack of a
              general framework: the unraveling of markets with adverse selection, the
              conceptual distinction of separating and pooling equilibria, signalling,
              rat~onmg.
In economies with asymmetric information, as opposed to Arrow-Debreu
              economies, different assumptions about the observability of agents' trading
              choices matter. Agents' trades in fact contain information about their private
              information. But observation of agents' trades require in general costly
              monitoring and hence various other assumptions on observability of trades,
              besides complete observability, are of interest. (Complete observability of
              trades also implausibly implies, in equilibrium, exclusivity of contractual
              relationships: agents only trade one contract in equilibrium which specifies
              their allocation of consumption and leisure in the present and at any time and
              state of uncertainty in the future.)
This research centers on comparing
              properties of economies with complete observability of trades with those of
              economies with various restrictions on observability of trades: from
              observability only of 'related' trades (e.g. observability of credit contracts
              only in credit markets, health insurance contracts only in health insurance
              markets, and so on), to observability only of buying and selling positions (as
              opposed to observability of the whole set of contracts traded), to finally
              complete anonymity of trades.
For each of the baseline assumptions on
              observability of trades, existence of competitive equilibria, and their welfare
              properties will be studied. A characterization of a minimal form of
              observability of trades which is necessary in general for existence of
              competitive equilibria will be provided. Conditions for the decentralization of
              incentive constrained efficient allocation by competitive equilibria with
              complete observability of trades will be derived; while it will be shown that,
              in general, equilibrium allocations of economies with restrictions on
              observability of trades are not even third best efficient.
Finally various
              applications, like for instance the design of securities in financial markets,
              the study of bankruptcy procedures and priority rules, and the study of
              rationing schemes, in which the analysis of restrictions on the observability
              of trades is most relevant, will be developed.

