Title       : The Nature of Conceptual Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9818094

Award Number: 9818094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77888              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold I. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop a general theory of concepts and apply it
              to two types of studies: 1) eases of conceptual change from the history of
              science; and 2) analyses of two concepts that are central to philosophy of
              science, causality and truth. The guiding theme of the project is that
              conceptual analyses and studies of conceptual change must be carried out on the
              basis of an explicit theory of concepts. The developed theory will provide
              accounts of the different types of concepts, explain how the content of these
              concepts is determined, provide criteria for an adequate conceptual analysis,
              yield a framework for comparing concepts from different scientific theories and
              historical periods, and provide a basis for understanding how new concepts are
              introduced.

The methodology of this study combines philosophical analysis of
              concepts, metaphilosophical theory construction, and case studies of conceptual
              change from the history of science. The starting point for the project is an
              exposition and critical analysis of Wilfrid Sellars' theory of concepts,
              followed by the construction of an improved Sellarsian theory. The critical
              analysis will be based on three considerations: the internal logic of Sellars'
              position, comparisons with alternative views in the literature, and the ability
              of the theory to provide an understanding of examples of conceptual development
              and conceptual innovation in science. Concepts may be viewed from two
              complementary points of view: On one hand, concepts are psychological
              entities-cognitive tools that people use to think about specific topics. On the
              other hand, concepts can be studied as abstract structures independent of their
              implementation in individuals. This project will be concerned with concepts
              from the abstract point of view. The requirement that human concepts must be
              implementable in human minds provides a constraint on the acceptability of any
              theory of concepts, although this constraint will not be considered in the
              present project.

The resulting theory of concepts will be applied to several
              studies of conceptual development from seventeenth-century and
              twentieth-century science; these studies will concern examples that were not
              used in developing the theory. Cases to be studied will include the development
              of concepts of dynamics from Galileo, through Descartes, to Newton; the
              introduction of the concept of an isotope; and developments in the concept of
              force in twentieth-century physics. It will be argued that one major advantage
              of the Sellarsian approach is its ability to provide a systematic basis for
              comparing concepts from competing theories, and for understanding how new
              concepts can be introduced by systematic alteration of existing
              concepts.

The theory will also be applied to analyses of the concepts of
              causality and truth. In the case of causality, the theory will provide the
              basis for a detailed argument that philosophers defending different analyses of
              this concept are actually discussing different, but analogous, concepts. This
              result will lead to the proposal that debate on this concept should be
              refocused. Rather than seeking a single analysis of a presumed universal causal
              concept, philosophers should provide accounts of a variety of causal concepts
              as a basis for exploring which, if any, are instantiated in the world and found
              in various forms of discourse. The account of truth will develop a form of
              correspondence theory in which the notion of correspondence is introduced as a
              fruitful analogy, not a definition

There will be two major outcomes of this
              project. The first will be a theory of concepts that can provide a richer basis
              for conceptual analyses and for studies of conceptual change in science than is
              provided by available competitors. The second will be a set of conceptual
              analyses and historical cases studies that are of interest in their own right,
              and which also provide evidence of the power of the new theory.

