Title       : San Diego Symposium on Asymptotics and Applied Analysis to be held January
               10-14, 2000 in San Diego, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1999   
File        : a9818531

Award Number: 9818531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy M. Dunster dunster@math.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald A. Lutz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Re: DMS-9818531
Title: San Diego Symposium on Asymptotics and Applied
              Analysis.



T. M. Dunster and D. A. Lutz are the organizers of the "San
              Diego Symposium
on Asymptotics and Applied Analysis" from January 10 - 14,
              2000 at San
Diego State University, California.  The proposed conference will
              have
talks falling under the following three categories in asymptotics
              and
applied analysis: difference equations, ordinary differential
              equations,
and functions defined by integrals.  The first of these would
              emphasize
asymptotic methods involving special functions.  Included in the
              second and
third categories would be new results related to
              exponentially-improved
asymptotics and hyperasymptotics, summation of
              divergent solutions,
connection problems, error analysis, and applications to
              special functions.
The following eleven leading experts in the above fields
              have indicated a
willingness to participate as principal speakers in the
              proposed symposium:
F. W. J. Olver (Maryland), R. Askey (Wisconsin), W. Balser
              (Ulm, Germany),
C. Bender (St. Louis), M. Berry (Bristol, UK), B. Braaksma
              (Netherlands),
P. Pham (Nice, France), R. Schaefke (Strasbourg, France), Y.
              Sibuya
(Minneapolis), N. Temme (Netherlands), and R. Wong (Hong
              Kong).
Post-doctoral and graduate students, and especially those
              from
under-represented groups in mathematics, are strongly encouraged to
              attend.

The broad area of this conference is asymptotics of special
              functions.
Asymptotics is defined to mean, for example, the approximation of a
              given
function in terms of a function whose properties are better understood,
              or
which can be more readily computed.  Special functions are solutions
              of
certain equations which appear in many areas of physics, engineering
              and
mathematics.  This is a very classical branch of mathematics that
              has
already contributed much to our understanding of the physical
              world.
However, during the past decade there have been a series of new
              and
exciting ideas leading to significant improvements in the accuracy
              of
asymptotic methods, with the main contributors coming from the US,
              Europe,
and the Fareast.  But since 1989 (Winnipeg, Canada) and there have
              been no
major conferences in North America on the theme of this symposium,
              even
though there have been many conferences on similar themes in Europe
              and
Asia.  This symposium will bring experts and younger researchers
              together
to disseminate these new ideas to a wider audience and lay the
              groundwork
for future studies and collaboration, new applications, and insight
              into
more complex problems to be yet solved.

