Title       : Human Brain K Channel Sites of Interaction with G Protein Subunit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1999  
File        : a9818053

Award Number: 9818053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diomedes E. Logothetis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Guarnieri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Sinai School of Medicin
	      One Gustave L. Levy Place
	      New York, NY  100296504    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Logothetis
IBN 9818053
LAY PROJECT SUMMARY

Potassium channels are proteins
              embedded in the lipid bilayer that selectively allow K+ ion movement across the
              plasma membrane.  Under physiological conditions K+ ion movement retards
              cellular excitability. A decrease in excitability can be manifested in
              different ways, such as in a decrease of the frequency of action potentials,
              the units of cellular electrical activity, or a decrease in transmitter
              release. A certain class of K+ channels, the G protein-gated K channels, couple
              extracellular signals, such as hormones or neurotransmitters, to changes in
              membrane potential and therefore to cellular excitability. Acetylcholine (ACh)
              for example, the transmitter of the vagus nerve, binds a receptor on the
              surface of a cardiac cell and activates a membrane associated signaling
              protein, called a GTP binding protein, which in turn interacts with the K+
              channel to activate it and slow heart rate. The details of the interaction of
              the G protein with the potassium channel are not understood. This is partly due
              to lack of high resolution structures of mammalian K+ channels and their
              complex with the G proteins.  Such information is of paramount importance in
              order to understand the molecular physiology of these potassium channels.
This
              proposal seeks to understand how functionally important sites on G
              protein-gated K+ channels interact with G proteins. Use of an ion channel to
              probe G protein effects enables us to probe physiologically relevant
              interactions in real time and at an unprecedented resolution, the single
              protein level. Recently, we identified G protein sensitive sites of the k+
              channel. In parallel we have developed computational methods to model the 3-D
              structure of a G protein-interacting peptide, QEHA (Chen et al., 1995). Here,
              we propose subjecting the channel G protein-sensitive peptides to Monte
              Carlo/Stochastic Dynamics simulations and testing experimentally model
              predictions, in order to understand their interactions with G proteins.  What
              makes this proposal unique and most appropriate for funding by the National
              Science Foundation is the exciting collaboration of theoretical and
              experimental approaches lead by the two co-investigators.

