Title       : Biochemical and Genetic Analysis of the RNA Polymerase Specificity of Small
               Nuclear RNA Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2001  
File        : a9818000

Award Number: 9818000
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Stumph   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Stumph

	The small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) known as U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6
              comprise a highly abundant class of metabolically stable, non-polyadenylated
              RNA molecules that are required for pre-messenger RNA splicing in eukaryotic
              organisms.  Whereas U6 snRNA is synthesized by RNA polymerase III, the
              remainder of the spliceosomal snRNAs are synthesized by RNA polymerase II.  In
              spite of this difference in polymerase specificity, the promoter sequences of
              U6 genes are very similar in structure to those of the snRNA genes transcribed
              by RNA polymerase II.  For example, U1 and U6 genes have promoter structures
              that are more closely related to each other than either is related to classical
              RNA polymerase II or III promoters.  Furthermore, overlapping sets of
              transcription factors participate in binding to U1 and U6 promoters, including
              the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and the PSE-binding protein (PBP).  It is
              therefore of great interest to understand how RNA polymerase specificity is
              determined at snRNA gene promoters.  Experiments will be performed that use the
              U1 and U6 snRNA genes of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster as a model
              system.  A multifaceted approach using techniques of biochemistry, molecular
              biology, molecular modeling, and genetics will be employed.  The trajectory of
              the DNA will be determined following its assembly into partial transcription
              pre-initiation complexes with PBP and TBP.  Helical phasing, DNA
              circularization, and DNA minicircle binding assays will be used to determine
              the DNA-bending properties of PBP itself bound to DNA.  Following this, the
              overall net direction of DNA bending will be determined when PBP and TBP are
              simultaneously bound to the same DNA molecule.  The unique features of the
              Drosophila system will be further exploited by employing a genetic approach.  A
              screen for Drosophila mutants that have an altered or relaxed RNA polymerase
              specificity at snRNA gene promoters will be carried out.  The defective genes
              will be mapped, isolated, and characterized.   

	There are two classes of
              enzymes that synthesize the small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) that function in mRNA
              maturation: RNA polymerase II and RNA polymerase III. The regulatory DNA
              sequences that specify which polymerase is used for a given snRNA are quite
              similar, so it is of interest to determine what specifies the choice. In this
              project, the organization of the proteins that initiate snRNA synthesis will be
              examined in RNA pol II and RNA pol III-specific snRNA genes, using biochemical
              approaches. Furthermore, Drosophila mutants that can use either RNA pol II or
              RNA pol III will be isolated and characterized. This work should lead to
              significant insight into the molecular architecture that effects the choice of
              RNA polymerase not only on snRNA promoters, but also on other promoters
              transcribed by RNA polymerases II and III.

