Title       : Analysis of Antarctic Ice-Shelf Rifting, Calving and Ice-Front Ocean Interaction
               Using SAR Interferometry, Ice-Shelf Thermomechanical Models and Ocean Tidel
               Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2001   
File        : a9818622

Award Number: 9818622
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172836             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. MacAyeal drm7@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is to support a study of Antarctic ice-shelf rifting, calving, and
              ice-front ocean interaction using synthetic aperture radar (SAR)
              interferometry, ice-shelf thermomechanical models and ocean tidal models.  The
              mass balance of the Antarctic ice sheet is governed in large part by iceberg
              calving from the large-scale ice shelves which surround the ice sheet's seaward
              perimeter.  This work is designed to develop an understanding of ice-shelf flow
              and rifting processes.  The recent break-up of the northernmost portion of the
              Larsen Ice Shelf suggests that ice shelves can catastrophically disintegrate in
              response to environmental change by a "disaggregation" process involving
              pre-existing detachment rifts.  This work will address the question of whether
              similar break-up could be possible for the larger Filchner-Ronne and Ross ice
              shelves.  The existence of rifts is believed to be a necessary condition for
              sudden ice-shelf break-up, and processes such as meltwater formation and
              surface ponding are believed to be the additional sufficient (enabling)
              condition that causes rifts to separate.  The focus of this study will be on
              the governing tidal and creep-flow processes by which rifts are created.  This
              study will involve synthetic aperture radar (SAR) interferometry, finite
              difference modeling of ocean tides, and finite-element thermomechanical
              modeling of ice-shelf creep flow.  The processes that govern ice-shelf
              fracture, calving, flow and interaction with the ocean and atmosphere will be
              investigated.
