Title       : The Civil Jury at Work: A Study of Discussions and Deliberations by Real Juries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9818806

Award Number: 9818806
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shari S. Diamond sdiamond@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil Vidmar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Bar Foundation
	      750 North Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606114403    312/988-6513

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research takes advantage of an unprecedented opportunity to study the
              behavior of actual juries as they make decisions in the jury room.  For the
              past quarter century or more the American civil jury has been a focus of
              controversy involving claims about the quality of its performance.  Some
              critics have called for its abolition, but many more have asserted only that
              jury reforms are needed.  The claims about jury performance and the reforms
              that have been introduced in various courts involve empirical assertions about
              jury behavior.  Although a considerable body of research has developed on the
              jury to address these empirical assertions, it consists exclusively of
              simulation studies, analysis of verdicts from archives, or post-trial
              interviews with jurors.  A direct study of jury deliberations has not been
              possible.  Consequently, questions have been raised about the utility of this
              research to provide an accurate portrayal of what juries actually do and the
              ability of theoretical models that researchers have developed to explain the
              way that juries actually behave.   This research project seizes upon a unique
              opportunity to see inside the real jury room.  In order to evaluate the effect
              of an important and controversial jury reform in Arizona, namely allowing
              jurors to discuss evidence during the trial rather than only during final
              deliberations, the Pima County Court (Tucson) obtained permission form the
              Arizona Supreme Court to allow videotaping of the actual deliberations of 100
              civil jury trials and to randomly assign two-fifths of the juries to a "no
              discussion condition."  The parties and jurors give their permission for the
              videotaping and the tapes are confidential and can be used only for research
              purposes.  The trials are also videotaped so that the researchers can compare
              jury discussion with what actually occurred at trials.  Additionally, the trial
              judge, jurors, and attorneys answer post-trial questionnaires.  This research
              will analyze the tapes of these actual deliberations and other measures in
              order to address a number of questions:  What are the effects of allowing early
              discussion of evidence?  What does the jury consider "important" evidence? 
              Does the jury understand the evidence and how does it arrive at this
              understanding?  How do juries handle expert testimony and respond to
              conflicting experts?  What are the effects of judicial intructions on the jury?
               What is the relation of liability decisions to jury awards?  How does the jury
              arrive at its award?  Do judges have a different perspective than juries?  The
              findings will have practical applications for developing procedures to assist
              the jury in its task and will provide critical insights about theoretical
              issues bearing on jury decision-making.
