Title       : Towards an Improved LGM Surface Ocean Reconstruction with Focus on the Eastern
               Pacific and Tropical Atlantic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2001    
File        : a9818237

Award Number: 9818237
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346401             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan C. Mix mix@coas.oregonstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicklas G. Pisias  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
ATM-9818237
Mix, Alan C.
Oregon State University
Title: Towards and
              Improved LGM Surface Ocean Reconstruction with Focus on the Eastern Pacific and
              Tropical Atlantic

The CLIMAP maps of ice-age sea-surface temperatures,
              glacier ice, and albedo, created nearly 20 years ago, have been questioned
              especially in the tropics and subtropics.  Although some regional updates have
              been made to the Last Glacial Maximum-Sea Surface Temperatures (LGM SST) maps,
              no systematic, internally-consistent, multi-proxy reconstruction has yet been
              made of tropical and subtropical thermal structure of the ice age oceans.  Such
              a reconstruction is critical to the goals of the international PMIP
              (Paleoclimate Modeling Intercomparison Project) and EPILOG (Environmental
              Processes of the Ice-Age: Land, Ocean, and Glaciers) programs.  This award
              supports a study to reconsider glacial maximum environments of the low-latitude
              Atlantic and eastern Pacific Oceans, to test a hypothesis that CLIMAP's
              reconstruction was in error in these regions and to improve LGM boundary
              condition estimates for modeling studies.  Work will focus on (1) an incorrect
              assumption that modern (core-top) faunal assemblages were representatives of
              past ice-age) assemblage groupings, and (2) the failure to consider linkages
              between biological productivity and temperature in the biological response of
              the plankton.  Data and insight gained in the last 20 years warrants a new
              systematic look at Last Glacial Maximum (LGM).  This study will provide (1) a
              high quality data set of oceanic thermal estimates, (2) insight into the
              processes that drive oceanic thermal changes, and (3) model predictions that
              can be compared to other sources LGM environmental data and models.

