Title       : Reconstructing the Limits of the Last Glaciation and Postglacial Environments in
               the Southeastern Barents and Southwestern Kara Seas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a9818247

Award Number: 9818247
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499412             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Polyak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Principal Investigator will attempt to define and date the highly-debated
              southeastern margin of the latest Barents-Kara Ice Sheet.  The uncertain
              configuration of this major Northern Hemisphere marine-based ice sheet results
              in striking discrepancies in global models of ice and sea-level distribution at
              and after the Last Glacial Maximum.  A major question is related to the
              southeast extent of the Barents-Kara Ice Sheet.  It is unclear whether Late
              Weichselian ice advanced onto the coasts of western Siberia and Pechora
              lowland.  He surmises that the ice-sheet limits should be investigated on the
              shelf of the Barents and Kara Seas south and east of the Novaya Zemlya
              archipelago.

The Principal Investigator will organize a Russian-American
              oceanographic program to retrieve geophysical and sedimentary records from the
              Pechora Sea and southwestern Kara Sea of time-constrained ice-sheet development
              and postgacial environmental history.  The goal will be to build a
              comprehensive characterization of the glacier-marginal zone by seismic,
              side-scan, and penetration sonar profiling, and recover long sediment cores in
              key locations.  Sediment records will be analyzed for lithological,
              paleobiological, and geochemical proxies supported by rigorous
              chronostratigraphic control.  He anticipates identifying: 1) the marginal
              position of the last glaciation, 2) the timing of its culmination and the speed
              of retreat, and 3) major (extreme) events in the evolution of postglacial
              environments in the southern Barents and Kara seas.  Although he does not plan
              to do a detailed study of the late Holocene, he can use accumulated data to
              investigate recent climatic change in the Eurasian Arctic.

