Title       : Investigations in the Theory of Confirmation and Inductive Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9818150

Award Number: 9818150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58820              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Norton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project comprises a series of studies into confirmation theory and the
              nature of inductive inference. The first part is designed to deepen our
              understanding of a scheme of inference known as demonstrative inference. In it,
              an inductive inference from evidence to hypothesis is rendered deductive
              (demonstrative) by the addition of suitable general assumptions to the
              premises. This turns out to be a strategy used quite frequently in the history
              of science as a way of controlling inductive risk. The principal investigator
              will seek further examples of these inferences and also attempt to understand
              how it is possible for a special class of these inferences to be
              self-validating in the sense that the success of the inference also supplies
              support for the general assumptions. In the second part, the principal
              investigator will seek to understand the weaknesses and strengths of the
              Bayesian treatment of confirmation theory by developing an axiom system for
              probability theory. The axiom system will not be designed to be as parsimonious
              as possible, but rather to be based on intuitively distinct commitments
              concerning the nature of confirmation. This will enable various of the
              appealing properties of the Bayesian scheme to be distinguished from others.
              Finally the principal investigator will briefly explore several heresies
              pertaining to inductive inference.
