Title       : Molecular Probes for Nutrient Stress in Phytoplankton: Emiliania Huxleyi as a
               Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a9818543

Award Number: 9818543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian P. Palenik bpalenik@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Palenik  9818543

Molecular Probes for Nutrient Stress in Phytoplankton:
              Emiliania huxleyi as a model.


Numerous examples exist where both the type
              and physiological status of the phytoplankton influence major processes in the
              oceans such as carbon fixation, calcification, sulfur gas emission, and toxic
              bloom formation. Our ability to understand the physiological status in the
              field of individual phytoplankton species or individual cells is limited,
              however. Most biological field measurements (carbon fixation, C:N ratio, Fv/Fm,
              for example) currently integrate over the whole phytoplankton community. In the
              long term, an understanding of the physiological ecology of individual
              "keystone" phytoplankton species will provide a more mechanistic, predictive
              understanding of ecosystem processes.

Emiliania huxleyi is an abundant,
              cosmopolitan phytoplankton species which is important in the global
              biogeochemical cycles of carbon and sulfur because of its production in the
              water column of calcite (coccoliths) and the sulfur gas DMS. It is present in
              both oligotrophic and neritic environments and in some locations is known to
              form massive blooms visible in satellite images. To date our understanding of
              the ecology of this organism has focused on these bloom phenomena.

One of
              the research goals of the field of phytoplankton ecology is the development of
              incubation-independent probes of phytoplankton nutrient status. From previous
              work an antibody to a cell surface protein, NRP1, that is present in
              nitrogen-stressed, but not nitrate--replete or ammonia-replete E. huxley has
              been developed. In this study the antibody will be used to develop a field
              method for characterizing the physiological state of natural E. huxleyi
              populations. A whole cell assay will be optimized and its efficiency and
              sensitivity characterized for examining cell numbers down to those present in
              oligotrophic environments. Fluorescence microscopy and image analysis will be
              used to quantify the number of cells expressing NRP1 and ideally the relative
              level of expression.

An antibody to intact whole cells will be developed to
              count the total and percent nitrogen-stressed cells in samples. A few
              previously obtained samples from the California current and the coast of Norway
              will be tested initially for the presence of nitrogen-stressed cells in the
              field. The demonstration of the physiological state of a specific phytoplankton
              group would be novel. This work will involve the training of one graduate
              student and one or more undergraduates in emerging techniques for applying
              immunological probes to marine ecological questions.


