Title       : Estate Taxation, Capital Gains Taxations, and Taxpayer Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a9818623

Award Number: 9818623
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217595             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Poterba poterba@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the effect of estate taxes and capital gains taxes
              on household financial decisions. The Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 provides
              important new variation in the marginal estate, gift, and capital gains tax
              rates facing high net worth households. The Survey of Consumer Finances, which
              has been conducted every three years since 1983, and in comparable format since
              1989, provides enough information on repeated cross-sections of high net worth
              households to permit analysis of how these taxes affect taxpayer behavior.
The
              project is divided into three subprojects.The first considers how the current
              tax law provision allowing "basis step-up" for capital assets passed through
              estates affects inter vivos giving and capital gain realizations. The analysis
              will focus on the tradeoff between capital gains taxes and estate taxes. This
              tradeoff arises when an individual considers whether to sell an appreciated
              asset, and give the proceeds to children or other parties as inter vivos gifts,
              or alternatively to hold the asset until death, when it will be included in a
              potentially taxable estate but receive basis step-up. The central empirical
              focus of this project will be on the estimation of models for inter vivos
              giving, using data from the Survey of Consumer Finances. The hypothesis to be
              tested is that households with the most to gain by holding assets until they
              die are particularly unlikely to make inter vivos gifts. The empirical results
              will provide evidence on the degree to which capital gains tax rules and estate
              taxes induce asset "lock in" among high net worth households with appreciated
              capital assets.
The second subproject will develop new evidence, also based on
              the Survey of Consumer Finances, on the probability of realizing accrued
              capital gains in a given time interval. This information will be used to
              explore how a change in asset values, such as the increase in corporate stock
              prices during the 1 990s, might affect realizations and capital gains tax
              revenues. It will also be used to develop new estimates of the effective
              accrual tax rate on realized capital gains. Existing estimates of this
              effective tax rate rely on aggregate data, rather than householdlevel
              information, and are based on dated information about asset realization
              rates.
The third subproject will explore the effect of pass-through taxation
              of realized capital gains on the behavior of mutual fund investors. It will
              study the impact of a mutual fund's "tax efficiency" on the cash inflows to the
              fund, thereby generalizing previous studies that have analyzed how pretax
              returns affect cash inflows. It will also consider the factors that determine
              the tax efficiency of different mutual funds, and the impact of mutual fund
              distributions on federal tax receipts. More generally, this study will provide
              new evidence on whether investors consider the tax burdens on different
              investment options in making portfolio choices.




