Title       : GOALI: Weakly Coordinating Anion-Activated Ni-and Pd-Catalysts for Polymerizing
               Norbornene and other Polycyclic Olefins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1999      
File        : a9818263

Award Number: 9818263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven H. Strauss strauss@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Bell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award, supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
              Chemistry Program and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, funds
              research on polymerization catalysts by Dr. Steven H. Strauss of the Chemistry
              Department, Colorado State University.  The award is made under the GOALI
              (Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaisons with Industry) program and includes
              a collaboration with Dr. Andrew Bell of the BFGoodrich Specialty Chemicals
              Company, Cleveland, Ohio.  The researchers will investigate fundamental
              questions related to the application of new weakly coordinating anions (WCAs)
              to cycloolefin polymerization.  The new WCAs will be composed of fluoroalkoxide
              groups and other ligands including alkoxides, alkyl groups, and aryl groups
              attached to aluminum or boron centers.  Some of the key criteria for these
              species include thermal stability, hydrocarbon solubility, and ability to
              activate Ni(II) and Pd(II) procatalyts for the addition polymerization of
              norbornene and substituted norbornenes and for the addition copolymerization of
              norbornenes and substituted norbornenes with a variety of alpha-olefins.  The
              coordinating ability and the ion-pairing characteristics of the new WCAs will
              be determined and used to shape the design, synthesis, and testing of new
              cycloolefin polymerization catalysts.

Cycloolefins and related polymers are
              widely used in microelectronics and other applications and are produced in
              great quantity worldwide.  The goal of this research is to develop new
              production catalysts that are more thermally stable and activators that are
              more soluble in hydrocarbons.  Both graduate and undergraduate students will
              have an opportunity to experience industrial as well as academic approaches to
              research by becoming part of a larger research team.  One student each year
              will spend three months in residence at the BFGoodrich laboratories to gain
              firsthand knowledge of working in an industrial environment.


