Title       : Extensions and Applications of State-Space Models with Markov-Switching:
               Hypothesis Testing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a9818789

Award Number: 9818789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Feinberg                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75391              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Nelson cnelson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chang-Jin Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

The first stage of the overall research program of Nelson and Kim was to
              develop a classical approach to making inferences of state-space models with
              Markov-switching and their applications. With the algorithm for approximate
              maximum likelihood estimation developed by Kim (1994), a broad class of models
              becomes operational that could not be handled before. The resulting model and
              the algorithm have been applied by principal investigators to various topics in
              macroeconomics and finance. (Kim and Nelson (1998), Kim and M. Kim
              (1996).)

The second stage of the program made Bayesian Gibbs sampling
              operational for the state-space model with Markov switching, building upon
              ideas in Albert and Chib (1993) and Carter and Kohn (1994). The methods were
              applied to: modeling business cycle asymmetry and comovement; testing business
              cycle duration dependence in a multivariate context (Kim and Nelson, 1998); and
              to modeling long-run U.S./U.K. real exchange rate. (Engel and Kim,
              1998).

The third stage of the program was devoted to writing a book in order
              to introduce to a wider audience of researchers in economics and finance recent
              advances in the estimation of state-space models in which switching between
              regimes occurs stochastically according to a Markov process. The book, titled
              State-Space Models with Regime-Switching: Classical and Gibbs-Sampling
              Approaches with Applications, (Kim and Nelson, 1998), is forthcoming from the
              MIT Press.

While estimation of the models with Markov-switching has been
              well developed in the literature in both the classical and the Bayesian
              perspectives and their applications are abundant, there apparently seems to be
              a lag in the literature in the development of procedures for hypothesis
              testing. Thus, in this fourth stage of the research program, the investigators
              are designing various hypothesis tests within Markov-switching models. The
              current stage of the program consists of three related projects. First, they
              develop a test for structural change at an unknown changepoint in the
              hyperparameters of Markov-switching models that are otherwise assumed fixed. As
              an application, Nelson adn Kim test whether the U.S. economy has become more
              stable. In the second project, they develop a test of Markov-switching within a
              univariate framework. In the third project, they further extend the second
              project to develop a test of Markov-switching within a multivariate framework
              of a dynamic factor model. Tests of Markov-switching within both univariate and
              multivariate frameworks are  based on the posterior probabilities of the model
              indicator parameters. The second and third projects test whether asymmetry is
              an important feature of the business cycle.




