Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Collaborative Hypermedia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9818309

Award Number: 9818309
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Bieber bieber@njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Starr R. Hiltz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Franz Kurfess  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard B. Scherl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry Fjermestad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9818309
Bieber, Michael P.
Fjermestad, Jerry
New Jersey Institute of
              Technology

Collaborative Hypermedia

This research instrumentation enables
              research projects in:
- Automatically Supplementing Computer Applications with
              Hypermedia,
- Studies of Distributed Multimedia Support for Group
              Collaboration,
- Virtual Classroom Leading to a Virtual University, and
-
              Collaborative Knowledge Networking.

To support the aforementioned projects,
              this award contributes to the purchase of multimedia development and group
              support environments and experimentation workstations, an NT server, notebook
              portable computers for demonstrations projectors, authoring devices and
              software, for building the instrumentation infrastructure for conducting the
              necessary experimental research cited above at New Jersey Institute of
              Technology, Schools of Computer Science and Liberal Arts and School of
              Management.  The first project will develop a hypermedia engine to
              automatically generate hypermedia links and navigation.  This approach
              contributes especially by serving systems which dynamically generate their
              display contents, the most
common case in business and engineering analysis
              applications.  The second project will develop theory, tools and techniques for
              distributed decision support utilizing the World Wide Web.  This project is an
              integrated program of theory building, software tool development and
              assessment, and empirical studies (both controlled experiments and field
              studies).  The third project extends the existing Virtual Classroom program to
              produce a "Virtual University."  Research components include semi-structured
              interviews with faculty and selected students, and field experiments to isolate
              the influence of specific factors on outcomes.  The last project will develop a
              set of powerful tools designed to support learning communities.  The tools will
              be pilot tested with classes of graduate students, refined, and assessed
              further through field trials with professional societies and other scholarly
              communities.  The equipment will create a development lab and
              two
experimentation labs for these projects.
