Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Instruments for Systems, Software, and Database
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9818323

Award Number: 9818323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan I. Maletic   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gautam Das  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              King-Ip Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dipankar Dasgupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9818323
Maletic, Jonathan I.
Dasgupta, Dipankar
University of
              Memphis

Instruments for Systems, Software, and Database Research

This
              research instrumentation enables research projects in:
- Geometric Techniques
              for Data Mining,
- Immunity-Based Intrusion Detection,
- Adaptive Indexing,
              and 
- Software Reuse and Understanding.

To support the aforementioned
              projects, this award contributes in building an instrumentation infrastructure,
              a laboratory dedicated to specific research in systems, software, and database,
              at the University of Memphis, Department of Mathematical Sciences.  The funds
              will contribute to the purchase of a Sun Enterprise 250, some Sun Ultra 5's,
              and the supporting networking software facilities.  The computational
              techniques in the first project will be used to handle data mining problems in
              time series, where the data is not geometric in nature, but solutions involve
              geometric structures and algorithms and in spatial data mining, where the data
              itself is geometric in nature.  Specific problems include similarity measure
              and searching in time series, and proximity and clustering problems in spatial
              data mining.  The second project focuses on investigating immunological
              principles in designing a multi-agent system for network intrusion detection. 
              The immune agents roam around the nodes of the network and monitor the
              situation, mutually recognize each other's activities, and produce specific
              action, while learning and adapting to its environment dynamically.  The third
              project explores techniques such as query information and automatically
              adjusting features to enable the indexing to respond to change more
              appropriately.  The last project tries to improve software quality and
              productivity through software reuse using latent semantic analysis.  

