Title       : Media Framing of Products Liability Lawsuits and the Social Production of Legal
               Knowledge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9818581

Award Number: 9818581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159911             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. McCann mwmccann@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A heated political debate has raged in recent years over the rationality and
              fairness of products liability litigation and of the U.S. tort law system
              generally.  Critics charge that tort claims, plaintiff victories, and large
              punitive damages awards have "skyrocketed" in the last two decades at great
              economic and social cost to the nation.  May social scientists have responded
              that such criticisms are grounded in unrepresentative anecdotes and "horror
              stories" that obscure the patterns and implications of actual legal practice. 
              The primary reason for the apparent political appeal of tort reform, scholars
              argue, is the effective manipulation of rhetoric by well financed tort reform
              advocates and, especially, biased reporting in the mass news media.

This
              project consists of conducting a content analysis of media framing of two case
              studies involving products liability-the McDonald's coffee lawsuit, and the
              two-decade legacy of lawsuits against the tobacco industry.  Additionally, the
              project will identify common elements of products liability lawsuit coverage in
              the news over a twenty-year period as well as study how media-generated
              anecdotes, icons, and sources have figured into congressional debates about
              tort reform.

This research contributes to the scholarly enterprise by
              systematically examining media coverage of product liability lawsuits.  While
              the empirical focus is on new media coverage, the project's primary objective
              is to analyze the social production of practical legal knowledge.  The working
              assumption is that the mass media generate a significant portion of public
              knowledge both of and about law in modern society. This knowledge in turn is
              highly likely to influence public opinion and political debates regarding the
              need for tort reform as well as routine legal practice.  

The research
              utilizes a general "framing" methodology.  Analysis focuses on three specific
              dimensions of framing activity: 1) the imperative of "newsworthiness," which
              selects and presents news in ways that are personalized, morselized,
              dramatized, and normalized for cultural consumption; 2) the privileging of
              particular cultural norms emphasizing individual responsibility in the
              presentation of legal disputes; and 3) the selection of various types of
              authoritative data for story lines, including quotes by experts, anecdotes, and
              social science data.  The research design tests for the influence and
              implications of these framing devices in the production of news stories about
              tort law practice.  This research will enhance our understanding of
              contemporary debates over tort reform in the U.S. and contribute to socio-legal
              analysis regarding the production, reproduction, and transformation of law
              itself in contemporary society.

