Title       : Thorstein Veblen in Context: From Johns Hopkins to the University of Chicago,
               1881-1906
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a9818068

Award Number: 9818068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126220             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Camic camic@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is an intellectual-historical study of the American social
              scientist Thorstein Veblen (1857-1929). The focus of the study is the
              development of Veblen's theoretical, methodological, and social-critical ideas
              in the early years of his intellectual career. This formative period in
              Veblen's life has not been subject to systematic historical investigation since
              Joseph Dorfman's widely-influential, but seriously flawed, study Thorstein
              Veblen and His America, published in 1934.

In contrast to the work of
              Dorfman and the several generations of scholars who have followed him, this
              study seeks to understand Veblen's intellectual development by locating Veblen
              in the specific local interdisciplinary contexts in which his ideas took shape,
              giving particular attention to debates then underway in the biological sciences
              at the academic institutions where Veblen studied and taught:  Johns Hopkins,
              Yale, Cornell, and the University of Chicago. Through examination of these
              contexts, the project seeks to reconstruct the turn-of-the-century intellectual
              and institutional debates to which Veblen was oriented and, in so doing, to
              uncover the basic questions that he sought to address in his own work and the
              various tools (concepts, methods, assumptions) that he employed for this
              purpose.

To reconstruct the debates present in the several local contexts
              where Veblen's ideas took shape, the study analyzes as fully as possible (for
              the period preceding and including the years of Veblen's involvement in the
              these contexts) the published and unpublished writings and correspondence of
              the social and biological scientists who were active players in these settings,
              with particular attention to the scientific questions raised in these works,
              the concepts and methods used to achieve their scientific and institutional
              aims, their assumptions and points of agreement and disagreement, and the
              complex relation on these ideas to the development of Veblen's own theoretical,
              methodological, and social-critical views. Insofar as these contemporary
              materials are unpublished, the study includes extensive research at several
              archives in the Midwest and on the East Coast.

By situating Veblen in the
              contexts in which his ideas emerged, the project seeks to challenge the nearly
              universal claim by Veblen scholars that the heterodox features of Veblen's
              social thought took shape because he was an "outsider" to the academic world of
              his time. Through an analysis of Veblen's intellectual development, the project
              also seeks to refine and extend a new perspective on the history of the
              American social sciences -- a perspective that gives emphasis to contexts that
              are both local and thoroughly interdisciplinary.
