Title       : Collaborative Research in
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  2001     
File        : a9818177

Award Number: 9818177
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Parsons                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95063              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith L. Aissen aissen@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9818177
AISSEN
The importance of markedness hierarchies in morphosyntax has
              been well-documented in functional and typological work. Hierarchies of person,
              animacy, definiteness, grammatical function, semantic role, etc. underlie
              grammatical asymmetries which are found both within particular languages, and
              in the cross-linguistic distribution of various grammatical phenomena. Although
              universal tendencies in the form of these hierarchies are discernible, this
              domain is characterized by a great deal of language-particular variation. A
              central problem then is how to integrate markedness hierarchies into
              morphosyntactic theory in a way that acknowledges what is universal and at the
              same time permits for a wide range of language-particular variation.

The
              variability of hierarchies -- both across and even within languages -- has
              impeded recognition in formal generative syntax of their explanatory importance
              as universals. While hierarchies have played a central role in functional and
              typological syntax, they have remained on the margins of formal description and
              theory. The emergence of Optimality Theory (OT), however, has introduced new
              ways of thinking about the relation between the universal and the
              language-specific, as well as a formal theory of markedness. In OT, all
              constraints are conceived as universal but violable, with language-particular
              difference the consequence of different rankings of universal constraints.
              These developments provide the opportunity to reconsider the role of markedness
              hierarchies in syntax and to build a bridge between the insights and results of
              functional/typological work on the one hand, and the explicit modeling
              techniques of formal grammar on the other. The goal of this collaborative
              project is to develop a fully explicit OT approach to markedness hierarchies in
              syntax, and to test it against both crosslinguistic typological research and
              language-internal studies of syntactic structures.

This project will study
              crosslinguistic and language-specific asymmetries along several dimensions of
              prominence, including person, animacy, definiteness, and obviation. These
              asymmetries manifest themselves in various subsystems of grammar. To be studied
              here are voice, direction (i.e. inverse systems), case marking, agreement, and
              pronominal inventories, focusing on the Mayan and Bantu languages for in-depth
              linguistic study. A comparative survey of Australian languages will also be
              undertaken in the subsystems of interest. In addition, the role of markedness
              hierarchies in pidginization will be examined. This broad empirical scope is
              demanded by the theoretical approach (for which a major empirical test is the
              generation of typologies by reranking), and made possible by the combined
              expertise of the principal investigators and their assistants.

