Title       : Doctoral Dissertation in Political Science: Explaining Patterns of Regulatory
               Enforcement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1999     
File        : a9818668

Award Number: 9818668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6469               (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Douglas Arnold arnold@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project focuses on patterns of
              enforcement in government regulation of occupational safety.  The project
              develops and tests a theory that explains how the Occupational Safety and
              Health Administration (OSHA), in cooperation with state agencies, enforces the
              Occupational Safety and Health Act.  The project's central aim is to advance
              the state of knowledge in political science on the way in which uncertainty
              about compliance alters how the law is enforced.  The project does so by
              showing how uncertainty about compliance leads to 1) the development of
              enforcement routines that reflect strategic decision-making and 2) the adoption
              of evaluative procedures for enforcement personnel based on easily observed
              policy outputs.  These routines and procedures directly determine regulatory
              outcomes and further condition the success of powerful groups seeking to
              influence policy outcomes.

Testing the theories involves an examination of
              how individual cases are treated throughout the enforcement process. 
              Therefore, a data set has been constructed that disaggregates the OSHAct
              enforcement process by distinguishing inspection targeting, penalty imposition,
              and post-penalty negotiation and litigation.  This data set includes
              information about all private facilities subject to OSHAct regulation, allowing
              the investigator to diagnose both the treatment of facilities that are filtered
              into the enforcement process and those facilities that avoid inspection
              altogether.  Furthermore, with access to information about actual safety
              conditions at individual facilities (information that is not available even to
              OSHA's own field offices), the investigator can compare the treatment of
              "similar" facilities in different stages of the enforcement process, under
              different levels of uncertainty about compliance, and in a variety of group
              influence environments.  The data are collected through interviews with
              personnel in a sample of OSH and state agency field offices.



