Title       : An STS Focus on Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a9818207

Award Number: 9818207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280231             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Woodhouse woodhouse@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Schumacher  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kim Fortun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian E. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Langdon Winner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linnda R. Caporael  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Department of Science and Technology Studies (STS) at Rensselaer
              Polytechnic Institute has been awarded a Small Grant for Training and Research
              to support a sustained research training program focused on design. In addition
              to training students in theoretical concepts for understanding the social
              construction of technology, the program will develop research competence in
              exploring the social, cultural and political aspects of the process of
              designing technologies. In the process of designing a technology, assumptions
              about human nature and society come together with heterogeneous values,
              short-term and long-term interests, and a wide variety of technical and social
              factors, giving rise to a designed object (system, process, space). STS
              scholarship has made great strides in understanding the social construction of
              technology, but previously has not often focused explicitly or directly on the
              process of designing. This project focuses STS scholarship on design. Students
              recruited for this initiative carry out research on practices in design, using
              a variety of observational, archival, conceptual, and experiential methods. The
              1997-98 NSF planning grant (SBR-9711830) helped the Rensselaer group to
              understand that practices of design must be situated in both an educational
              setting, such as Rensselaer itself, and an industrial setting.  It is precisely
              the synergy between the research explorations in these two settings that has
              taught us the most about design. Rensselaer's STS department is well-situated
              to undertake this project because of its strong, interdisciplinary faculty and
              their increasing involvement in a variety of design-related activities on
              Rensselaer's campus. Three years of National Science Foundation funding will be
              used to support three graduate students and a post-doctoral fellow, and to
              extend the program's colloquium series.

