Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Wireless Networking and Collaborative Knowledge
               Building Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2001    
File        : a9818371

Award Number: 9818371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Riccardo Bettati bettati@cs.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nitin H. Vaidya  (Principal Investigator former)
              Wei Zhao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank M. Shipman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9818371
Vaidya, Nitin H.
Zhao, Wei
Texas Engineering Experiment
              Station

Wireless Networking and Collaborative Knowledge Building
              Research

This research instrumentation enables research projects in:

-
              Adaptive Connection Management for Real-Time Applications over Wireless,
-
              Service Replication for Mobile Environments,
- Collaborative Knowledge
              Building through Incremental Formalization, and
- Data Transport and Routing
              in Mobile and Wireless Environments.

This award contributes to the purchase
              a protocol analyzer, a computerized whiteboard with projector, and laptops with
              wireless and global positioning system cards at the Department of Computer
              Science of Texas A&M University.  This equipment facilitates research on
              several research projects in Computer and Information Science and Engineering,
              including, in particular, the aforementioned projects.  The first project will
              provide adaptive QoS since the network conditions are likely to be
              time-varying.   The second project will extend prior work on IP address and
              port-number-based-service replication in fixed networks to deal with mobility
              and higher application level service replication.  The third project is a
              sense-making process
where information is discussed and manipulated until
              agreement is reached.  It includes capturing emergent understandings and
              enabling incremental formalization, recognizing implicit structure within
              informally presented information, suggesting and automating formalization,
              aiding the development of shared languages, and improving understanding of
              knowledge building processes.  The last project seeks to address packet losses
              due to wireless errors, hand-off, and route change in an end-to-end manner,
              rather than involving switches or routers, etc.  These research projects are
              designed to advance the state of the art in areas related to wireless
              networking and collaborative knowledge building.  The above equipment
              facilitates experimental evaluation and demonstration of ideas developed in the
              research projects.



