Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Augmenting the Capture and Understanding of
               Everyday Experiences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1999   
File        : a9818305

Award Number: 9818305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory D. Abowd abowd@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Irfan Essa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Colin Potts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thad Starner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Blair MacIntyre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin W. Ribarsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth D. Mynatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher G. Atkeson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jon Spencer Rugaber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Umakishore Ramachandran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9818305
Abowd, Gregory D.
Atkeson, Christopher
Georgia Institute of
              Technology

Augmenting the Capture and Understanding of Everyday
              Experiences

This research instrumentation enables research projects in:
-
              Ubiquitous Computing: The Capture, Integration, and Access Problem,
-
              Automated Understanding of Captures Experience,
- Automated Capture of
              Software Architectural Rationale, and
- Command Post of the Future.

To
              support the aforementioned projects, this award contributes to outfit a
              classroom and a meeting room, providing embedded capture work surfaces, at the
              College of Computing in Georgia Institute of Technology. The classroom will
              have seats, containing power and network distribution, equipped with a
              pen-based annotation surface; the meeting room will contain large electronic
              whiteboard surfaces, both upright and horizontal, providing group-level
              interaction.  The annotation system consist of a high-resolution video tablet
              from Mutoh, driven by a PC/104+ embedded computer attached to the
              student/meeting table.  This project provides infrastructure for interactive
              pen-based computing equipment which is dedicated to support research in
              computer and information science and engineering in the area of capture and
              retrieval of everyday experiences.  The research projects respectively include:
              augmenting the capture of university lectures to
include student note-taking
              and collaboration, in which lecture experiences are preserved and made
              available for later review; automated understanding of capture experiences, in
              which computational perception and machine learning techniques are applied to
              interpret the semantics behind captured activities in different domains;
              automated capture of software architectural rationale, in which an interactive
              whiteboard provides a more natural surface for creating and capturing software
              design discussion about the high-level organization of complex software
              systems; and strategic meeting room tools, in which integrated large format
              interactive surfaces allow for the capture and dissemination of informal and
              strategic information.



