Title       : Protein-RNA Interactions in the Ribosome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a9818051

Award Number: 9818051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Zimmermann zimmermann@biochem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9818051
The expression of genetic information in all cells depends on specific,
              noncovalent interactions between protein and RNA molecules. Nowhere is the
              importance of such interactions better illustrated than in ribosomes, the
              complex ribonucleoprotein particles that carry out the biosynthesis of cellular
              proteins according to genetic information encoded in messenger RNA. Ribosomal
              particles are composed of roughly 55 different proteins, two large RNA
              molecules, and one small RNA molecule which assemble into a compact, functional
              structure owing to an intricate network of noncovalent protein-RNA
              interactions. Specific associations between ribosomal proteins and ribosomal
              RNAs are essential both for the assembly and for the structural integrity of
              the ribosome, and underlie the functional activity of this particle in protein
              synthesis. In the bacterium Escherichia coli, many of the proteins that
              associate with ribosomal RNA also regulate the expression of the ribosomal
              protein genes through specific interactions with the corresponding messenger
              RNAs. These complexes provide a rich source of material for investigating the
              molecular bases of protein-RNA interaction. The present research is directed
              toward elucidating the specific structural features that mediate the
              association of small-subunit protein S8 with its binding site in 16S ribosomal
              RNA and of large-subunit protein L1 with its binding site in 23S ribosomal RNA.
              Each of the protein binding sites has been narrowed down to about 30
              nucleotides and that for protein S8 has been solved by NMR. Further insight
              into the nature of the S8- and L1-RNA interactions will be gained through
              site-directed mutagenesis, protein-RNA cross-linking, functional group
              analysis, SELEX, NMR and X-ray crystallography. Precise information about the
              structure of ribosomal protein-rRNA complexes is important not only for
              understanding the way in which several dozen unique ribosomal components
              spontaneously assemble into functional ribonucleoprotein particles, but also
              for comprehending the principles that underlie the many different protein-RNA
              interactions that play crucial roles in the expression of genetic information
              via the synthesis of DNA, RNA and protein molecules.

The expression of the
              genetic information stored in the DNA culminates in the synthesis of the
              proteins that define the properties of individual cells. Remarkably, the
              mechanism of this process is quite similar in all organisms, from bacteria to
              humans. Protein synthesis is carried out by compact globular particles known as
              ribosomes which consist of a large number of protein and RNA molecules arranged
              in an intricate and highly specific manner. The ribosomal particles guide the
              assembly of many other cellular components on its surface in a way that permits
              the efficient linkage of amino acids into protein chains according to the
              genetic plans encoded in the DNA. Ribosome function in protein synthesis
              depends critically on the precise three-dimensional structure that these
              particles assume. The structure of the ribosome is in turn determined by a
              myriad of chemical interactions among its protein and RNA components. The main
              objective of this research is to gain a better understanding of such
              interactions by determining the molecular architecture of some of the
              protein-RNA complexes that underlie the three-dimensional structure of the
              ribosomal particle. The results will help to explain the manner in which the
              structure of the ribosome contributes to its function in protein
              synthesis.



