Title       : Human Values in the Use of Computer Networks: The Ethics of Virtual Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9818724

Award Number: 9818724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan E. Sieber                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67483              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew L. Feenberg afeenber@mail.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9139,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Computer networks have become a public medium in which millions of ordinary
              people participate. Their human significance is emerging gradually out of a
              variety of practices reflecting different understandings of "appropriate use."
              In this process, users creatively invent the computer as a medium, not
              necessarily confined to the norms and functions embodied in the technology by
              its designers, nor simply reproducing practices originating in their
              face-to-face experience. Among the many types of social behavior on computer
              networks the formation of community, a fundamental human value, is particularly
              significant for ethical inquiry. From the beginning of computer networking,
              supporters have promised that it would enhance community and extend it
              globally, while critics have contended that it is destructive of real
              community. This pilot project tests the viability of an on-line approach to
              explore the ethical dimensions of community on computer networks. It focuses on
              three central questions: (1) How familiar moral concepts are reconstructed as
              the basis of online community in the unusual network environment. (2) How
              experiences with computer networks relate to the everyday lives of users. (3)
              What technical features and designs of computer networks need to be modified,
              eliminated or introduced in order to support and facilitate the activities and
              values identified in (1) and (2)
	This research can enrich the existing
              tradition of online community studies by addressing ethical issues raised in
              the critiques of cyberspace. and by exploring the links between "virtual" and "
              real world" practices. It will look for connections between norms of
              sociability established in virtual communities and values held by participating
              members in their "real worlds," and ways in which computer network technology
              can be reformed to better serve the goal of community. The research methodology
              includes observation and discourse analysis of the verbal interactions in
              virtual communities; and electronic interviews with participants. Two
              communities will be selected from those formed around significant shared needs
              and interests or collective action - for example: learning groups, self-help
              groups, political activist groups. The criterion for selection will be the
              extent to which the online participation can be expected to make a difference
              in the lives of the community members. The focus will be on the mechanisms for
              establishing shared norms and values, with a view to identifying the ethical
              underpinning of the new forms of sociability emerging on the Internet.  The
              sample of individuals to be studied will comprise online-community members who
              agree to the study. In the interviews with these respondents, the goal will be
              to understand what participation in virtual communities means to them as well
              as how it fits into the larger picture of their everyday life. Relationships
              between the technical structure of computer networks and the ethical quality of
              the human interactions they support will be studied in the data collection and
              ethical analysis.  The results of the pilot project will be reported in an
              article or edited volume; the final report to NSF will address the ethical and
              methodological issues arising from on-line research, and consider whether
              further research would be useful.

