Title       : Dissertation Research: An Ethnographic Study of Information and Technology in
               Transnational Healthcare Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1999     
File        : a9818159

Award Number: 9818159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11640              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael M. Fischer mfischer@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation proposes ethnographic fieldwork in the strategic arena of
              "informatics and biology" within contemporary international healthcare. In
              particular the researcher will investigate the sciences and technologies
              driving or facilitating the changing transnational medical care markets, as a
              crucible for analyzing and re-mapping the changing structures and ever-present
              dilemmas of health care, the welfare state, decision-making in clinical
              practice, and the display, manipulation and transformation of information
              within and across healthcare systems. The project is divided into three
              sections-Macro, Micro, and Margin-which are supported by empirical fieldwork in
              several sites. The 'Macro' section outlines the theoretical dimensions of the
              shift from the national welfare-state provision of healthcare to the
              international market-oriented welfare capitalism of the emerging healthcare
              market. These empirical changes will be yoked to the theories of Ulrich Beck
              and Francois Ewald on risk, responsibility, and rights, requiring a theoretical
              synthesis of political economy, history and anthropology.  The 'Micro' section
              includes detailed empirical fieldwork (first phase, completed) on the sciences
              and technologies that facilitate and exacerbate the changes outlined in the
              Macro section. This research focuses on the design and implementation of
              information and communication technologies by both large and small
              organizations within an Academic Medical Center; in particular, the studies
              focus on technologies for the manipulation and communication of visual images
              on the internet. The researcher has explored and will continue to study the
              tension between contingent design and standardization, and among academic,
              medical and industry research strategies. The 'Margin' section will follow the
              technologies in 'Micro' to several international and national remote sites.
              Under the assumption that the unevenly porous boundaries of nations produce
              global centralizations of capital and expertise, the researcher intends to
              study how a new international geography of center and periphery is built up
              around the marketing and use of networked healthcare; in particular how the
              technologies designed in Boston are used and understood by the doctors,
              technicians, and administrators away from the center. The potential sites for
              extended fieldwork (based on the existing connections established by the field
              sites I am currently working in) include Istanbul, Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, Central
              Maine, and Roxbury, Massachusetts. The research funds applied for here are
              primarily for the international fieldwork component of the dissertation: for
              travel and living expenses, and for the audio-visual equipment used for
              interviews and participant observation.
