Title       : Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2001      
File        : a9818932

Award Number: 9818932
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368464             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Gertler mark.gertler@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jordi Gali  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Among the central issues in macroeconomics is the nature of short run inflation
              dynamics. This question is also one of the most fiercely debated, with few
              definitive answers available after decades of investigation. At stake, among
              other things, is the nature of business cycles and what should be the
              appropriate conduct of monetary policy.  In response to this challenge, in
              recent years important advances have come about in the theoretical modeling of
              inflation dynamics, but accompanying econometric analysis has been rather
              limited and the work to date has raised some troubling questions about the
              existing theory.   It is in this context that this project develops and
              estimates a structural econometric model of inflation, and then studies
              implications for business cycles and monetary policy.The proposed research
              builds on some  work in progress on inflation dynamics. It also builds on some
              of the investigators' existing work  that explores the implications of the
              nature of short run inflation dynamics for optimal monetary policy.

The
              research has three main stages. The first stage involves developing and
              estimating a structural Phillips curve that survives conventional hypothesis
              testing. Distinctive features of the approach include: (i) the use of real
              marginal costs as opposed to an output gap measure, as the theory suggests;
              (ii) extension of the baseline theory to allow for a subset of firms that may
              use rule-of-thumb pricing; and (iii) identification and direct estimation of
              the model's primitive parameters.  The second stage involves modeling the
              cyclical behavior of real marginal costs. It is motivated by some preliminary
              results from the first stage that suggest that the behavior of inflation
              conditional on the path of real marginal costs is roughly consistent with
              existing theories that stress forward looking behavior (i.e., we find that rule
              of thumb behavior is statistically significant but not quantitatively
              important). Where the theory appears to break down, however, is in
              characterizing the link between aggregate activity and real marginal costs.
              Specifically, to the extent they are reasonably characterized by unit labor
              costs, movements in real marginal costs tend lag output over the cycle, rather
              than move contemporaneously as much of the existing theory suggests. In this
              vein,  preliminary findings suggest that the output costs of disinflation may
              be related to sluggish adjustment of real unit labor costs to movements in
              output, as opposed to arbitrary stickiness in inflation or adaptive
              expectations. For this reason, the behavior of real marginal costs is studied. 
              The final stage of the project involves integrating the empirical Phillips
              curve within a complete dynamic general equilibrium framework (with the
              appropriate rigidities in unit labor costs) and then analyzing the consequences
              for monetary policy, both from a positive and normative standpoint.

