Title       : Nuclear Factors Regulating Light-Independent Chlorophyll Formation in
               Chlamydomonas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9818037

Award Number: 9818037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Timko mpt9g@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              During evolution two distinct mechanisms were established for the reduction of
              protochlorophyllide (pchlide) to chlorophyllide (chlide), a key step in the
              chlorophyll biosynthesis pathway.  One mechanism, catalyzed by the enzyme
              NADPH:  protochlorophylide oxidoreductase (POR), is completely dependent upon
              light for its activity.  Light-dependent POR activity is present in
              cyanobacteria, green algae, most non-vascular and vascular plants, and is the
              only mechanism used for chlorophyll formation in angiosperms.  The second
              mechanism, present in anoxygenic photosynthetic bacteria as well as
              cyanobacteria, non-vascular plants, ferns and gymnosperms, is capable of
              reducing pchlide to chlide in a light-independent manner.  Organisms containing
              this pchlide reduction mechanism are all capable of chlorophyll formation in
              the dark.  While a significant amount of information is now available on the
              regulation of POR biosynthesis and activity, little is known about the enzyme
              mediating light-independent pchlide reduction (designated LIPOR), the factors
              that regulate its formation, and its requirements for catalytic function.  In
              this proposal the factors involved in regulating the biosynthesis and activity
              of the polypeptide subunits that comprise the LIPOR activity in the green alga,
              Chlamydomonas reinhardtii will be elucidated.  Previous studies have shown that
              the products of three chloroplast genes (designated chIL, caIN, and chIB) and
              at least seven independent nuclear loci (designated y for yellow-in-the-dark)
              are required in this process.  Mutations in either the plastid-or
              nuclear-encoded genes result in cells with identical "yellow-in-the-dark"
              phenotypes, reflecting a loss of chlorophyll formation and the accumulation of
              the biosynthetic precursor pchlide in dark-grown cells.  Although direct
              biochemical evidence is still lacking, the products of the plastid-encoded
              chIL, chIN, and chIB genes are thought to constitute the subunits of an
              oligomeric LIPOR complex.  No structural information is available for any y
              gene and no specific function has yet to be ascribed to their products. 
              However, it is thought that these genes are involved in either regulating the
              transcription or posttranscriptional activities of the three plastid-encoded
              genes.  The overall goal of this research is to characterize the various y
              genes and their encoded products and determine their role(s) in the process of
              light-independent chlorophyll biosynthesis.  Within this broad framework it is
              proposed(1) to define the effect(s) of the various y mutations on the
              transcription and postransciptional activities of the plastid-encoded chIL,
              chIN, and chIB genes.  In particular, we would like to know if any of the known
              y mutations specifically affect the expression of a particular chl gene or
              subset of chl genes, or if they have an indirect or general effect on plastid
              function or development.  (2) If specific alterations of chl gene expression
              associated with various y mutations are observed, an attempt to define the
              level at which this regulation occurs (e.g., transcription, splicing,
              translation initiation, turnover, etc) and the structural determinants within
              the chl gene or its product that mediate these activities will be made.  (3)
              Experiments using a combination of molecular and genetic approaches to isolate
              one or more y loci for which a defined regulatory effect can be attributed will
              be initiated.  The structure of the gene(s) at the particular locus and the
              role their encoded product(s) play in the regulation of LIPOR synthesis,
              assembly, or catalytic function will be determined.
Our studies should provide
              significant new information on the biochemical and genetic factors that
              regulate this critical biosynthetic process and provide new insights into how
              nuclear and organellar compartments coordinate their genetic and biosynthetic
              activities.  Since both the light-dependent and light independent mechanisms
              for pchlide reduction operate in the Chlamydomonas, these studies should also
              contribute to our eventual understanding of how these two enzymatic processes
              are integrated and coordinated in their operation


