Title       : Households and the Emergence of the Moundville Polity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a9818082

Award Number: 9818082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151671             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clara M. Scarry Margie_Scarry@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Scarry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science support, Drs Margaret and John Scarry and their
              collaborators will conduct two field seasons of archaeological research at a
              series of sites in the Black Warrior Valley in west central Alabama. Their work
              will focus on the emergence, ca. 1000 A,D, of Mississippian societies which
              constructed the National Historic Register site of Moundville. At approximately
              this time in a number of regions in the US South, Midwest and Southwest groups
              underwent a significant cultural transformation. Prior to that time, people
              subsisted by agriculture and lived in small, largely egalitarian village
              groups. There is very little evidence for social stratification or inherited
              rights or privileges and likewise evidence for large scale cooperative
              activities in the form of monumental structures is lacking. At Moundville and
              many other sites however the picture rapidly changed and societies became
              hierarchically organized and politically centralized. These changes involved
              significant shifts in material culture, in economic structures , in
              relationships among individuals, households and larger social units and in the
              ways people viewed themselves, their societies and the world at large. Because
              of the large imposing mounds which give the site its name, extensive research
              efforts over the past century have produced detailed pictures of the polity and
              of the growth of the paramount center at Moundville. However much less is
              understood about the process which led to this transformation and this issue
              forms the core of Drs. Scarrys' research. 

The team will conduct
              archaeological excavation at a site adjacent to Moundville which dates from the
              immediate preceding period. They will also excavated at an early phase
              (Moundville I) community in Moundville itself as well as dispersed rural sites
              which also characterized this latter time interval. Because families form a
              crucial unit of adaptation, the project is designed to collect information on
              household subsistence economies and craft production, on variation in wealth
              and status among households, on relationships among households and on the
              nature of supra-household social groupings. The team will also examine and
              synthesize relevant data collected in numerous past excavations.

Although no
              North American prehistoric society reached the formal level of "civilization",
              the same processes which led to the development of complexity in other parts of
              the world occurred here as well and study of sites such as Moundville can
              provide scientists with fundamental knowledge of how social development occurs
              over time. This research will shed important new light on the prehistory of the
              United States. It will also play an important training function and will
              provide a structured research experience for many students.

