Title       : International Trade and Transboundary Pollution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9818753

Award Number: 9818753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Feinberg                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20367              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda M. Fernandez lindaf@esm.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   This project analyzes how international trade agreements and institutions
              can improve environmental quality and environmental policy. Within the context
              of the North American Free Trade Agreement, the project explores how to improve
              water quality and public health along the U.S.-Mexico border through trade
              incentives and environmental policy instruments. The analysis may be applied to
              other settings throughout the world where countries share the costs and
              benefits of trade and transboundary pollution.
     The research will
              determine the optimal strategies for managing water quality in a border
              waterway 1) when trade is liberalized and waste is used as an input to produce
              a traded good and 2) when there are trade barriers and other policy instruments
              are needed.  The research will also examine the effects on water quality and
              economic welfare of the two countries coordinating water pollution control
              versus acting independently.
     The first step of the research plan is to
              develop an economic model that analyzes the effects of alternative
              environmental policies, as well as the corresponding effects of alternative
              trade policies.  A dynamic game framework will be used to model countries
              making decisions over time that affect one another.  The model helps
              characterize changes in pollution and economic activities over time under
              either independent or cooperative action in pollution control and trade.
     
              The second step is to develop empirical measures of the costs of pollution,
              based on public health and environmental effects, and of the costs of reducing
              it.  By correlating water pollution levels to public health and environmental
              effects as well as production it is possible to explore how different trade
              patterns and institutions enhance or degrade the environment.
       The third
              step is to simulate the effects of alternative environmental and trade policies
              under the two scenarios of cooperation and noncooperation on international
              competitiveness, environmental pollution loads, and on consumers and producers
              of agricultural goods in both countries.
       The goal of the research is to
              derive solutions that are useful for multinational and national policy
              strategies to control pollution. Data from the Rio Grande watershed for values
              of costs, water quality measures, public health damages, trade flows, and
              pollution abatement systems will be used. The analytical framework to be
              developed is transferable to other settings and policies. The research is a
              significant step in advancing empirical study of trade and environment within a
              dynamic and spatial context.

