Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Video Analysis and Reconstruction in a
               Distributed Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1999   
File        : a9818332

Award Number: 9818332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher O. Jaynes Jaynes@cs.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Seales  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James N. Griffioen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9818332
Jaynes, Christopher
Seales, Brent
University of Kentucky

Video
              Analysis and Reconstruction in a Distributed Environment

This research
              instrumentation enables research projects in:
- Video Analysis and Sensor
              Control in Distributed Heterogeneous Networks,
- Automatic Site Model
              Acquisition and Reconstruction,
- Real-Time Synthetic Environment
              Visualization and User-Guided Error Correction, and
- Real-Time Depth Warping
              for Unstructured Visualization Environments.

This award supports on-going
              research in the Department of Computer Science at the University of Kentucky
              and contributes to the purchase of three components: Active-Control Stereo
              Vision Sensor Platform, High Performance Image Processing Compute Server, and a
              Real-Time Visualization Environment.  The video analysis and reconstruction
              project seeks to develop distributed real-time approaches to large-scale video
              and image based problems.  The project utilizes three component platforms
              connected by a high-speed computer network: an active sensor platform, a
              distributed high performance computing environment, and a flexible real-time
              display system.  The overall goal of sensing, reconstructing, and visualizing
              an environment in real-time leads to several specific problems that require the
              use of one or more of the platforms.  The active sensor platform allows
              investigation of sensor control and issues in the compression and communication
              of large-scale image data.  Typically, datasets may contain thousands of images
              of a complex environment.  A high-performance computing platform, in
              conjunction with sophisticated computer vision algorithms, is necessary for the
              reconstruction of these environments in real-time.  The flexible
display
              system enables research in the visualization of synthetic environments. 
              Sophisticated user interaction with the model can lead to model improvement by
              the communication of user-indicated errors from the visualization platform to
              the sensor platform for the acquisition of new data, or to the compute server,
              for reprocessing of the data in light of the new information.  This real-time
              interaction between platforms is facilitated via the high-speed network.
