Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Politcal Science: Seeking Power and
               Re-election in American Legislatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1999      
File        : a9818888

Award Number: 9818888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7980               (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca B. Morton rebecca-morton@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kristin Kanthak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              It has been asserted that every legislator's principal goal is to be reelected. 
              The structure, rules, and norms of Congress help legislators to achieve their
              goals.  And since that structure is endogenous to the institution, legislators
              can and would change the rules if they failed to meet their needs.  This
              research explores one such case in which legislators in the U.S. House of
              Representatives changed the process for selecting their leaders when the old
              system became suboptimal.

In an effort to focus attention on strategic
              behavior of legislators within an institution, formal models of legislatures
              often "black box" the strategic behavior of voters.  Legislators are assumed to
              be office-seeking, so they want to please voters, but voters are rarely
              depicted in formal models of legislatures as making complex rational choice
              calculations.  This leads to an unnecessary divide in the literature, with
              neo-institutionalism on one side, and spatial models of voting on the other. 
              

This Doctoral Dissertation Research project develops two formal theories of
              leadership selection.  In the simple model, pure seniority determines who gets
              power and who does not.  In the more complex model, each party uses majority
              rule to determine which of its members will rise to leadership positions.  The
              model incorporates several assumptions.  Legislators are first and foremost
              reelection seeking.  They also derive utility from holding a position of power
              within the legislature.  Therefore, they seek power, provided that doing so
              does not cause them to lose reelection.  Like the Hotelling-Downs models,
              voters derive utility from electing legislators who are ideologically proximate
              to them.  They also derive utility from electing a powerful legislator, but
              that utility is a function of the ideological distance from the legislator to
              the constituent.  As members of their political parties, as well, legislators
              derive utility from electing leaders who are proximate to them and are able to
              perform leadership tasks well.  The model can easily be manipulated to include
              term limits and interest group donations.

The project includes several
              empirical tests of the model, using data from the United States House of
              Representatives and four state legislatures:  California, Florida, Illinois,
              and New Hampshire.  These states were selected because they diverge on many of
              the variables relevant to the study, including the power of political parties
              in the electorate and in the legislature, the role of interest groups, the
              behavior of interest groups, and the types of leadership selection
              processes.

Preliminary data analysis consists of a comparison between
              relevant variables in the 1950s, arguably the heyday of the seniority rule, and
              in the 1990s, when party preferences play more of a role in leadership
              selection.  This data analysis shows differences in behavior among
              legislatures.  Most notably, party unity scores have increased from the 1950s,
              in correspondence with the model's prediction that legislators under a party
              selection process would move ideologically toward their parties in an effort to
              gain power.



