Title       : An Experimental Examination of Models of Bounded Rationality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2001   
File        : a9818683

Award Number: 9818683
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182379             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob K. Goeree jg2n@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles A. Holt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Skepticism about "rational choice theory" outside of economics is based on the
              conviction that people make mistakes and expect others to behave in a manner
              that is not perfectly predictable. Economists have started to take these
              criticisms seriously, and recent theoretical research has identified numerous
              situations in which even small departures from perfectly-rational decision
              making can cause a dramatic change in the landscape of expected payoffs. The
              effects of "bounded rationality" are particularly important in markets or games
              where the slopes of expected payoff functions are sensitive to parameters that
              do not affect the underlying structure of the Nash equilibria.  This project
              uses laboratory experiments to evaluate behavior in a series of situations of
              wide interest to economists: imperfect price competition, coordination,
              auctions, and interactive models. In each case, the theoretical predictions of
              both equilibrium and dynamic learning models are derived in a generalized
              context that spans perfect rationality in one extreme and perfectly random
              decision making in the other. Anyone who has looked at noisy laboratory data
              knows that most human behavior lies somewhere in between these extremes, and
              this intuition can be evaluated by specifying models in a manner that permits
              econometric estimation of error and learning parameters from laboratory
              data.

The experiments are carefully motivated by "noisy" equilibrium and
              learning models, so that the treatment changes have no effect on the Nash
              equilibria, but they do alter the predictions based on models of bounded
              rationality. Initial data patterns reported in this proposal conform nicely to
              both the dynamic trajectories and eventual equilibrium levels predicted. One
              goal of this research is to provide a data base that will stimulate further
              theoretical work on strategic behavior that is guided by carefully documented
              empirical regularities.

