Title       : Identifying Change Points and Patterns in Development, Learning and Problem
               Solving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1999     
File        : a9818959

Award Number: 9818959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68386              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nira Granott ngranott@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael I. Baron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop sensitive statistical procedures for detecting and
              recognizing patterns and changes in development, learning and problem solving. 
              A model based on microdevelopmental analyses of learning and problem solving
              shows that these processes consist of a series of microdevelopmental sequences,
              each starting anew and developing from lower levels of knowledge.  When
              learning shifts to the next microdevelopmental sequence, the increments in
              participants' levels of knowledge undergo a change in distribution. 
              Statistical methods of change-point analysis are utilized to detect and test
              such shifts.  The analysis involves detecting change points in ordinal data;
              multiple change points of an a priori unknown number; change points in the
              distribution of serially dependent data; and changes under a sequentially given
              prior distribtuion, based on "the anticipated liklihood of a change."

This
              project will enhance researchers' ability to understand how development and
              learning occur.  The analytic identification of change points will guide
              researachers to examine specific segments in the learning process.  Such
              findings have applications for designing effective learning in and out of
              school by diverse populations.  Research on change points in learning can
              explain prevalent reports about students' difficulties in transferring their
              knowledge to new problems and can give guidelines for enhancing generalization
              in learning and problem solving.
