Title       : Criminal Processing and Courtroom Construction of Infanticidal Parents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9818782

Award Number: 9818782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8702               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jo Dixon dixon@mail.soc.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral Dissertation Improvement project systematically explores questions
              and hypotheses regarding the role of gender in the criminal processing and
              socio-legal interpretation of child assaults and homicides committed by
              parents.  Analyses of both quantitative and qualitative data ascertain whether
              the treatment of these offenses is gender-neutral, more lenient for women or
              more lenient for men.  The study is partitioned into two closely related
              sub-projects.  The first project analyzes data from a two-year sample of child
              assaults and homicides prosecuted by the District Attorneys Office of a large
              urban jurisdiction.  Regression and logistic regression statistical techniques
              will be used to test whether there are gender differences in plea-bargaining
              and sentencing, controlling for legal and socio-demographic factors. The second
              project analyzes data from courtroom observations, interviews and trial
              transcripts to ascertain the social constructions of mother and fathers accused
              of assaulting and/or killing their children.  Both projects examine the extent
              to which cultural preconceptions of gender, class and race enter into legal
              processes and discourses.

This research contributes to debates about justice
              and gender.  Outcomes from the quantitative research will enhance existing
              research on the legal treatment of criminal women, demonstrating whether there
              are gender differences in the processing outcomes of crimes closely tied to
              gender roles.  Results from the qualitative research explore the degree to
              which legal discourses are organized around gender categories.  By assessing
              pivotal issues in the debates regarding "equal" or  "different" treatment of
              women under the law, this research will assist in providing a clearer
              understanding of the relationship between formal legal processes and the social
              characteristics of the parties involved.

