Title       : Factors that Limit Benthic Microalgae, and their Influence on Grazer-Microalgae
               Interactions in a Coastal Salt Marsh
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1999      
File        : a9818453

Award Number: 9818453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Carman zocarm@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Carman
	Various stable-isotope studies indicate that benthic microalgae (BMA)
              contribute substantially to the energetic foundation of coastal food webs, even
              in salt marshes where production by vascular plants is comparable to or greater
              than that of BMA. Relatively little is known, however, about how primary
              consumers exploit BMA biomass or how they respond to variation in BMA
              availability. Nor do we have a clear understanding of how nutrients and grazing
              influence BMA productivity and standing stock. Accordingly, this research
              project will employ a seasonal, field-manipulative-experimental approach to
              examine interactions between BMA and the benthic metazoan consumers in a
              coastal salt marsh. The objectives of this research are to (1) Determine how
              nutrients and grazing limit BMA biomass and/or productivity, and (2) Determine
              how availability of BMA influences grazer condition and feeding activity. To
              accomplish these objectives, nutrient (NH4+ & PO;3) concentration and arthropod
              grazing pressure will be manipulated in a factorial experiment designed to
              detect the main effects of nutrients and grazing on BMA, and the interactions
              between the two. Similarly, the response of benthic grazers to variation in BMA
              food availability will be determined by manipulating light and nutrient
              availability. Field experiments will be repeated seasonally over a 3-year
              period to determine seasonal and annual variation of BMA-grazer
              interactions.


