Title       : Enhancement of Interfacial Mass Transfer in Gas-Liquid Contactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a9818504

Award Number: 9818504
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105326             (Estimated)
Investigator: George T. Tsao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9818504
Tsao, G./Purdue U.

This proposal basic research on
              interfacial mass transfer was originated from the successful application by the
              PI of a technique called "pressure pulsation" in which practical aerobic
              fermentation and gas-liquid contacting processes.  The technique is very
              effective and intriguing and it has led to this present proposal on examination
              of its basic mechanisms.

For an aerobic fermentation process carried out in
              an agitated-sparged fermentor air is flown into a suspension of microbial cells
              in an aqueous nutrient solution.  Usually, the rotating blades of a centrally
              mounted agitator will mix and also cut inlet air into small bubbles to provide
              surfaces for oxygen transfer from the bubbles into the liquid to support
              microbiological activities.  The air passes through the liquid by buoyancy to
              the top and then leaves the fermentor through an exit pipe.  Depending on
              specific conditions, the oxygen partial pressure in the gas changes from about
              21% in the inlet stream to anywhere from 16 to 20.5% of the total pressure at
              the exit.  For tall tanks where the bubbles spend a longer residence time in
              the liquid, the final oxygen partial pressure will be lower; for aerobic
              fermentation is often a major cost item, second only to the carbon
              source.

Pressure pulsation (or PP) involves a simple procedure and a simple
              mechanical set-up.  All is needed is to install an On/Off valve on the exit
              line of the fermentor.  This valve will be periodically opened and closed,
              controlled by an electrical timer.  When the valve is closed, pressure inside
              the fermentor will increase when the valve is open, the pressure goes down. 
              The periodical closing and opening of the exit valve creates pressure
              pulsation.  With such a simple system, PP has been found to be able to increase
              oxygen transfer and thus enhance the fermentation performance by 20-30%, as
              observed in preliminary experiments.  The current proposal is to further
              examine the effect and the mechanism of PP in gas-liquid contacting system. 
              When PP is applied to solid phase fermentation where the gas-liquid mixture is
              replaced by a porous bed of moist solids, the fermentation performance was also
              increased substantially.  In solid phase fermentation, heat dissipation is slow
              and the high temperature thus created hinders the fermentation performance.  PP
              creates convective flow in and out of the porous beds, enhancing heat
              dissipation and also air circulation, and thus helps the fermentation process
              greatly.

This proposed project starts with theoretical analysis, trying to
              provide theoretical explanations of why PP can enhance oxygen transfer.  It is
              then followed by experimental verification.  Several possible mechanisms of
              enhancement have been postulated in this document.  Through the proposed
              project, a better understanding of PP will result.

Interfacial mass transfer
              is involved in numerous industrial processes for manufacturing, water
              treatment, pollution prevention, etc.  Even just for aerobic fermentation
              alone, an improved oxygen transfer often means an improved fermentor
              productivity because most aerobic fermentation processes are limited by the
              oxygen transfer capability of their systems.  The rate of aerobic fermentation
              of citric acid, for instance, is known directly proportional to oxygen
              transfer.  Aerobic fermentation is used for producing large varieties of
              products including antibiotics, enzymes, organic acids, amino acids, vitamins,
              xanthan gums and other polysaccharides, etc

PP is simple, effective and
              inexpensive.  It can be added to the long list of important research topics of
              interfacial mass transfer.  Besides bioprocesses, it must have many other
              applications, once its basic mechanisms are better understood and quantified. 
              Another interesting observation shows that pressure pulsation also
              de-stabilizes foam which often exists gas-liquid contactors.  PP will serve as
              a foam breaker, saving the cost of antifoaming agents and reducing the usual
              hinderance of mass transfer by antifoams.         

