Title       : Microparticle Photonics: Frequency Control and Linewidth Quenching of
               Semiconductor Lasers Using Optical Feedback from Spherical Micro-Cavities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1999   
File        : a9818596

Award Number: 9818596
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236909             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haim Grebel grebel@adm.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Giora Griffel  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9818596
Griffel
Frequency stability and the optical linewidth of semiconductor
              laser are critical parameters, affecting a wide range of applications such as
              coherent and optical communication system performance, wavelength division
              multiplexing (VMM) based photonic switching and communication systems,
              room-temperature spectral-hole-burning optical memory, interferometric sensing,
              path length measurement, and high-resolution spectroscopy.  For many
              applications the operating frequency of a single longitudinal mode (SLM) laser
              such as the distributed feedback laser (DFB),.or the distributed Bragg
              reflector laser (DBR), is not stable enough.  It is susceptible to thermal
              fluctuations, and intensity as well as spatial variations of carrier
              concentration cause chirping.  In addition, a typical DFB laser, operating at
              1.5 microns has a linewidth of the order of 3- 1 0 MHz, while most coherent
              optical communication systems require sub MHz linewidth.  Several techniques
              have been used in the past to lock the operating frequency and reduce the
              optical linewidth, among which are electronic or optical feedback.  Reduction
              of the optical linewidth to the kHz range has successfully been demonstrated
              using bulk external cavity semiconductor laser.  Another approach is to couple
              the laser cavity to a properly detuned external high finesse resonator. 
              Frequency locking with dramatic linewidth reduction by a factor of ~I 000,
              using coupling of a semiconductor laser to high-finesse Fabry-Perot etalon, has
              been demonstrated.  However, in spite of impressive reduction of the laser
              noise, most of these techniques are cumbersome, require a bulky,
              laboratory-Lype optical set-up, and are sensitive to cantankerous parameters,
              such as the phase of the reflected signal, which is strongly affected by
              niicrophonic effects.  In addition, due to the length of the cavity required
              for the set-ups, the longitudinal mode spacing is small and SLM operation is
              difficult to realize.  As a result, these techniques were primarily used only
              for experimental set-ups.

In this project, we propose to develop and carry
              out theoretical and experimental studies of a novel scheme for realizing
              frequency locking and linewidth reduction of semiconductor lasers in a small
              scale geometry.  The approach involves the use of a new type of optical
              resonator system, based on a very high Q microsphere cavity.  It has been known
              for some time that micrometer sized dielectric spheres act as high-Q
              resonators, with electromagnetic energy stored in form of spherical cavity
              modes confined around the sphere, near its surface.  Employment of such modes
              in an axially-symmetric dielectric body results in sharp resonance peaks named
              "morphology dependent resonances" or MDR'S.  The Q-factor of these resonances
              is projected to approach 10  8 at T = 77=degrees K, and exceed 10 9=at T=4 K.
              For comparison, a Fabry-Perot etalon type resonator, comprised o= f two mirrors
              of 98% reflectivity separated 10 cm apart would result in a Q factor of  3X10
              7. 




These resonance peaks of the micro-spheres occur at specific
              values of the sphere size parameter X, where X = 2*Pi*a/lambda; a is the radius
              of the sphere, and lambda is the optical wavelength.  Using this phenomenon,
              cavity effects such as optical bistability, and lasing have been reported.  In
              our case, the micro-sphere can be used as a detuned loading for a semiconductor
              laser, causing the oscillating field to lock on to one of the MDR's and quench
              its linewidth at the same time.  This approach may achieve extremely narrow
              linewidth in a system that is stable, cost effective, and not larger than the
              laser itself.

In addition, the ability to lock into and measure MDR's of
              single stationary micro-spheres opens up the prospect of performing extremely
              sensitive adsorption and reaction measurements between species bonded to the
              micro-sphere surface and reagents in a surrounding solution.  With modest Q's
              of 10 6, a layer having a subatomic thickness (~O.1 Angstrom) may be detected
              on a micro-sphere with r=3D 10 microns.  Since this thicknes= s is considerably
              less than the molecular size of a typical antigen molecule, the possibility of
              observing small fractions of a monolayer is reasonable and thus paves the way
              to new immunological testing techniques.



