Title       : Winners, Losers, and Citizens Support in Contemporary Democracies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1999     
File        : a9818525

Award Number: 9818525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80622              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Anderson canders@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The second half of the twentieth century has seen a rise in the number of
              democracies around the world as well as increased opportunities for citizens to
              influence decisionmaking in them.  Because the relationship between citizens
              and their government is one of the fundamental issues in the study of
              democratic politics, public (dis)satisfaction with the democratic process and
              support for democratic institutions are an area of research that is ever more
              critical for our understanding of how and how well contemporary democracies
              function.

Building on research initiated in 1995, the purposes of the
              proposed project are to gather, analyze, and report data about how citizens'
              status as part of the political majority (winners) or political minority
              (losers) affects satisfaction with the political system and support for
              political institutions in over 50 contemporary democracies.  Specific issues to
              be addressed include: (1) the pattern of variation in support among winners and
              losers across established and newly emerging democracies; (2) the dynamics of
              variation in winners' and losers' satisfaction over time; and (3) how political
              institutions mediate the relationship between winner/loser status and political
              support.

The proposed research combines study of institutional/contextual
              and individual-level influences on political support in a systematic fashion. 
              Specifically, it combines an examination of democratic institutions and
              processes, individuals' voting behavior, and attitudes toward the political
              system.  As such, the research fills a crucial gap between earlier studies that
              have focused separately on individual-level, systemic, or procedural influences
              on political support.  Concentrating on elections as the central mechanism of
              citizen influence in democracies, the project is designed to investigate how
              elections produce winners and losers in the public mind, how winning and losing
              affects commitment to the democratic process, and how the political system
              works to amplify or dampen these effects.

