Title       : Summer Workshop in Economic Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1999     
File        : a9818685

Award Number: 9818685
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55245              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry E. Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eddie Dekel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy L. Stokey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger B. Myerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Satterthwaite  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Since 1984, the J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management at Northwestern
              University has hosted a series of summer workshops on selected topics in
              economics and management.  The topics have varied from year to year and have
              included: strategic models of competition, game theory, industrial
              organization, bounded rationality and complexity, capital theory, monetary
              economics, microfoundations of macroeconomics, learning, and political economy.
               Each of the workshops is fairly narrowly focused on an area of current
              reassert, bringing together researchers working directly in the fields of
              emphasis.  Each is organized around a program of formal seminars with a
              schedule that is sufficiently flexible to leave ample time for informal
              discussion and interaction.  Each workshop is a week long so that participants
              would be in attendance for the entire conference.   This grant provides funding
              for conferences to be held at Northwestern University during the summers of
              1999.   Each conference consists of two week-long workshops, one concentrating
              on theoretical issues in macroeconomics and the other on microeconomics.  Areas
              that look promising for the 1999 macroeconomics workshop include: macroeconomic
              consequences of contracting frictions; searching and matching models of labor
              market dynamics; and models of financial  "fragility."  Areas that look
              promising for the 1999 microeconomics workshop include: rational and social
              learning, market structure and information transmission, models of bounded
              rationality, and mechanism design approaches to the theory of the firm. 
              




