Title       : Disease Resistance in Sea Fan Corals and the Host Range of the Fungal Pathogen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a9818830

Award Number: 9818830
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408410             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Drew Harvell cdh5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kiho Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Harvell
	The incidence of disease among tropical marine organisms appears to be
              increasing and indeed is thought by some that it will increase due to global
              warming and anthropogenic causes. Yet we lack critical knowledge to manage
              disease in tropical marine systems. Not only do most tropical marine pathogens,
              including the widely studied coral band disease, remain unidentified, but the
              mechanism of resistance to even identified pathogens is unstudied. The paucity
              of information is particularly problematic for there is little scientific basis
              for devising protocols for management of diseased populations in the
              oceans.
	An ongoing fungal epizootic among Caribbean gorgonian corals provides
              an unprecedented opportunity to study the dynamics of an emergent disease and
              the mechanisms of host resistance. The sea fan-Aspergillus sydowii interaction
              is unusually tractable because: 1) Lesions can be followed on the 2-dimensional
              fan surface by videography  2) the fungus can be readily isolated from nature,
              cultured in the laboratory, and used in bioassay for resistance studies, and 3)
              corals can be infected in the laboratory with pure inocula and in the field by
              grafting diseased onto healthy ones.
	The objectives of this study are to:  1)
              determine the host range of the fungal pathogen A. sydowii among Caribbean
              gorgonians,  	2) experimentally evaluate the mechanisms of sea fan resistance,
              and 3) evaluate the role of temperature in disease resistance and pathogen
              virulence.
	If Aspergillus is not restricted to Gorgonia, then this epizootic
              could have far greater impact on Caribbean reefs, many of which are dominated
              by sea fans and other gorgonian corals. Understanding the mechanisms of natural
              resistance is important in evaluating whether the spate of new diseases is
              caused by new disease introductions, lowered resistance of corals due to
              anthropogenic stresses, or a combination of both. Because the identity of the
              pathogen is known and in culture, and because we are able to infect sea fan
              under experimental conditions, we will be able to study the interactions among
              host defenses, pathogen dynamics, and environmental conditions.

