Title       : Continuation of a Facility: Institute for Rock Magnetism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2002  
File        : a9818704

Award Number: 9818704
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $951280             (Estimated)
Investigator: Subir K. Banerjee banerjee@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Marvin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce M. Moskowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,9161,AMPP,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9818704
Banerjee
This grant provides continued support for the operation,
              maintenance and development of the Institute for Rock Magnetism (IRM) at the
              University of Minnesota.   The IRM is a cost-effective means for providing the
              U.S. and international geoscience, materials science and physics communities
              with access to both a knowledge base and analytical arsenal that cannot be
              found elsewhere in the world.  The application of rock magnetic techniques
              pioneered and/or adopted by IRM faculty that are specifically designed for low
              temperature, nondestructive characterization of magnetic mineral recorders
              continues to find broad use both by the faculty at Minnesota and by U.S. and
              international geoscientists.  Techniques have been developed to identify
              biogenic magnetic minerals in marine samples through low temperature remanence
              measurements.  Other low temperature techniques have been used to identify
              superparamagnetic material produced during pedogenesis in loess-paleosol
              sequences and these data have been applied to regional paleoclimatic studies in
              China, central Europe and Alaska.  Studies of high-resolution Holocene records
              of geomagnetic field variability found in Minnesota lacustrine sediments are
              being used to improve techniques for the accurate measurement of
              paleointensity, an important constraint for modeling geomagnetic field
              behavior. Studies utilizing the magnetic force microscope (MFM) are fundamental
              to our understanding of the fidelity of magnetic mineral recorders through time
              and their response to temperature, chemical and stress changes and provide
              valuable information to the magnetic media industry.  Further, new
              collaborations of the IRM staff with archaeologists and microbiologists holds
              promise for constraining the timing of man's earliest agricultural practices in
              southern Arabia, understanding microbial life in extreme environments at depth
              within the Earth's crust, and detecting evidence for microbial activity in
              extraterrestrial samples, through the use of novel rock magnetic and
              paleomagnetic techniques and proxies.
In terms of outreach, the IRM has been,
              and continues to be, perhaps the premier training ground for graduate students
              in applications of rock magnetic techniques to studies in tectonics,
              geomagnetic field behavior and paleoclimatology.  State-of-the-art research and
              development at the IRM finds widespread dissemination through the IRM's
              heralded "Visiting Scholars" program, which brings researchers from around the
              world to Minnesota to utilize the instruments and develop symbiotic working
              relationships with the IRM staff.  Further, the biannual Santa Fe conference
              advertises the successes of many of the unique instruments and techniques
              available at the IRM (i.e. Magnetic Property Measurement System, Mossbauer
              spectrometry, Alternating Gradient Field Magnetometer, Magnetic Force
              Microscope) and highlights the scientific advances in the field on an
              international scale.
***

