Title       : Collaborative Research on Political Discussion in the Workplace: Causes and
               Consequences of Cross-Cutting Political Dialogue
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1999     
File        : a9818216

Award Number: 9818216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152253             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana C. Mutz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey J. Mondak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Political dialogue with non-like-minded others is an essential component of a
              health, functioning public pshere.  Unfortunately, research suggests that
              people in the United States may be segregated increasingly from those with
              views which differ from their own, and thus political communication across
              lines of difference is more and more unlikely in people's day-to-day lives. 
              Residential patterns have moved toward spatially segregated living. In addition
              to structural trends, exposure to dissimilar views is inhibited by the
              well-known tendency for people to select politically like-minded discussion
              partners.  Strong ties and frequent interpersonal contact tend to occur within
              the context of homogeneous interactions, thus limiting the extent to which
              these contacts bring new views to people's attention.
	Based on evidence from
              secondary analyses of four independent surveys, we demonstrate that the
              workplace is a key context in which political dialogue regularly crosses lines
              of difference, and thus it constitutes a venue with tremendous potential to
              influence political attitudes.  In order to understand better the current and
              potential future contributions of the workplace, our project is designed
              explicitly to study workplace networks of informal political communication. 
              The project promises both theoretically interesting insights on contemporary
              concerns surrounding the prospects for a public sphere, and practical insights
              into how the workplace might be utilized better as a context for promoting the
              goals of both broader and deper public discourse.
	Our research questions are
              organized around three broad concerns:  (1) What individual and environmental
              factors facilitate explosure to cross-cutting political views?  (2) What are
              the consequences of cross-cutting political discussion?  We examine a variety
              of specific outcomes that have been posited to result from exposure to diverse
              views.  They include persuasion from one political viewpoint to another;
              greater awareness of rationales for opposing viewpoints on various issues, and
              the political tolerance that may flow from such awareness; a deeper
              understanding of the rationale for one's own political views; alterations in
              levels of political engagement; and the degree of social trust.  (3) What role
              does the workplace play as a mediating structure in the political life of
              ordinary Americans?
	Our study makes uses of three different approaches to
              examine the contributions of the workplace toward cross-cutting political
              dialogue.  First, we use several existing data sets that tap general networks
              of political communication in order to examine the ways in which discussants
              encountered through the workplace differ from those encountered in other
              venues.  Second, since these previous network studies have been designed
              explicity to study residential social contexts, we plan to conduct a national
              survey of working Americans that focuses specifically on workplace networks of
              political discussion.  Finally, we plan to conduct more intensive interviews
              with respondents in each of four different workplaces and five different work
              units within each of these workplaces for a total of 20 work units.  In
              addition to studying a small number of workplaces in greater depth, the major
              advantage of this design component is that aggregate measures can be used as
              independent variables to explain variance in the nature of individual dyads. 
              Beyond this, the contextual data and the dyad-level data can be used as
              independent variables to explain individual-level attitudes and behaviors.  In
              other words, analyses can be performed across levels and units to draw stronger
              conclusions about who influences whom.     

