Title       : Effects of Ultraviolet Radiation on the Planktonic Life-History Phases of
               Benthic Echinoderms from the Gulf of Maine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a9818918

Award Number: 9818918
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Lesser mpl@cisunix.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lesser
9818918

The consistent occurrence of the ozone hole over Antarctica
              has initiated many studies that have demonstrated the effects of UV radiation
              on primary production of phytoplankton communities. The effects, if any, of UV
              radiation on the planktonic phases of marine invertebrates in any ecosystem has
              received considerably less attention. Concern about ozone depletion has
              resulted in a growing awareness of the separate and interacting effects of UV
              radiation on marine organisms. These studies have also shown that stratospheric
              ozone depletion is not restricted to the Antarctic. In fact, precipitous
              declines in northern latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere have already been
              detected. This project will address, using both laboratory and field studies,
              the role of solar ultraviolet radiation-induced photooxidative stress for
              gametes, embryos, and larvae of- two dominant echinoderms from the shallow
              subtidal zone of the Gulf of Maine. Like other marine organisms, temperate
              invertebrates contain mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs), which absorb
              environmentally relevant wavelengths of UV radiation (310-360 nm). MAAs are not
              synthesized in animals, so their origin in heterotrophic marine invertebrates
              is uncertain, but presumed to be from their diet. It is known that microalgae
              and various seaweeds are rich in MAAs, and these dietary sources of MAA's can
              be translocated to the invertebrate tissues, especially the ovaries. This
              results in a fixed amount of MAA within the newly spawned eggs and developing
              embryos or larvae (although planktotrophic larvae could obtain additional MAAs
              from feeding on phytoplankton), whose planktonic phase is naturally exposed to
              higher doses of UV radiation than the adult benthic: population. The sea
              urchin, Strongy1ocentrotus droebachiensis and the sea star, Asterias vulgaris
              are dominant members of the benthic community in the Gulf of Maine that obtain
              a suite of MAAs from their diet. This project addresses whether the
              accumulation of MAAs provides effective protection from the direct and indirect
              effects of UV radiation using field and laboratory experiments on embryos and
              larvae from these two important benthic species. Exposure to ultaviolet
              radiation results in the photodynamic production of reactive oxygem species
              that can damage various cellular components. Measurements of DNA photoproducts
              production and simultaneous differential display-PCR to examine differentially
              expressed genes (e.g. cell cycle and antioxidant) known to be affected by
              exposure to UV radiation and oxidative stress will be conducted. The results
              from this work will have implications for the role of trophically accumulated
              UV absorbing compounds, DNA damage, the molecular response of cell cycle genes
              to environmental stress, and photooxidative defenses of embryos and larvae of
              temperate echinoderms exposed to the photodynamic effects of UV radiation. The
              effects of UV radiation on different life-history phases of benthic:
              invertebrates must be examined to understand the potential ecological
              consequences on the benthos, and in marine food chains, a genuine concern for
              the community ecology of the benthos as current predictions suggest that annual
              decreases in stratospheric ozone over temperate latitudes will to continue for
              the next 25 years.

