Title       : Interaction, Adaptation, and Social Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a9818975

Award Number: 9818975
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230093             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Peyton Young   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This research project is concerned with dynamic processes in which agents
              learn from or adapt to the actions of their neighbors, and the spatial patterns
              of conformity that result. Processes of this type cover a wide variety of
              phenomena, including the diffusion of new technologies, the transmission of
              social norms, and sorting by class, race, or ethnicity. The research extends
              our theoretical understanding of such processes, and where possible compares
              predictions of theory with evidence. Three topics are investigated. The first
              is the relationship between the macroscopic behavior of these processes and the
              micro-response rules governing individual behavior. The hypothesis is that
              certain long-run properties, such as the relative likelihood of various
              equilibrium and disequilibrium patterns, are robust under various
              specifications of individuals' adaptive behaviors. This would enhance the
              usefulness of such models in applications where individual response rules are
              heterogeneous and difficult to estimate statistically. A second topic of
              theoretical investigation is the inertia of local interaction processes --the
              expected time it takes the system to reach (or come close to) long-run
              conditions from an arbitrary initial state. Extending previous work in this
              area, it will be shown how inertia is related to geometric properties of the
              social network. Of particular importance is the degree to which agents interact
              in small, close knit groups instead of large, disparate ones.
The third part
              of the research tests certain qualitative predictions of these theories against
              empirical evidence. The primary application is an empirical study of
              principal-agent contracts agriculture, using an extensive data base covering
              several thousand farms in Illinois from 1977-1995. The level of detail in these
              data presents a unique opportunity to test various hypotheses suggested by
              theory. One hypothesis is that contract terms tend to exhibit a local
              conformity effect, that is, they cluster around certain values that can be
              construed as local norms. Once established, these norms shape the expectations
              of the contracting parties, and thus tend to perpetuate themselves through the
              force of precedent. This model of norm formation leads to specific predictions
              about spatial and temporal variations in contract terms that can be tested
              empirically. A second hypothesis suggested by the theory is that such norms can
              cause measurable distortions from neoclassical price equilibrium, that is, they
              create a stickiness in expectations that impedes the equilibration of factor
              returns.  The overall goal of the research is to identify situations where
              dynamic models of local interaction lead to predictions that differ from those
              of neoclassical equilibrium models, and to put some of these predictions to the
              test empirically.


