Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Ambiguity Resolution for Intelligent Systems
               Using a Cognitive Robot
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a9818341

Award Number: 9818341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank M. Brown brown@eecs.ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arvin Agah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Gauch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shari R. Speer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Schreiber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9818341
Brown, Frank M.
Agah, Arvin
University of Kansas

Ambiguity
              Resolution for Intelligent Systems Using a Cognitive Robot

This research
              instrumentation contributes to the acquisition, by the Departments of
              Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Psychology, and Speech Language
              and Hearing, of a Cognitive Robot (base system, arm and hand manipulator,
              binocular color vision, laser ranger, sound reception and interpretation, and
              sound generation) enabling research projects in:

- Ambiguity Resolution in
              Spoken Language Understanding,
- Ambiguity Resolution in Context Driven Active
              Robot Vision,
- Ambiguity Resolution within the Memory System, and
-
              Ambiguity Resolution in Robot Reasoning and Actuation.

The Cognitive Robot,
              with visual, speech, movement, and hand/arm manipulation capabilities, will
              enable research plausible interactions among the processes of ambiguity
              resolution in multiple cognitive subsystems including subsystems for speech and
              natural language understanding, scene interpretation, the retrieval of
              appropriate memory context, and robot planning and action execution.  The
              research methodology is to integrate together computational models of these
              various ambiguity resolution processes of these subsystems into the Cognitive
              Robot and to test them in an integrated fashion by observing the behavior of
              the Cognitive Robot.  The significance of this research lies in the fact that
              ambiguity in one subsystem can often only be resolved by the ambiguity
              resolution capabilities of the other subsystems.   Thus, the study of ambiguity
              resolution in each of the four research projects using the Cognitive Robot will
              be enhanced by its integration with the ambiguity resolution capabilities of
              the others. Since the human capability for effortlessly resolving ambiguity
              seems to be a fundamental aspect of intelligence, an explication of the
              interactions among the ambiguity resolution capabilities of these subsystems
              may be highly significant.  




