Title       : Genetic Evolution in South Indian Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a9818215

Award Number: 9818215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334796             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn B. Jorde lbj@odin.genetics.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Bamshad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
	India contains 1/6 of the world's population, and its population harbors a
              tremendous amount of genetic diversity.  Yet relatively few modern molecular
              anthropological studies have been done in India.  With previous funding, the
              researchers have conducted extensive molecular analysis of caste populations
              from South India.  These studies have demonstrated that historical processes
              (i.e., known patterns of mating within and between castes) leave legible
              imprints on our genes.  This encourages further examination of genetic
              variation to learn more about the histories of human populations. 
	The
              researchers are now extending analysis to 300 members of India's poorly
              understood "tribal" populations.  These populations are especially interesting
              because they are thought to be descendants of some of India's earliest
              inhabitants.  By studying these populations, the researchers will learn more
              about the early prehistory of the Indian subcontinent.  Did the original
              inhabitants of India come from Africa, Australia, or elsewhere?  Comparing
              genetic variation in these populations with that of the caste populations will
              teach us more about the early history of  the castes, which are thought to have
              been imposed by Indo-European invaders about 3500 years ago.  It will be 
              particularly interesting to learn whether the invaders appropriated the upper
              caste positions for themselves and relegated the existing Dravidian speakers
              and tribal populations to lower caste positions (preliminary findings support
              this scenario 
but are not extensive enough to prove it conclusively).  It is
              especially important to collect and analyze genetic information from tribal
              populations because, as India becomes increasingly modernized, they are rapidly
              being lost or assimilated. 



