Title       : Schwann Cells as Potential Androgen Targets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2001     
File        : a9818425

Award Number: 9818425
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia L. Jordan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              One of the main signals driving sex differences in behavior are androgens
              produced by the male tests.  Androgens promote the expression of various
              sex-specific behaviors by interacting directly with the nervous system where
              they bind to specialized receptor proteins in cells.  The nervous system is
              comprised of two main cell types, neurons and glia.  Neurons carry information
              and control behavior and glia have a more supportive role.  There is no doubt
              that androgens directly affect neurons, since these cell have androgen
              receptors (ARs).  However, recent evidence reveals that glia also have ARs,
              suggesting that androgens may also exert direct effects on gila. Dr. Jordan has
              found that Schwann cells, glia which ensheath axons in peripheral nerves, have
              ARs.  This novel finding has many implications.  For example, androgens keep
              neurons and synapses alive, even some neurons that lack ARs.  The effect of
              androgens on neuronal survival is likely mediated via neurotrophic substances. 
              Because Schwann cells make neurotrophic substances, androgens may act on ARs in
              Schwann cells to increase their productive of neurotrophic substances which in
              turn enhance neuronal and synaptic survival.  The experiments described in this
              proposal will further characterize the presence of ARs in peripheral nerve of
              adult male and female rodents with overall aim of understanding the role of ARs
              in regulating neural structure and function.  Immunocytochemistry, reverse
              transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, and in situ hybridization will be used
              to identify and quantify which cells in peripheral nerve express the AR gene
              and protein.
