Title       : Metabolic Physiology During Embryonic and Larval Development of Antarctic
               Echinoderms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9420803

Award Number: 9420803
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399725             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donal T. Manahan manahan@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Manahan  9420803  Feeding larval forms of benthic marine invertebrates in the
              cold  waters of McMurdo Sound, Antarctica are present in the water column  for
              many months prior to the phytoplankton bloom.  It is currently  not understood
              how these feeding larvae of antarctic invertebrates  survive long periods under
              starvation conditions.  Knowing the  physiological mechanisms of this process
              is important for  understanding the ecology of larvae from antarctic regions. 
              Recent  findings with antarctic echinoderm larvae do not support the 
              suggestion that feeding larvae survive this period of negligible  phytoplankton
              abundance by using other food sources (bacteria or  dissolved organic
              material).  Physiological data, however, do  suggest a possible survival
              strategy whereby potential larval  lifespans can be extended for about one year
              in the complete  absence of food.  Such lifespans (without food) for feeding
              larval  forms are unique to antarctic larvae.  The metabolism of this  process
              in antarctic echinoderm larvae is the focus of this  research.  A hypothesis
              that the metabolic cost of development will  be lower in antarctic echinoderms
              than for the same "unit of  differentiation" (fertilized egg to feeding larval
              form) in  comparable temperate larvae will be tested.  Such data on temperate 
              larvae already exist and the proposed studies with antarctic larvae  will allow
              for a comparison of stage-specific developmental  metabolism.  To obtain these
              metabolic data, a novel technique  called coulometric respirometry that permits
              continuous  measurements of metabolic rate during development will be used.  In
               addition, the biochemistry of development will be examined to  determine the
              mechanism(s) of low metabolism in antarctic larvae.   Data from experiments
              will test long-standing hypotheses about  cellular mechanisms of low metabolism
              as they apply to invertebrate  development in antarctic environments.  The
              findings from this  research may also have implications for larvae developing
              under lo w  food conditions in other cold environments, such as the deep sea.
