Title       : Jurassic Volcanic Rocks in the Transantarctic Mountains: A Test of a Model for
               Continental Flood Basalt Magmatism in Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1999     
File        : a9420498

Award Number: 9420498
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274194             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Elliot   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    This award supports a project to study the Jurassic volcanic  rocks
              which overlie the Permian to Triassic Gondwana sequence in  Antarctica.  These
              rocks constitute the Antarctic part of the  magmatic record of the break-up of
              the supercontinent Gondwana.  These Jurassic rocks, which occur along the
              length of the  Transantarctic Mountains, include both silicic and tholeiitic 
              compositions.  The most complete stratigraphic record of the time  interval
              from the Late Triassic termination of deposition in the  Beacon foreland basin
              to the Middle Jurassic eruption of the  flood basalts of the Ferrar Group is
              located in the central  Transantarctic Mountains.  In that region, the upper
              Falla  Formation is dominated by volcanogenic rocks including plinian  airfall
              tuffs and phreatomagmatic deposits.  The overlying  Prebble Formation is
              dominated by fine to coarse grained  phreatomagmatic deposits, including
              accretionary lapilli tuffs  and breccias.  Compositionally the rocks are
              bimodal with silicic  activity initiating volcanism and continuing into the
              flood  basalt eruptive episode, whereas the basaltic activity begins  with
              explosive eruptions in the Prebble and changes to quiet  effusion of lava.  The
              basaltic pyroclastic rocks are comagmatic  with the lavas, having the same
              geochemical characteristics.  The  silicic rocks are probably anatectic. 
              Coarse quartzose  sandstones with large angular clasts and the presence of 
              monoclinal structures active late in the magmatic activity,  indicate
              contemporaneous basement block faulting.  Stratigraphic,  structural,
              petrologic and paleovolcanologic data indicate that  these igneous rocks
              accumulated in a tectono-magmatic rift  setting.  In south Victoria Land, the
              correlative strata include  flood lavas, basaltic pyroclastic deposits and some
              recently  reported silicic pyroclastic rocks.  At one locality a major 
              disconformity separates the basaltic pyroclastic rocks from the  underlying
              Beacon.  The relations of the silicic tuffs to the  basalt ic pyroclastic rocks
              and to the disconformity are unclear.  The silicic tuffs are reported to
              include an ignimbrite.  The  objectives of this project are to gather data to
              test the tectono-  magmatic model proposed for the Jurassic magmatism in
              Antarctica.  Specifically, the objectives are to: 1) establish a detailed 
              stratigraphic framework for the Jurassic pyroclastic rocks in  order to assess
              syndepositional extensional normal faulting, 2)  investigate the
              paleovolcanology of the rocks, in particular the  rocks formed by
              phreatomagmatic processes, in order to understand  the physical environment, 3)
              further characterize the  geochemistry of the rocks in order to better define
              time  dependent changes in magma compositions, relations between  silicic and
              basaltic rocks, and source region characteristics of  the silicic magmas, and
              4) establish the age  of onset of the  silicic volcanism.  These data will be
              used to validate or modify  the proposed model and to assess the model's
              applicability to  continental flood basalt magmatism in general.
