Title       : Chemical Ecology of Swallowtail Butterflies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9420319

Award Number: 9420319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul P. Feeny ppf1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9420319  Feeny    Most  plant-feeding  insects have  specialized  preferences, 
              feeding  and laying their eggs on only a few plant  species.  They  find  their
              host plants largely by smell or  taste  of  chemical  compounds produced by the
              plant.  Different  plant  species attacked by the same insect often share one
              or  more  kinds  of  unusual chemical compounds, even  when  the  host  plants 
              themselves are not closely related to  one  another.  This  suggests that the
              ability of insects to add new  plant  species   to  their  diet  is 
              facilitated  by  the   shared  occurrence of compounds that the insects use for
              cues.   The  goal   of   this  research  is  to  find  out  how  chemical 
              similarities  and differences among plants  have  influenced  present-day
              associations between different plant species and  the  insects  that feed on
              them. The swallowtail butterflies  are  used  as  a model system in this
              research  since  their  evolutionary  relationships  and  larval  host  plants 
               are  especially  well  known.   The research  will  identify  the  mixtures of
              plant compounds used as egg-laying stimulants by  four  insect  species that
              differ greatly in  the  kinds  of  plants  they  attack.  The data will be 
              used  to  test  the  hypotheses  that plant selection by insects is triggered 
              by  relatively  fixed sensory responses to particular compounds,  and  that
              movements to new host species are unlikely  unless  those species produce the
              same compounds.  The results  will  provide  valuable insights into the degree
              to which  sensory  responses  by  insects to plant chemicals  are  conservative
               rather  than  labile over evolutionary time.   Knowledge  of  both  the  cues
              insects currently use to locate host  plants  and  the frequency with which
              insects abandon those cues  to  take  advantage  of new hosts  has obvious
              implications  for  the  wise  deployment of new crop varieties  whose  chemical
               profiles   have   been  or  can  be  modified   by   genetic  engineering.
