Title       : Phylogenetic Analysis of Biogeography, Habitat and Host Associations in Ticks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9420658

Award Number: 9420658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239997             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Black IV wcb4@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Keirans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Piesman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Johannes S. Klompen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9420658  BLACK  Ticks are obligate ectoparasitic mites feeding on a wide variety
              of terrestrial vertebrates.  They have generally been believed to be
              characterized by high levels of host specificity which has led to the
              assumption of parallel speciation between ticks and their hosts.  However, a
              preliminary analysis suggests that this seeming specificity might be an
              artifact: species recorded as having only one or two hosts tend to be those
              that are uncommon or rare, while host range seems to increase as more
              collections are made.  Alternative mechanisms, such as speciation through
              geographical separation or the development of specificity for different
              off-host habitats, should therefore be considered.  Initial results from
              investigation of collection's information on distributions and host
              associations fit such mechanisms; they also support a New World origin for the
              argasid genera Otobius and Carios and a possible Gondwana origin of the genus
              Ixodes.  Within these groups there appear to be lineages specialized for caves
              or for specific types of bird nests.  The hypothesis to be examined in this
              study is that the perceived pattern of host associations in ticks can be
              explained as a secondary result of host availability determined by specificity
              for off-host habitats and geography.  Well resolved phylogenetic relationships
              for tick taxa are needed to test this hypothesis.  Morphological and molecular
              systematic analysis, using the 16S and 12S mitochondrial rDNA and COI and COII
              mitochondrial protein coding genes, has already begun to provide well supported
              phylogenies at various taxonomic levels.  The research of this project will
              continue such molecular phylogenetic analysis and integrate those data with
              morphological information, concentrating on relationships among hard ticks in
              the genus Ixodes and soft ticks on bird and bats.  These groups are ideal for
              testing the hypothesis because they are cosmopolitan and exhibit a wide range
              in host and habitat preferences.  An extensive computerized d ata base on host,
              habitat, and geographic distribution of tick species is currently being
              completed for use in testing this hypothesis.    %%%  This project will
              contribute to our understanding of the earth's biodiversity by clarifying
              identification and classification of ticks.  These blood-feeding ectoparasites
              have always been disease vectors and thereby imposed controls on the levels of
              many vertebrate populations.  Most recently they have gained major notoriety
              for including the vector of Lyme disease, which is debilitating, ultimately
              fatal and has spread throughout most of the United States.  ***
