Title       : Reinforcement Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9420646

Award Number: 9420646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. R. Staddon staddon@psych.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY    PI:  J. E. R. Staddon,  IBN 94-20646, Reinforcement 
              Mechanisms           One of the most basic, enduring goals of behavioral 
              science is to understand how reward and punishment affect  behavior and what
              these effects tell us about the basic  mechanisms of learning.  In this
              research project, Dr.  Staddon will investigate three aspects of this problem:
              the  effects of reward on choice, the processes by which patterns  of reward
              affect behavior, and the processes that produce  novel or creative behavior.   
                 The studies of choice will address the fact that  choices are affected by
              both recent and remote events as  well as by correlations between responses and
              rewards.  Experiments will be carried out to disentangle these three  variables
              and their effects on choice responses.       Organisms also react immediately
              and proportionately to  sudden changes in the time interval between rewards. 
              These  fast-acting processes allow organisms to track the intervals  between
              successive rewards and react immediately to changes  in the temporal patterning
              of rewards.  A series of  experiments will examine the dynamics of these timing
               effects.       An act must occur before it can be modified by reward  or
              punishment.  This raises the question,  How do novel  behaviors occur?   A
              third series of experiments will use  the vocal behavior of budgerigars to
              study is process.  Previous research has shown that budgerigars can easily 
              learn to emit specific vocal names in the presence of  different visual stimuli
              and will then spontaneously emit  the name of a to-be-chosen stimulus during a
              choice task  even if this is not required by the experimental procedures.  By
              selectively rewarding rare vocalizations, it has been  possible to expand this
              repertoire.  A series of experiments  will be carried out to explore the role
              of this novel vocal  behavior in the learning of complex tasks.  This research 
              should help us understand the processes that produce new  behaviors and may
              further our un derstanding of the role of  speech in cognition and learning.
