Title       : Biomolecular Engineering: From Molecules to Tissues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1996     
File        : a9420567

Award Number: 9420567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Montgomery smontgom@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Burns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Mooney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Scott Fogler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernhard O. Palsson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer J. Linderman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9420567  Montgomery    ABSTRACT    The goals are: The developed materials to
              expose all undergraduate chemical engineering students to current industrial
              applications of biotechnology within the context of the core curriculum; and we
              will train interested undergraduate and graduate chemical engineering students
              to meet the new challenges in biotechnology by integrating current research
              into the curriculum.  The accomplished of these goals are by fulfilling the
              following specific aims:    1. Develop a new biotechnology curriculum - An
              upper level undergraduate/lower level graduate course, entitled "Biomolecular
              Engineering", will focus on engineering analyses and applications at the
              molecular, cellular, and tissue level.  It will be based largely on on-going
              research efforts in laboratories of the University of Michigan and some of its
              industrial research partners.  The existing upper level biochemical engineering
              courses will be modified to include more advanced concepts.  The resulting
              bioengineering sequence will provide students with breadth as well as depth of
              knowledge in biotechnology.    2. Develop interactive multimedia-based software
              for the new curriculum and for national integration into the core undergraduate
              chemical engineering curriculum - This software will be used in the new course
              (Aim 1) as well as in an existing biotechnology course which covers the more
              traditional aspects of biotechnology, e.g. fermentation process design. 
              Abbreviated versions of the software will be prepared for use in core
              undergraduate chemical engineering courses.  These modules, which will be
              distributed nationally, will serve both as motivators to provide exposure to
              the biotechnology field as well as facilitators to enable students to analyze
              engineering fundamentals as they are applied to new situations.  ***
