Title       : Enhancement of the Academy of Natural Sciences Orthoptera and Diptera
               Collections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1997        
File        : a9420188

Award Number: 9420188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184710             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon K. Gelhaus gelhaus@ansp.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Otte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project proposes an international collaborative effort by systematists
              focusing  on the unstudied, undetermined holdings of Orthoptera (grasshoppers,
              crickets, katydids, mantids,  roaches walking sticks and related insects) and
              Diptera (flies) at The Academy of Natural Sciences of  Philadelphia.  ANSP
              holds the largest collection of Orthoptera in the world, comprising more than a
               million specimens from all regions, over 4000 primary types, and an associated
              collection of insect  songs and library of published research.  The use of the
              collection by scientists worldwide through  collection visits and loans of
              specimens confirms it as a worldwide, scientific resource.  It is the  only
              collection in North Amer ica to have supported active research on systematics
              of Orthoptera by a  continuum of curators for most of this century.  The
              Diptera collection (flies) contains impressive  collections in aquatic fly
              groups, such as the Chironomidae (aquatic midges), Ephydridae (shore flies) 
              and Tipulidae (crane flies) assembled through active research by curators for
              well over fifty years.  Both collections continue active development through
              strategic collecting and collection-based  research by resident curators and
              other scientific researchers.  Large numbers of specimens (estimated  in excess
              of 170,000) in both collections remain unstudied taxonmically even some years
              after specimen  preparation.  In many cases, these insects cannot be
              recollected due to subsequent habitat  destruction, logistical difficulties and
              other factors, and, in effect, the data carried by these  specimens are now
              unavailable to science and society.  These specimens are unidentified to
              taxonomic  levels that would allow retrieval to fulfill loan requests for
              further scientific study and fall  outside the specific taxonomic expertise
              represented by the resident curators. In addition, many of  the scientists
              potentially interested in studying these insects work overseas and find it
              difficult to  visit the collections.  The specimens themselves are too fragile,
              bulky and numerous to efficiently  ship to researchers in the numbers needed to
              allow taxonomic sorting by specialists and subsequent  inclusion in research. 
              This project represents the first such focused effort at reducing the number 
              of undetermined specimens for any Orthoptera collection.  Support will catalyze
              the process by  facilitation short-term intensively-focused visits by national
              and international specialists to sort  the undetermined backlog of specimens in
              their area of expertise to taxonomic levels (generally genus)  useful for loan
              retrieval and study.  These visiting curators will also provide valuable advice
              toward  upgrading the classification of the collection in their area  of
              expertise, and in directing us to  scientists whose studies might benefit from
              these newly sorted specimens.  These efforts will result  in an increase in
              loans and study of the collection materials for Orthoptera and Diptera, and a 
              reduction of the undetermined specimens to minimal, manageable amounts.  In
              particular, the newly  sorted specimens will not only supplement existing
              research projects, but their availability should  provide the impetus for
              initiation of new lines of research.  Additional components of this project 
              focus on readying the specimens in anticipation of the visiting curators and
              organization and  upgrading of the collection curation following their work. 
              This project will complete the rehousing  of all specimens of Orthoptera and
              Diptera from substandard units or vials to safe modern storage.  Unprepared
              specimens in both orders, representing the first collections for these orders
              in geographic  region or life stage, will be prepared and sorted taxonomically.
               Recuration, including an update of  classification, will follow visits of
              specialists in both orders.  The Orthoptera Species File, a  computerized
              taxonomic authority file developed at ANSP, will be used for the first time in
              any  Orthoptera collection to verify and update scientific names, allowing
              staff and other collection users  to work more efficiently and accurately, and
              serving as a model project for curation of other  Orthoptera collections.  All
              completed aspects of this project will be publicized through targeted  letters,
              newsletters, electronic listing services and scientific meetings to reach a
              wide variety of  collection users.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
