Title       : Peptide Dynamics Investigated by 13C- & 15N-NMR Relaxation & Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1997      
File        : a9420203

Award Number: 9420203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $373101             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin H. Mayo mayox001@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir A. Daragan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9420203  Mayo  13C- and 15N-dipolar auto-and cross-correlation spectral
              densities  and NOEs will be determined to systematically investigate backbone 
              and side-chain rotational dynamics in short linear peptides.  13C-  multiplet
              relaxation in methylene and methyl groups will provide  unique motional
              information.  Side-chain motions then will be  better understood in the absence
              of most steric hinderences, e.g.,  the "unfolded," solvent-exposed state. 
              Penta-peptides like G-G-X-  G-G will be studied to assist in separating
              relaxation effects due  to correlated internal rotations and overall molecular
              tumbling.   The temperature dependence of all relaxation parameters will be 
              investigated in order to derive rational energy barriers.   Measurements will
              be done in water and in organic solvent, e.g.,  DMSO.  In water, the effect of
              pH and varying ionic strength will  assist in understanding electrostatic
              contributions to internal  rotations.  Restricted and unrestricted rotational
              diffusion,  rotational fluctuation within potential wells, jump models, 
              inclusion of internal rotational correlations, etc., and "model  free"
              approaches will be used to analyze relaxation data, and  molecular dynamics
              simulations and F,Y,C bond rotation energy  profiles will be  calculated for
              insight into which bond rotations  may contribute most to these relaxation
              phenomena.    %%%  Proteins are composed of backbone atoms arranged in a
              repetitious  polymeric array and specific side-chain groups that are arranged
              in  a specific sequence.  This sequence-specific arrangement of the  twenty
              common side-chains tells, for example, a protein how to fold  and what function
              it will have.  In this study, NMR spectroscopy  and computer modeling will be
              used to investigate fundamental  processes of how small parts of proteins  move
              and behave in  solution.  This in turn will provide a better understanding of 
              protein backbone and side-chain internal motions and the influence  of their
              motions on each other.  In addition, due to  the very  nature of correlated
              motions in proteins, this study will set the  stage for a better understanding
              of protein folding, the so-called  "second genetic code."   ***
