Title       : Clonal molecular evolution in E. coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1996  
File        : a9420613

Award Number: 9420613
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger D. Milkman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1305,9104,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9420613  Milkman  The current paradigm for the evolution of E. coli is an
              outgrowth of the periodic selection model, in which from time to time a broadly
              favorable rare allele arises and, because recombination is rare, selection for
              this allele carries its entire genome to a high frequency.  The clone thus
              formed has very little genetic variation initially.  Evidently other existing
              clones are not eliminated.  Recombinational replacements do accumulate, and so
              the clonal chromosome is comprised by stretches of DNA from other ancestors;
              the clonal frame, a discontinuous but prominent ancestral sequence type, is
              still recognizable.  Strains sharing a recognizable clonal frame have been
              called members of a meroclone.  Eventually the clonal frame is obscured by
              additional replacements.  Among the representative set of 72 wild "ECOR"
              strains, three major meroclones are recognized on the basis of comparative
              sequencing, and so far these correspond to the three major groupings according
              to multi-locus enzyme electrophoresis.  The recombinational replacements are
              often recognized, by comparative sequencing, to belong to homologous sets;
              these clonal segments are often on the order of 1 kilobase (kb) in length,
              though this varies.  The purpose of the present project is to reconcile the
              observed distribution of discontinuous sequence similarities with the rates and
              patterns of recombinational replacements.  For example, the DNA molecules
              introduced into E. coli cells by transduction may be as large as 100 kb;
              conjugation may transmit much larger molecules.  How are the smaller
              discontinuities produced?  Recent work suggests that DNA introduced by general
              transduction in E. coli is often cut up by restriction enzymes, resulting in
              much smaller replacements which are often multiple and discontinuous. --There
              is clear evidence for similar restriction effects on conjugation, but some
              possible indications to the contrary exist as well.  Also, sequence differences
              (~ 20%) much greater than those generally obser ved among E. coli strains have
              been shown to block conjugation between species.  Do the smaller (1 -3%)
              sequence differences have a lesser (modifying) effect on conjugation?
              --Finally, a computer simulation has demonstrated that patterns comparable to
              those observed can be generated by successive randomly-placed large
              replacements.  And certainly whether the replacements are large, small or both,
              the cumulative effects of recurrent replacement must be considered.  The
              individual aims of this project are: 1) to expand the existing 12.7 kb region
              of comparative sequencing into a unique continuous 40-strain, >20 kb database,
              which will provide insight into DNA sequence variation in bacteria, and aid in
              the analysis of recombinants in its region; 2) to investigate experimentally,
              describe and explain the patterns of conjugational replacement between strain
              k12 and various wild strains of E. coli; 3) to infer the distribution of size
              and multiplicity of conjugational replacements in nature; 4) to explore the
              potential cumulative effects of transductional and conjugation recombination in
              nature by simulation; 5) to consider chromosomally local special
              characteristics via restriction analysis of PCR fragments; and then 6) to begin
              work on a quantitative model of the evolution of the chromosome of this
              species.  %%%  This study of a number of bacterial chromosomes is providing an
              understanding of the means by which bacteria exchange genes in natural
              settings.  ***
