Title       : Aquisition of Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9420049

Award Number: 9420049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stella M. Coakley coakleys@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred Soeldner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Oregon State University (OSU) asks assistance to obtain a  field emission
              scanning electron microscope (FESEM) with an  integrated x-ray energy
              spectrometer (XES) to replace an  obsolete, deteriorated 18-year-old scanning
              electron  microscope/x-ray energy spectrometer (SEM/XES) system. Our  present
              system, the only instrument of this type at OSU, was  built in 1976 and was
              purchased in used condition in 1981.  OSU has taken over 30,000 micrographs and
              logged in excess  of 6000 beam hours with this SEM. In 1993-94 , 165 campus 
              researchers from 24 departments in nine colleges used the  Electron Microscope
              Facility at OSU; the facility is managed  by the Department of Botany and Plant
              Pathology.    Diverse and high quality research by OSU faculty members 
              requires a SEM with the greater resolution, broader  versatility, and better
              reliability available in a modern  FESEM. Amongst the many users are six
              investigators, three  each from the Department of Botany and Plant Pathology
              and  the Department of Zoology, that would be primary  beneficiaries of this
              instrument; each of these individuals  currently have research projects
              supported by NSF.    Dr. Philip Brownell's research is on sensory neurobiology
              of  arthropods and focuses on cuticular sense organs and the  correlation of
              fine structure with sensory function. Dr.  Aaron Liston uses herbarium
              specimens for comparative  examination of morphological features to compare
              plant  species. Dr. Terri Lomax's research centers on understanding  the
              regulation of plant growth and development at the level  of cellular responses
              to hormonal and environmental signals.  Dr. Robert Mason studies the
              reproductive biology and  chemical ecology of reptiles. Dr. Carol Rivin's
              research  focuses on activities and regulation of genes essential to 
              embryogenesis in maize. Dr. Barbara Taylor's program  investigates
              intercellular communication between muscles and  their innervating nerves
              during adult development of fruit  flies.    In addition to the direct benefits
              t o these research  programs, our SEM/XES system helps in attracting faculty
              and  students to OSU, contributes to undergraduate and graduate  student
              training, and is essential to many other of OSU's  basic and applied research
              programs in:         human, animal, and plant health, pharmacy, and   
              bioengineering;       air, water, and soil ecology, pollution, and resource 
              development and conservation;       forest pathology, productivity, and
              development and  performance of wood products;       foods and nutrition;      
              engineering, advanced metallic, ceramic, glass, and    polymeric materials
              development, failure analysis, and    tribology;       botany, entomology,
              microbiology, zoology, chemistry,    geology, and physics.    This new field
              emission instrument would significantly  improve the research capability at
              Oregon State University.  The new capabilities for low voltage high resolution 
              examinations of cell and tissue surfaces allow substantial  improvements to
              image quality and would allow researchers to  apply this improved technology to
              a variety of problems.
