Title       : Crystallographic and Mechanistic Studies of Cytochrome c Peroxidase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1996   
File        : a9420845

Award Number: 9420845
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Kraut   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9420845  Kraut  The electron transfer reaction between cytochrome c peroxidase 
              (CcP) and cytochrome c will be examined.  CcP is a 34,000 M.W.  monomeric heme
              enzyme that catalyses the reduction of peroxide to  water, using cytochrome c
              as the electron donor.  One step in the  catalytic cycle of CcP involves rapid
              electron transfer between the  hemes of CcP and cytochrome c, although the heme
              edges are  separated by at least 17  .  The crystal structure of CcP and the 
              complex formed between CcP and cytochrome c have been determined in  this
              laboratory.  These crystal structures will be used to guide  site-directed
              mutagenesis experiments aimed at perturbing specific  elements of the electron
              transfer pathway between the two hemes.   The effect of specific mutations on
              structure and electron transfer  rates will be evaluated using crystallography
              and transient  spectroscopy techniques.  The results will help to define the 
              structural elements that are required for the long distance  electron transfer
              reaction between the hemes of CcP and cytochrome  c.  %%%  All aerobic
              organisms obtain the energy required for biosynthetic  reactions from the
              conversion of oxygen to water.  This is  accomplished by a highly ordered
              enzyme system that transfers  electrons from metabolites to oxygen, while
              preserving some of the  energy from this reaction for use in synthetic
              reactions.  The  cellular electron transfer system consists of a variety of
              metal  centers that are embedded in proteins.  It is clear that the  electrons
              are transferred between the metal centers, and the  electron transfer is
              controlled by the protein surrounding the  metal centers, but little is known
              about how the protein matrix  makes these electron transfer reactions efficient
              and highly  specific.  As a first step in understanding this process, this 
              investigation will examine how electron transfer is conducted  rapidly between
              the metal centers of twm well-defined protein  molecules.  The larger goal of
              the work is to understand how   aerobic organisms achieve the efficient and
              specific electron  transfer reactions that are required for survival.  ***
