Title       : Cretaceous-Paleogene Foraminiferida of the Victoria Land Basin (Cape Roberts
               Project)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a9420475

Award Number: 9420475
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124735             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter-Noel Webb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    This award supports efforts to characterize the foraminifera in 
              drill core recovered by the Cape Roberts Project (CRP).  The CRP  will drill
              four holes, from a sea-ice platform in up to 500m of  water, in the southwest
              Ross Sea.  Geophysical site surveys  suggest that the four drill holes will
              provide an aggregate  thickness of about 1500m of core and span about 100 to
              about 30  Ma (Cretaceous-Paleocene).  This interval of geological time is  not
              yet documented by in situ stratigraphic sections in either  the Ross Sea or
              East Antarctica.  The nearest comprehensive data  sources for the Cretaceous
              and Paleocene) occur in New Zealand,  the northern Antarctic Peninsula and the
              southern ocean.  Benthic  and planktic Foraminiferida from the core will be
              used, together  with data from other fossil groups, to provide on-site age and 
              stratigraphic control as drilling progresses.  Age correlations  will be made
              with DSDP/ODP biostratigraphy from southern Ocean  drill sites, and also with
              New Zealand planktic and benthic  zonal/stage schemes.  A principal task of
              this work is to  document in the project's initial report, a comprehensive 
              accounting of foraminiferal material present so as to assist  planning of
              post-drilling investigations.  Basic information to  be recorded on the
              foraminifera will include: presence,  abundance, preservation, species
              dominance and diversity,  stratigraphic distribution, levels of endemism or
              cosmopolitanism  in faunas, and completeness or fragmentation of population 
              structures, et cetera.  These data will be used to address a  variety of
              geological problems.  Disconformities and acoustic  reflectors which extend
              across the rift system basins and are  also expected to be encountered in the
              drill hole will be dated.  Major basin subsidence/uplift trends resulting from
              compaction  and/or rift margin faulting will be deduced from benthic 
              foraminiferal bathymetric indicators.  More subtle cyclicity in  the
              stratigraphic distribution of benthic species will be u sed to  recognize and
              document phases of transgression and regression,  which in turn may indicate a
              relationship between sea level  oscillation and terrestrial glacial events. 
              The Cretaceous-  Paleocene was an interval of time during which the final 
              disintegration of Gondwanaland occurred, specifically the  northward movement
              of New Zealand and Australia away from  Antarctica.  Foraminifera from the CRP
              drill holes will  contribute to an understanding of the paleogeography and 
              paleoceanography between the highlands and Pacific margin of East  Antarctica
              (the location of the proto-Transantarctic Mountains),  and the West Antarctic
              Rift System basins between this suspected  island chain and the highlands of
              West Antarctica.  This will  help answer the question as to whether the marine
              margin of East  Antarctica, in the vicinity of the planned drill holes, was 
              located in a Cretaceous cul-de-sac, or whether it occupied, at  times, a
              position on a major oceanic circulation pathway between  the SW Indian Ocean,
              SW Pacific, and SW Atlantic Oceans.
