Title       : Physical Studies of Xanthine Oxidase and Trimethylamine Dehydrogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1996  
File        : a9420185

Award Number: 9420185
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Hille   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hille  9420185  A study of the biophysical properties of two oxidoreductases,
              xanthine oxidase and  trimethylamine dehydrogenase, builds on past success in
              the PI's laboratory.  The goal of this  work is to fully characterize the
              kinetics of electron transfer within the two subject proteins and  ascertain
              its role in catalysis.  Xanthine oxidase from cow's milk catalyzes the
              oxidative  hydroxylation of xanthine to form uric acid, a reaction that takes
              place at the molybdenum center  of the enzyme.  For a variety of reasons, the
              enzyme has become the prototypical molybdenum  center of the enzyme.  For a
              variety of reasons, the enzyme has become the prototypical  molybdenum
              hydroxylation of substrate.  Studies of electron transfer among the four
              redox-active  centers of this enzyme will be pursued along two different lines:
              (1) pulse radiolysis studies in  D2O and as a function of temperature will be
              performed with the aim of extending past work by  the PI; and (2) use will be
              made of a ruthenium center that has been covalently attached near the 
              molybdenum center of xanthine oxidase to very rapidly introduce reducing
              equivalents into the  enzyme by flash photolysis.  The advantage of this
              protocol is that the initiation of electron  transfer is an intramolecular
              process, making possible studies at cryogenic temperatures.  Other  work will
              focus on several related aspects of trimethylamine dehydrogenase, an enzyme
              from the  methylotrophic bacterium W3A1 that catalyzes the oxidative
              demethylation of trimethylamine to  dimethylamine and formaldehyde.  The enzyme
              possesses a covalently linked flavin  mononucleotide cofactor and a 4Fe/4S
              (ferredoxin-type) center, and thus represents a useful  system with which to
              extend past work on xanthine oxidase.  The work includes: (1) studies of  the
              rates of electron transfer between the two redox-active centers using pulse
              radiolysis; (2)  characterization of the reaction of reduced trimethylamine
              dehydrogenase with its physiological  oxidant, electron-transfe rring
              flavoprotein; and (3) development of a photolabile slow substrate  for
              trimethylamine dehydrogenase that will be suitable for a Laue experiment in
              which the  progress of the reaction at the active site is followed by
              timeresolved crystallography.  %%%  The experiments are designed to address two
              goals.  The first has to do with how  protonation/deprotonation events modulate
              electron transfer into and out of organic cofactors that  are redoxactive
              (e.g., flavins and quinones), using xanthine oxidase and trimethylamine 
              dehydrogenase as the experimental systems.  The second involves a study of how
              the two  cofactors of the enzyme trimethylamine dehydrogenase interact with one
              another, and the role  of this interaction in catalytic turnover.  This work
              involves a combination of kinetic and  crystallographic approaches aimed at
              gaining a more complete understanding of how this enzyme  functions
              mechanistically.  ***
