Title       : Magnetic Levitation Haptic Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9420869

Award Number: 9420869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304971             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph L. Hollis rhollis@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Baraff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 2891,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This  project advances knowledge about how to give  computer  users 
              convincingly real haptic (sense of touch) interaction  with  computers.  While
              there has been some progress in this  area,  chiefly  through the use of
              back-driven  robotic-like  manipulators,  this  is a substantially new 
              approach  which  promises   a  qualitative  leap  in  improvement   of   such 
              capabilities: A user interacts with the computer by grasping  arigid   tool 
              whose  behavioral  description  is  computed,  employing  this tool to interact
              with computed  environments  which   are   semantically  meaningful  in  terms 
               of   the  application.   At  the  same time,  the  environment  exerts 
              realistic forces and torques on the tool's handle which  are  felt  by  the 
              user.   The vision is one  of  providing  the  computer  user  immediate,
              high-fidelity, convincingly  real  interaction  with  computed  environments. 
              The  new  haptic  interface approach is based on a recently developed magnetic 
              levitation technology, and on recent strong advances in  the  art of
              physically-based simulation.  The magnetic levitation  technology  uses 
              Lorentz  forces  to  stably  levitate  and  control  a  rigid  body (which
              includes the  handle  through  which  the user interacts) in six degrees of
              freedom, giving  a  new  and heretofore unexplored physical basis for  haptic 
              interaction.   The  new  simulation  methods  are  based  on  special-purpose 
              techniques  that  promise  to  be  simpler,  faster,  and  more  robust than
              their generic  counterparts.  Robust  realistic  physical simulation, coupled 
              with  high-  bandwidth  six-degree-of-freedom force reflection,  has  the 
              potential  to greatly improve the state of the  art  in  the  feel, 
              performance, and capabilities of virtual  environment  systems for use in a
              wide range of human activities.
