Title       : Molecular Basis of RNA: Protein Recognition by the MiaA tRNAPrenyl Transferase
               of E. coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1996  
File        : a9420416

Award Number: 9420416
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm E. Winkler mwinkler@utmmg.med.uth.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC Houston
	      P.O.Box 20036
	      Houston, TX  772250036    713/500-9352

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             mhm                  C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       u       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                      i      
              i                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               A   B   C   D   E   F   G   H   I   J         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       '    ,   R 9 @   D    
                         `                     '                     G    c       3          
              q       G           -         ;       v                       '       b        
                                    N                                     c     9420416
              Winkler PRIVATE    The overall goal of this proposal is to investigate the
              molecular basis for RNA:protein recognition by an important class of tRNA
              modification enzymes, the tRNA prenyl transferases. As an experimental model
              system, the E. coli K 12 MiaA tRNA prenyl transferase will be analyzed. The
              MiaA enzyme catalyzes the addition of a (2 isopentenyl group from dimethylallyl
              diphosphate (DMADP) to the N6 nitrogen of adenosine adjacent to the anticodon
              at position 37 of 8 of 46 E. coli tRNA species (i.e., i6A 37 formation). The
              MiaA prenyl transferase will be overexpressed and purified to homogeneity,
              possibly with the aid of removable affinity tags. The combined tRNA sequence
              and secondary structure determinants required by the MiaA enzyme for i6A 37 
              formation will be established. Finally, the roles of four highly conserved
              amino acid motifs in the MiaA enzyme will be ascertained for substrate binding
              and i6A 37 formation. These combined data should lead to a more complete
              picture of how cells regulate tRNA modification levels and coordinate
              modification with changes in tRNA levels unde r different physiological
              conditions. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the proposed experiments may
              lead to new concepts in the general problem of RNA:protein recognition. None of
              the conserved protein motifs in MiaA strongly matches known RNA or DMADP
              binding sites, and one motif corresponds to an ATP/GTP binding site, even
              though nucleotide triphosphates are not known to be required for i6A 37 
              formation. Several hypotheses will be tested for the role of these conserved
              motifs in MiaA enzyme function. %%% RNA is a large nucleic acid molecule that
              plays numerous essential biological roles in the cells of all organisms. To
              function, different kinds of RNA interact specifically with proteins, which act
              as enzyme catalysts and structural components in cells. Thus, it is of
              fundamental biological importance to learn the principles by which different
              kinds of RNA recognize specific proteins. To date, these principles are known
              for only a small number of RNA:protein interactions, and no consensus rules
              have emerged. The overall goal of this NSF grant is to determine the principles
              of RNA:protein recognition for an important model bacterial protein, called the
              MiaA prenyl transferase, that specifically binds to and changes bases of (i.e.,
              modifies) certain transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules.. By correlating structural
              changes with functional properties, it should be possible to work out the rules
              for tRNA:protein recognition for these important kinds of macromolecules. ***  
                                                   ;                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                              @              
                                                                                             
                                                                      ....()()))()()         
                                                       Z   :                                 
                                   phoenix             W   CH  o                          ;  
                                              S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n            
                            (                                                   @            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             Oh     +'  0                                       $       H    
                l                                               D       h                    
                                            R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                    
                                marcia steinberg                    marcia steinberg         
                @                                   @                                   @    
              UZ                                                                             
                                    @                                           Microsoft
              Word 6.0                                                      3                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  e 3       e               >
                u                   1                                                        
                                                                                             
                                    C                                                        
                        L       N       N       N       l
