Title       : Phylogeny and Molecular Evolution of Leguminosae: Nodulation and Nodulin Gene
               Families
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1996     
File        : a9420215

Award Number: 9420215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey J. Doyle jjd5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9420215  Doyle       The ability to use atmospheric nitrogen, rather than more 
              complex organic compounds, as a source of nitrogen is a hallmark of  the legume
              family (Leguminosae, the "beans") and a major cause of  its great economic and
              ecological importance.  Nitrogen fixation is  accomplished biochemically in
              partnership with soil bacteria  ("rhizobia") which are housed in complex organs
              termed nodules,  usually found on the roots of legumes.  Among the novel
              features of  nodules are a suite of proteins ("nodulins") produced by the plant
               predominantly or exclusively in that organ.  The origins of many of  the genes
              encoding many of these proteins are unknown; suggestions  have included
              horizontal transfer, gene duplication, or simply  recruitment of existing genes
              for novel purposes.  Phylogenetic and  taxonomic considerations suggest that
              nodulation originated more  than once within the legume family of plants, yet
              the biochemical  and structural complexity of the nodule might argue for a
              single  origin followed by many independent losses of the ability to  nodulate.
                    Dr. Jeff Doyle of Cornell University is studying the origins  of genes
              encoding nodulin proteins in order to test ideas about the  number of
              evolutionary shifts in nitrogen fixation.  Research  focuses on glutamine
              synthetase, a protein with an important role  in nitrogen transport, encoded by
              a gene family that has been  studied in several crop legumes (soybean, alfalfa,
              garden bean) but  has yet to be studied in legumes more phylogenetically
              distant from  these.  The major taxonomic focus is on legumes of the nodulating
               genus Chamaecrista and its non-nodulating close relative, Senna.   Insights
              into the origins of nodulation in hitherto unstudied  legumes should shed light
              on common mechanisms of gene evolution in  this important plant physiological
              process.  ??
