Title       : The Evolutionary and Ecological Significance of Natural Disturbance in a New
               England Salt Marsh
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1995     
File        : a9420186

Award Number: 9420186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56946              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Stephen Brewer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Bertness  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0521200   Salt Tolerant Plants                    
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9420186  Brewer  Ecological succession is one of the most widely studied
              processes in community ecology. Nonetheless, while numerous ecological models
              of community dynamics have been developed to explain successional responses to
              disturbance, very little is known about historical effects of disturbance on
              plant community dynamics. The main goal of the proposed research is to explore
              the historical effects of wrack-burial disturbance on plant community dynamics
              in a New England salt marsh. To do this, three experimental approaches will be
              employed. First, replicated wrack disturbances in three marsh areas with known
              differences in disturbance history will be created to test the hypothesis that
              marsh plants with different disturbance histories respond differently to
              disturbance. Secondly, disturbance history influences on intraspecific
              variation in clonal morphology will be quantified with common garden
              experiments in three co-occurring high-marsh perennial species. Third, the
              hypothesis that disturbance  history influences the intensity of interspecific
              interactions will be tested with an additive series of competition experiments
              in the greenhouse.   %%%  This study will explicitly examine the importance of
              considering disturbance history in studying plant community dynamics and
              specifically will examine the role of disturbance frequency as a selective
              force on marsh plants. The results of this study will explore an important
              interface between plant population biology and community dynamics that has
              received surprisingly little attention.
