Title       : Convex Optimization for Engineering Analysis and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1994 
File        : a9420565

Award Number: 9420565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Win Aung                                
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305441             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Boyd boyd@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9420565  Boyd    ABSTRACT     The focus of this combined research-curriculum
              development (CRCD) proposal is convex optimization applied to engineering
              analysis and design.  The basic idea is that many analysis and design problems
              arising in engineering can be expressed in terms of convex optimization
              problems, which are mathematical problems of a special form.  While these
              problems can appear very difficult, they can be solved very efficiently by
              computer, using recently developed methods that exploit convexity.  This idea
              has recently been applied successfully to several problems in the field of
              automatic control systems, resulting in new theoretical advances as well as the
              development of practically useful computer-aided design tools.   Of course, not
              all problems arising in engineering are convex, and some methods developed for
              more general numerical optimization problems can be used to solve convex
              problems.  But the extraordinary potential increase in efficiency of the new
              interior-point methods over more general methods makes the concentration on
              convex problems worthwhile.   The research component involves the development
              of new and improved algorithms for the solution of the convex optimization
              problems that arise in engineering.  The project concentrates on methods that
              can exploit the underlying engineering structure in the problem, and hence
              solve even large-scale problems efficiently.  The research will involve not
              only the development and analysis of algorithms but also extensive numerical
              experimentation on real problems.  Preliminary experiments suggest the
              possibility of solving problems involving thousands of variables and tens of
              thousands of constraints in minutes on a workstation.   The curriculum
              development component involves the creation of a complete set of teaching
              materials   a conventional textbook as well as HTML hypertext material
              available via World-Wide Web   for a new course on convex optimization with
              engineering applications.  The course is aimed at senior under graduates and
              first year graduate students from all fields of engineering, and will
              concentrate on developing the background, experience, and skills required to
              recognize and exploit convexity in engineering applications.  The goal is that
              the course should eventually be adopted at every university with an advanced
              engineering program.  The ultimate goal is that convex optimization and the
              recently developed interior-point techniques for solving convex problems should
              make their way into the mainstream of numerical mathematics, and our main point
              into engineering practice.   The practical significance of a convex
              optimization-based solution to an engineering problem is the possibility of
              developing powerful computer-aided design and analysis tools for the
              engineering problem.  The development of such CAD tools and the training of
              students to develop such CAD tools is an obvious and substantial contribution
              to overall U.S. economic competitiveness.  ***
