Title       : Prosodic Morphology in Optimality Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9420424

Award Number: 9420424
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155444             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. McCarthy jmccarthy@linguist.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9420424              Prosodic Morphology (PM) is the study of how prosody plays
              a  role in word formation. Prosody deals with the structure of  syllables and
              the larger units into which they are grouped,  stress-feet and phonological
              words. Prosody impinges on word  formation in various ways, but particularly
              conspicuously in  phenomena like reduplication.        Optimality Theory (OT)
              is a model of how constraints on  linguistic form interact with one another. A
              fundamental notion  in OT is the idea that constraints are ranked with respect
              to one  another, and that constraints are violated when violation leads  to
              satisfaction of a higher-ranking constraint. Because it is a  very general
              approach to constraint interaction, and because it  can deal with the
              interaction of very diverse constraints (such  as constraints on prosody and
              constraints on morphology), OT is a  particularly apt framework to apply to PM.
                    The goal of this project is to study the areas where the  theory of PM
              intersects with OT. Preliminary results strongly  indicate that each of these
              theories will lead to a better  understanding of the other, and that the two
              together will shed  new light on linguistic phenomena. Based on previous work,
              a  number of likely hypotheses and potentially productive research  questions
              have been identified. These hypotheses and questions  will be studied through
              extensive empirical investigation of  phenomena like reduplication, infixation,
              root-and-pattern  morphology, and morphological truncation. Both cross-language
               surveys and intensive study of the systems of particular  languages will be
              undertaken. The results will be reported in  several articles and, at the
              conclusion of the project, in a  monograph summarizing all of the material.
