Title       : Magnetic Resonance Studies of Order and Dynamics in Liquid- Crystalline Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1998        
File        : a9420458

Award Number: 9420458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia J. Jameson cjj@sigma.chem.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lucio Frydman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9420458  Frydman  This project focuses on nuclear magnetic resonance 
              investigation of order and dynamics in liquid-crystalline  polymers.  These new
              materials play special roles in several  structural and electronic
              applications.  Their main  characteristics are a strong affinity towards the
              formation  of liquid-crystalline solutions, and an ability to retain  these
              solution arrangements upon going into the solid state.  This combination makes
              possible the generation of highly  ordered macromolecular materials with
              valuable mechanical,  thermal and non-linear optical properties.  Further
              advances  in the practical utilization of these polymers are  intimately linked
              to understanding the ways in which  chemical structures and external factors
              such as flow  fields, can control their dynamics and orientations.  These 
              aspects are explored using state-of-the-art multidimensional  nuclear magnetic
              resonance in both the liquid-crystalline  and the solid phase, as well as
              gradient-based magnetic  resonance microscopy methods.  These experiments rely 
              extensively on a specialized technology whose  purpose is  the characterization
              of local anisotropic environments at  molecular and supramolecular levels. 
              They involve the use  of high-temperature dynamic-angle assemblies for studying
               molten thermotropics, of variable-angle spinning probeheads  for solid-phase
              analyses of order and reorientations, and of  rheo-imaging instrumentation for
              the investigation of flow  in lyotropics.  Using these techniques it will be
              possible  to probe how local mesomorphic order in thermotropic liquid- 
              crystals depends on chemical composition; how much of the  liquid-crystalline
              order of these systems is preserved upon  cooling them into glasses; how
              solid-phase chain dynamics  affect the alignment of these polymeric glasses and
              what is  their exact nature; and how different types of flow and  diffusion
              impart a net anisotropy of solutions of liquid-  crystalline polymers.  An
              important aspect of these  experiments is the ir reliance on the
              natural-abundance  observation of  13C spins, a method that imposes no 
              preconditions on the type or origin of the samples under  study.  Thus, the
              materials to be analyzed include  homopolyesters with high melting
              temperatures, commercial  thermotropic copolymers, complex molecular blends of
              liquid-  crystalline and random polymers, and corrosive lyotropic  solutions. 
              %%%  All these are highly relevant systems, whose better  understanding should
              have a significant impact on their  practical application.
