Title       : Gyrase Binding Sites in Bacteriophage Mu Transposition and Chromosome Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1998     
File        : a9420804

Award Number: 9420804
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin L. Pato martin.pato@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9420804  Pato  Bacteriophage Mu/ by nature of its being both a virus and a
              transposon, is unusual among transposons in its large size and its high
              frequency of transposition. Amplification of Mu DNA during the lytic cycle
              occurs by a series of replicative transposition events which take place within
              the bacterial nucleoid, despite the restraints imposed by the complex structure
              of that body. Concerns about potential problems with synapsing the ends of
              prophage DNA within the nucleoid, an early step in the transposition process,
              led to studies which uncovered a strong gyrase binding site in the center of
              the Mu genome which is required for efficient replication. An hypothesis was
              proposed that the gyrase site is involved in organizing the topology of the
              supercoiled prophage DNA to assist in synapsis of the Mu ends. Several
              predictions of the model were tested during the previous grant period and the
              results to date offer strong support for the hypothesis. The present research
              continues the studies with Mu and extends them to include studies on the
              possible role of strong gyrase binding sites in chromosomal structure. The
              prediction that the Mu strong gyrase site can assist in bringing together
              interacting DNA sequences that are equidistant from the gyrase site will be
              tested/ and features of gyrase and of the binding site that are required for
              this activity will be examined. A powerful selection procedure for the
              isolation and characterization of potential strong gyrase binding sites from
              the E. coli chromosome is presented. Fragments of chromosomal DNA will be
              cloned into the center of a prophage deleted for its gyrase site, and hence
              unable to form a plaque; any fragment that restores plaque forming ability will
              be a candidate for one carrying a strong gyrase site.  %%%  Studies of
              bacterial and viral replication in this research have the potential to provide
              information useful in interfering with virus growth in other organisms.  ***   
                ??
