Title       : Americas Program: Responses of Red Mangrove to Long-Term Chronic Petroleum
               Contamination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1995   
File        : a9420164

Award Number: 9420164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45502              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Klekowski libby@umc5600.zool.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9420164  Klekowski    This Americas Program award will  fund a  research 
              collaboration between Dr. Edward Klekowski, University of  Massachusetts 
              Amherst , and Dr. Avril-Siung-Chang,  Institute of Marine Affairs, Trinidad
              -Tobago, West Indies.  They propose to survey, genetically and chemically,
              selected  mangrove populations in Trinidad,  to determine if there is  a
              correlation between sediment contamination by chemically  identified pollutants
              and enhanced mutation in the  indigenous mangrove forests.   The work is an
              extension of  previous studies done in Puerto Rico by Dr. Klekowsky.   The 
              research  focuses on a an easily observed small subset of  mutation , albino
              propagules, with the  purpose  of  extrapolating the results to the rest of the
              gnome.   The  study will be divided into three parts: genetics, sediment 
              chemistry and pigment fingerprinting.  The University of  Massachusetts  will
              be responsible for the population  sampling, mutation rate measurements and the
              final data  analysis.  The group from the Institute of Marine Affairs, 
              Trinidad, will be collecting sediment cores from the  mangrove populations and
              will do the chemical analysis for  the core samples for petroleum related
              compounds.  The  pigment fingerprinting  will be done by the Department of 
              Marine Science, University of P.R.    Mangrove forests are a widespread
              ecosystem in the tropics  with unique features at the interface of land and
              sea,  and  form a protective buffer that cushions against tropical  storm
              surges.   They are an important forestry resource in  certain areas and are
              often nursery areas for commercially  important fish species.  Basic
              information on their  component species and how they respond to stress, will be
               needed to develop appropriate conservation or restoration  programs and will
              help focus attention on the long-term  consequences of petroleum-related
              environmental pollution.  Trinidad offers a unique site for this study with its
               combination of both controlled uncontaminated mangrove  h abitats as well as
              habitats that have been chronically  contaminated by petroleum for decades. 
              ***
