Title       : Characterization of Plant H+-Coupled Sugar and Amino Acid Transporters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1997   
File        : a9420599

Award Number: 9420599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Loo dloo@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn Boorer  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9420599  Boorer    The cloned H+/hexose transporters from Arabidopsis (STP),
               H+/sucrose transporters from spinach (SoSUC1) and potato  (StSUC1) and a
              H+/amino acid transporter from Arabidopsis  (NAT2) will be expressed in Xenopus
              oocytes.  Their  transport kinetics will be investigated using the 2- 
              electrode voltage-clamp and the cut-open oocyte vaseline gap  methods to
              determine the external and internal transport  reaction steps of the
              transporters.  The dependence of  maximal rate of transport, imax, and the
              apparent affinity  K0.5 for ligands on voltage and the concentration of ligands
               will be determined.  Measurement of reversal potentials and  the simultaneous
              measurement of the flux of labelled  substrates and H+ currents will be used to
              determine the  stoichiometry of transport.   Analysis of the presteady-  state
              kinetics will provide unique insights in both partial  reaction steps of the
              transport reaction cycle and the  number of transporters in the membrane.  This
              kinetic  information will be used to formulate and examine transport  models to
              describe the kinetic properties of the sugar and  amino acid transporters. 
              Mutant transporters which have  been tested for function by complementing yeast
              amino acid  transport mutants will be expressed in oocytes and a  detailed
              kinetic characterization of the transporters will  be undertaken. This will
              allow transport models to be  tested.  For SoSUC1 and STSUC1 specific
              interactions between  transported substrates and inhibitors of transport will
              be  investigated and the optimal 3D structure  for recognition  by the
              transporter determined by energy minimization and  molecular model building. 
              In the long term, a concensus  structure for transported analogues may be used
              to target  the sucrose transporter in the design of novel herbicides  and
              pesticides.  Also, the mutants transtporters will be  used to alter the
              partitioning of carbon and nitrogen in  transgenic plants which will, in turn,
              lead to the  introduction of favorable agron omic traits into crop plants.  %%%
               The goal of this study is to understand the molecular  mechanisms underlying
              the transport of amino acids and  sugars into and out of plant cells. Amino
              acids and sugars  are essential nutrients and are transported into plant cells 
              via H+-coupled cotransporters which are integral membrane  protiens that couple
              the uptake of substrates to the  electrochemical gradient for H+ generated by
              the H+- pumping  ATPase.  These transporters play a vital role in the 
              partitioning of assimilates between source and sink tissues  which is a major
              determinant of crop yield.  The approach  will be to express the cloned
              H+-dependent hexose, sucrose  and amino acid transporters in Xenopus oocytes
              and to use  electrophysiological and radiotracer flux techniques to 
              characterize the biophysical properties and kinetics (ligand  specificity,
              ligand stoichiometry, voltage-dependence,  reversiblity) of these
              cotransporters.   These studies will  be combined with molecular biological
              techniques to  characterize mutant transporters which will allow the 
              identification of specific amino acid residues involved in  H+ and
              substrate-binding  and transport mechanisms.  ***
