Title       : Acquisition of an Image Plate Area Detector for X-Ray Crystallography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1995   
File        : a9420048

Award Number: 9420048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223431             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Alber tom@ucxray6.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond C. Stevens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hillary    C. M. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Funds are requested for an X-ray data collection system for  macromolecular
              crystal structure determination. The instrument is the  R-AXIS II imaging plate
              system, which includes a rotating anode X-ray  generator, focusing mirrors, and
              a controlling computer. The new  instrument will be located in Stanley Hall at
              the University of  California, Berkeley, and will be shared by three research
              groups  which- use X-ray crystallography as a primary research tool. Currently,
               the three research groups share one X-ray area detector, which is used  full
              time, and the backlog of data collection limits progress.    The three groups
              have a broad range of research interests. The proteins  and peptides under
              investigation differ significantly in size and  biological function. Prof.
              Alber asks general questions about protein  folding, stability, and intra- and
              intermolecular protein interactions.  Model systems used to test these
              questions include coiled-coils, T4  lysozyme, ATCase, and transcriptional
              accessory proteins. Prof. Nelson  studies DNA binding proteins and protein-DNA
              interactions. Crystals of  the DNA binding domain of the heat shock
              transcription factor diffract  X-rays to at least 0.9  resolution, making this
              the highest resolution  structure for which mutants are readily obtained. Prof.
              Stevens studies  proteins involved in neurotransmission. Proteins under study
              include:  two proteins involved in catecholamine biosynthesis, tyrosine 
              hydroxylase and dopamine monoxygenase; neuroreceptors, such as human 
              2-adrenergic receptor, fish olfactory receptor, and yeast  factor  receptor;
              and the botulinum neurotoxin. In addition, to the individual  research
              interests of the three groups, collaborative crystallographic  projects have
              been initiated with other faculty at Berkeley. Clearly,  an additional
              instrument will allow significant progress to made on a  wide range of
              crystallographic studies.    In addition to supporting the research efforts of
              these three groups,  this instrument will have a train ing function. Between
              the three  groups, there are 4 post-doctoral fellows, 14 graduate students, and
              4  undergraduates who are pursuing crystallographic projects. The size of  the
              joint group is expected to grow by 6 more students and fellows  within the next
              year.
