Title       : Dissertation Research: Frontier Economies: Prehispanic Pottery Production in the
               Chalchihuites and La Quemada Regions of Zacatecas, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1994   
File        : a9420704

Award Number: 9420704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1994  
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4774               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ben A. Nelson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nelson    Under the direction of Dr. Ben Nelson, Ms. Nicola Strazicich will 
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will travel to  Mexico and
              collect pottery samples from archaeological sites for  both petrographic and
              chemical analysis. The ceramics derive from  two regions in Northern Mexico -
              Alta Vista and La Quemada. Each  has been studied extensively by archaeologists
              and each is  characterized by a different degree of political centralization. 
              The site of La Quemada contains artifically constructed terraces  situated on a
              bluff above the Malpaso Valley floor. The central  precinct of the site houses
              monumental architecture including a  hall of columns, votive pyramid and a
              massive masonry staircase.  Architecturally, the site represents significant
              labor investment  and planning. However the region lacks evidence for either
              economic  diversification or the manipulation of prestige goods which  indicate
              a highly stratified and centrally managed society. At Alta  Vista, in addition
              to large-scale architecture, extensive mining  and quarrying activities were
              carried out. Minerals extracted  included iron, malachite, hematite, chert and
              blue-green gem  stones. Evidence here argues for a more complex and centralized
               form of social organization. Ms. Strazicich wishes to understand  differences
              in ceramic production within this comparative context.  She will conduct both
              elemental and petrographic analysis to  determine the extent of intrasite
              variability of both clay matrix  and production technique. She hypothesizes
              that the more complex  Alta Vista site will show a higher level of
              standardization.    Archaeologists wish to understand how complex societies
              emerge and  are maintained. Many have focussed on the economic aspects of this 
              process and want to know when and how standardization in production  emerges.
              The assumption is that as societies grow more complex and  centralized
              management emerges, manufacturing activities such as  pottery production will
              come under central contr ol and will be  carried out by specialists. The
              resulting wares will become more  standardized. While such a scenario may
              appear sensible from a  theoretical perspective, very little empirical work has
              been done  to either verify or disconfirm this idea. The two sites chosen by 
              Ms. Strazicich provide an excellent context within which to address  this
              issue.    This research is important because it addresses a topic of interest 
              to many archaeologists. It will help to develop a technique with  potential
              applicability in many situations and will assist in the  training of a
              promising young scientist.
