Title       : Collaborative Research: Relationship Between Clouds, SST and Surface Fluxes on
               Seasonal and Interannual Time Scales over the Western Pacific
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1996      
File        : a9420833

Award Number: 9420833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170128             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duane E. Waliser duane.waliser@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  ATM 9420833  Waliser, Duane  SUNY, Stonybrook  Title: Relationship
              between Clouds, SST and Surface Fluxes on  Seasonal and Interannual Time Scales
              Over the Western Pacific    The goal of this proposal is to contribute to the
              clarification of  the role of clouds on the surface radiation and latent heat
              flux in  the western Pacific over climatologically significant space and  time
              scales.  The data available until recently have not allowed us  to estimate
              unambiguously the magnitude and variability of the  dominant mechanisms at work
              in air-sea interactions in the tropical  regions.  There are, for instance,
              competing theories regarding the  mechanism responsible for the maintenance of
              tropical sea surface  temperatures at their observed temperature in the western
              Pacific.    Our proposal has three objectives.  First, we will compute cloud 
              and surface (shortwave radiation and latent heat) fluxes from  satellite
              observations using techniques we have developed or  adapted from other
              investigators.  Second, we will intercompare our  satellite results with
              surface and aircraft observations to ensure  the quality of the
              satellite-derived surface fluxes.  Third, and  this is the heart of our
              proposal, we will investigate the effect  of clouds on surface fluxes
              (including SST) over climatologically  significant space and time scales.   
              Our approach uses satellite data extensively to provide the large  scale
              framework, and it also builds upon the availability of TOGA-  COARE data to
              validate our satellite data and perform some process-  oriented studies.  The
              investigation will, however, extend the  results from the TOGA-COARE IOP to
              longer time periods in order to  explore seasonal and interannual variability. 
                Results from this research are expected to lead to a better  understanding of
              some of the mechanisms controlling air-sea  interactions and, thus, should help
              in the development of new  parameterizations for a hierarchy of numerical
              models aimed at  simulating the coupled atmosphere-o cean system over seasonal
              to  interannual time scales in the tropical regions.
