Title       : Isolation and Properties of Enzymes from the Hyperthermophile Pyrococcus
               Furiosus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1996        
File        : a9420228

Award Number: 9420228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evangelos N. Moudrianakis vanm@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christian B. Anfinsen  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9183,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The primary structures of proteins contain the chemical characteristics that
              determine the native folded conformation having the global free energy minimum
              for the system in a given microenvironment. Analysis of the pathway(s) of
              polypeptide chain folding and the nature of the intramolecular interactions
              that stabilize the final native format are active areas of research in many
              laboratories. Modern methodologies and technical advances in more classical
              approaches are now offering a real chance for solving these problems with a
              high degree of precision. From the standpoint of biological system, the
              synthesis and thermal stability of enzymes of the hyperthermophilic bacteria
              and Archaea raise further questi ons about the nature of forces involved in
              intramolecular stabilization. The experimental system focuses on proteins
              derived from the hyperthermophile Pyrococcus funosus, an obligate anaerobe
              isolated from geothermally heated marine sediments off the island of Vulcano,
              Italy. These organisms grow optimally at 100 C and their enzymes are also
              maximally active at this temperature. Alpha amylase, a serine protease, a
              DNAase, and a `dithioglycolase` are the subjects of this study. Work with these
              proteins will involve their purification from natural and from genetically
              engineered sources. The purified proteins will be analyzed by enzymologic,
              spectroscopic, and thermodynamic procedures. Crystallization of some of these
              enzymes will be attempted. From these studies, a data base will be developed
              that would allow correlations between structural and catalytic properties
              characteristic of these thermoactive enzyme systems. This information will be
              analyzed within the framework of the issue of protein folding and stability. 
              Moreover, in the long run, such understanding may aid in the production of
              stable enzymes with  economic and environmental applications.  %%%   The
              primary target of this research is to better our understanding of the process
              of protein folding.  Since the biological specificity and activity of all
              proteins depends on a precisely folded 3D architecture of the molecule,
              understanding the rules that govern this process is of fundamental importance
              both to basic science as well as to biotechnology and medicine.  A number of
              years ago Dr. Anfinsen proposed that the amino acid sequence within a protein
              chain contained all the thermodynamic information necessary to dictate the
              final folded state of that protein.  Much remains to be understood about the
              rules governing the mechanics  specificity and kinetics of the protein folding
              pathway(s). The relatively recent introduction of the experimental system of
              Archaebacteria offers new experimental material for the study of the problem of
              protein folding and stability.  Enzymes from these thermophilic bacteria are
              stable at high temperatures (up to 100  C); most of the times they are actually
              inactive at conventional temperatures  (15 37   C)  and  develop  their 
              activity  only  as temperature is raised.   The P.I. plans to purify certain
              enzymes  (an amylase,  a  protease  and  a  DNAase)  from  such  thermophilic
              archaebacteria  and  study  their  catalytic,   structural  and thermodynamic
              properties.    If  successful, these  studies  should  further our
              understanding of the rules of protein folding and enzyme stability, and might,
              at some  day, contribute towards the engineering of enzymes with improved
              properties.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
