Title       : Molecular Mechanisms of Brassinosteroid Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  1996   
File        : a9420016

Award Number: 9420016
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Clouse steve_clouse@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9420016  Clouse  Brassinosteroids (BRS) are widely occurring plant compounds 
              with structural similarity to animal steroid hormones.  BRS  have numerous
              physiological effects, including enhanced cell  elongation, but little is known
              about the mechanism of  action of these plant growth regulators.  An
              integrative  approach was used to investigate a number of physiological  and
              molecular parameters associated with BR-promoted  elongation of stem tissue. 
              From a cDNA library of BR-  treated soybean (Glycine max L) epicotyl mRNA, a
              gene (BRU1)  was cloned which is regulated primarily by BRS within two  hours
              of treatment.  The BRU1 transcript levels are not  increased by micromolar
              concentrations of auxins,  cytokinins, ABA or BA3, and BRU1 expression is
              highest in  stem tissue.  BRS caused a marked increase in Instron-  measured
              plastic extensibility, suggesting that they may  promote elongation in part by
              altering mechanical properties  of the cell wall (wall loosening).  The
              kinetics of wall-  loosening closely followed the increase in BRU1 expresssion.
               This suggests a possible role for the BRU1 protein in BR-  stimulated
              elongation.  The objective of this project is to  test this hypothesis and to
              further examine the regulation  of gene expression by plant steroids.   
              Despite the obvious growth-promoting effects of BRS on  plants and its
              demonstrated interactions with other growth  regulators, little is known about
              the molecular mechanisms  of BRS action.  Understanding BR activity has great 
              potential importance in basic developmental biology and  practical agriculture.
               The precise biochemical mechanisms  of wall loosening during elongation remain
              elusive.  The  completion of the proposed experiments may increase our 
              knowledge of the molecular events controlling stem  elongation.  The proposed
              studies on BRS-regulated increases  in BRU1 mRNA levels should add to our
              knowledge of  posttranscriptional mechanisms and will, in fact, be the  first
              detailed study of the mechanisms of gene regulat ion by  plant steroids.  The
              analysis of BRU1, and other BRS-  regulated genes may also have future impact
              on development  of transgenic crop plants with altered growth properties.
