Title       : Rapid Prototyping: Computer-Aided Manufacturing of Laminated Engineering
               Materials (CAM-LEM)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9420373

Award Number: 9420373
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wyatt S. Newman wsn@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Cawley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1052,1373,1771,9146,9162,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9420373  Newman       This multidisciplinary project addresses software,
              equipment  and materials processes for achieving high-quality, structural 
              ceramic parts with complex interior and exterior geometries,  produced directly
              from a computer aided design description.  The  technique involves cutting and
              stacking laminae to form a  structural component.  By separating the materials
              processing steps  from the shape fabrication operations, the method promises to
               achieve high dimensional accuracy while achieving monolithic  structural
              integrity.  By laser slicing pre-processed laminae and  robotically stacking
              them into laminated assemblies, it appears  possible to achieve significantly
              faster fabrication over direct  depositiol techniques.  Further, by utilizing
              surface normal  information to cut laminae at computed tangents, surface
              quality  can be improved.  By cutting-then-stacking, there is the  opportunity
              for complete material removal from intended voids, as  well as assembly of
              fugitive support structures.  Hardware issues  focus on the design,
              construction and testing of five axis laser-  cutting system.  This system will
              create laminae with the desired  outlines and edge tangents.  It will be
              integrated with a robot for  feeding stock sheet, feeding filler material,
              removing waste  material, and handling and assembling cut laminae.  Machine 
              performance issues include pragmatic cutting speed and achievable  cutting, and
              assembly accuracies.  Software developments will  incorporate existing
              knowledge and extend capabilities in two  areas.  Surface normal information
              contained within standard files  will be used to define laser-cutter
              trajectories for tapered edge  cuts, thus improving surface finish.  Second,
              part shrinkage due to  post-process firing will be modelled, and "green" parts
              will be  pre-distorted computationally to anticipate correct final  dimensions.
                        Rapid prototyping to near net shape parts offers numerous  advantages
              to the manufacturing sector in terms of redu cing cycle  time, reducing waste
              thus lowering manufacturing cost.  This  project synergetically combines well
              established technologies to  come up with solutions to current limitations on
              surface finish and  part accuracy.  While the project focusses on cast alumina,
              it has  the potential for much broader commercialization as opposed to the 
              current niche successes of rapid prototyping process.
