Title       : The Analysis of Craft Production and Residential Activity at Xochicalco, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1998     
File        : a9420202

Award Number: 9420202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98866              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Hirth Kgh2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hirth    In 1992 and 1993, with NSF support, Dr. Kenneth Hirth conducted 
              extensive excavation at the site of Xochicalo an archaeological  site located
              in Mexico. Xochicalo is important because it marks  the capital of a
              pre-Columbian state which was a major regional  power and because a survey of
              surface remains indicated that it  was rich in archaeological materials. During
              the course of two  seasons excavation, Dr. Hirth and his team uncovered three
              intact  and well preserved residential compounds with rich and  undisturbed
              artifact assemblages. Large quantities of household  goods, domestic tools and
              the remains of obsidian (volcanic  glass) stone tool production were recovered.
              The unusual  preservation makes it possible to engage in a detailed analysis 
              of domestic activity patterns which usually can not be attempted  using
              archaeological remains and Dr. Hirth will undertake such  work with support of
              this grant.    Archaeologists want to understand how complex societies arose
              and  how they were maintailed in technologically simple societies  which lacked
              written language and computation systems. Evidence  has shown that societies
              developed systems of economic  specialization in which production took place in
              varied and  carefully regulated contexts and that control over this  production
              helped to reinforce the centralization of power which  state control requires.
              Obsidian played an important role in pre-  metal societies because this
              glasslike rock can we worked to  produce sharp cutting edges. At Xochicalco
              obsidian is abundant  and is present in both the residential structures and
              other  workshop areas. Through the analyses which Dr. Hirth plans to  conduct
              insight will be gained into the organization of this  important industry.   
              This work is significant for several reasons. It will produce  data of interest
              to many archaeologists. It will also increase  our understanding of the
              emergence and maintenance of complex  societies.
