Title       : Interfacial Chemistries of Molecular Electronic Materials: Epitaxial Ultrathin
               Films of Large Molecules Created by OMBE, LB and Self-Assembly Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1996   
File        : a9420827

Award Number: 9420827
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $610000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal R. Armstrong nra@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The epitaxial growth of organic thin films which may have utility in electronic
              devices and  chemical sensor systems is the focus of the research in this
              project supported by the Analytical  and Surface Chemistry program.  The work
              emphasizes the mechanistic understanding of  epitaxial growth and molecular
              organization, and will use both vacuum and solution deposition  procedures to
              form these films.  Thin films of large dye molecules deposited on metal, 
              semiconductor, and insulator surfaces will be explored.  The relationship
              between molecular  packing, multilayer ordering, and the electronic and optical
              properties of these materials will be  determined. Small molecule chemisorption
              on these dye molecule films will be investigated, and  the development of
              designed "molecular recognition sites" on these films will be initiated.  This 
              strategy may be useful in the fabrication of versatile molecule specific
              chemical sensors.    The controlled growth of organic molecular thin films may
              have important application in the  development of molecular electronic devices
              and highly specific chemical sensors.  The work  of this research project is
              directed to developing an understanding of the conditions which  control the
              growth of organic thin films.  A range of experimental methods will be brought
              to  bear in these studies, with the goal of the controlled design of thin film
              assemblies with  molecular recognition sites directly incorporated.
