Title       : Precise Uranium-Series Dating of the Peking Man Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1994  
File        : a9420777

Award Number: 9420777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99968              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teh-Lung Ku rku@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ku    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Teh-Lung Ku and his 
              colleagues will conduct uranium series dating on a series of  speleothem (cave
              limestone) deposits from the  archaeological/paleontological site of
              Zhoukoudian which is  located near Beijing, China. This site is one of the most
               important in the world because its deposits span a major portion  of the last
              Ice Age and contain both archaeological materials and  hominid remains. The
              hominid cranial material from the site  played a basic role in the definition
              of Homo erectus in Asia.  Nine of the 13 layers at Zhoukoudian, locality 1
              contain hominid  remains. The layers are also very rich in archaeological 
              materials including both stone tools and faunal remains and may  contain the
              earliest evidence for the controlled use of fire. A  major problem with the
              site has been the inability of scientists  to obtain good age estimates for
              each layer. Dr. Ku and his  colleagues will collect speleothem from secure
              geological  contexts and conduct uranium series dating. Additionally, the age 
              determination will be carried out using thermal ionization mass  spectrometry -
              a recently developed technique that has  revolutionized the geochronology
              because of the technique's  unparalleled precision and sensitivity. It has the
              potential to  extend the U-series dating limit from ca 350 ka to ca. 600 ka.   
              Paleoanthropologists wish to understand how hominids developed  both culturally
              and physically over time. Data to date indicate  that the Far East played an
              important role in this process but  unfortunately relatively few sites have
              been discovered and  excavated in this part of the world. For this reason
              Zhoukoudian  with its rich fossil and archaeological record is extremely 
              important. More precise dating will allow these remains to be  interpreted in a
              broader geographical context.
