Title       : Function of Phospholipase C Encoded by the norpA Gene of Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1997        
File        : a9420836

Award Number: 9420836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Avijit Chaudhuri                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214631             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall D. Shortridge rds@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The process of phototransduction captures the energy of  light by cells in the
              retina of the eye, converting it into  a nerve signal to the brain.  A useful
              model system for  studying this aspect of vision is the fruitfly Drosophila, 
              because its genetics are extremely well known and many  mutant strains are
              available.  One of the mutations in a  gene called "norpA" abolishes a step in
              phototransduction,  making the animal blind.  This gene normally produces an 
              enzyme called PLC (for phospholipase-C), which is an  important effector enzyme
              for one of the largest classes of  biochemical pathways for cellular signaling.
               There are at  least two subtypes of PLC encoded by norpA.  One occurs only  in
              the eye, but the norpA gene also is expressed in other  tissues in the body
              unrelated to phototransduction,  suggesting its use in other cellular signaling
              pathways.  This work uses biochemical and molecular biological  techniques to
              examine how the norpA-encoded PLC functions in  the normal phototransduction
              pathway, during states of  adaptation to light and to dark.  The two protein
              subtypes  are tested to see whether the non-retinal subtype can  function
              adequately in vision if the retinal subtype is  absent.  Genetic deletion
              studies produce altered genes to  identify which domains of the PLC encoded by
              the norpA gene  are important for the visual function, and tissue-specific 
              expression of the norpA gene is examined to see where else  in the body the PLC
              is activated in non-visual signaling  pathways.  The work is an important step
              not only for  understanding the molecular basis of vision, but also for a 
              variety of fundamental signals involved in cell growth,  differentiation, and
              cellular secretion in both animals and  plants.
