Title       : Structural and Functional Biochemistry of Nitrate Reductase and Its Catalytic
               Fragments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1996  
File        : a9420313

Award Number: 9420313
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilbur H. Campbell wcampbel@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The biochemistry of eukaryoffc, assimilatory nitrate reductase has now been
              studied for about years and this laboratory has been involved in this pursuit
              for nearly half of this time period. Ti project is a continuation of studies of
              higher plant NADH:nitrate reductase (NR). The proposed foc is on the structure
              and function of the recombinant fragments of NR expressed in Eschenchia c and
              Pichia pastors. Using the recombinant corn NR cytochrome b reductase (FAD
              containir fragment produced in the P.l.'s laboratory, his Swedish collaborators
              (Drs. Y. Lindqvist and Schneider) recently deduced a three-dimensional model
              for this initial functional portion of holo-enzyme at 2.5 A resolution. W'th
              this first structural information on NR, the first objective i carry out
              site-directed mutagenesis to determine which residues are important for pyrid
              nucleotide specificity. In addition to basic biochemical analysis of the
              mutants, another collaborc (Dr. Russ Hille, Ohio State Univ.) will conduct
              physical biochemical studies. The second objectiv  to produce the next fragment
              of NR, namely the cyt c reductase fragment composed of the cyt b c cyt b
              reductase fragments, using the Pichia expression system, which will provide the
              quantitie  protein needed for crystallization and physical biochemical studies.
              The cyt c reductase fragmen NR is being produced using a portion of a spinach
              NADH:NR cDNA. These studies are cle' leading toward a more complete structural
              model for NR and, when combined with the phys biochemical studies and
              generation of key mutants, toward identification of the key amino c residues
              for NR functionality. NR is a unique multi-center redox enzyme and central to
              developin better understanding of this important class of enzymes. NR is, of
              course, also central in pl metabolism since most nitrogen obtained by plants is
              processed by NR. Recently, NR has becc commercially important as a useful tool
              for nitrate detection and may become important in nitr removal from
              contaminated water. In summary, knowledge of NR biochemistry is limited by a
              lac a structural model and this project represents a significant effort to
              overcome this gaF understanding of a key enzyme.  %%%  Higher plant
              NADH:nitrate reductase catalyzes the first step in nitrate assimilation, which
              leads to the production of proteins by plants. Biochemistry of nitrate
              reductase has been studied by this laboratory for nearly 20 years. Since it is
              diff'cult to obtain suffcient quantities of pure nitrate reductase from plant
              sources, the P.I. began several years ago to produce its fragments in bacteria
              using recombinant DNA technolgy.  This approach led to the first structural
              model of the portion of the nitrate reductase which uses a vitamin b-2
              cofactor(flavin)for catalyzing the intial step in nitatrate reduction. 
              Mutations of the nitrate reductase will be used to enhance understanding of the
              enzyme functionality.  In addition to basic knowledge gained via these studies,
              nitrate reductase is becoming commercially important in removal of nitrate from
              contaminated ground water and this project will contribute to the understanding
              needed to make this enzyme work for enviornmental cleanup.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
