Title       : An Investigation of the Evolution of Autotrophic Endosymbioses in Bivalves By
               Comparative Molecular Phylogenetic Analysis of Host and Symbiont rRNA Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1995       
File        : a9420051

Award Number: 9420051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Distel distel@maine.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9420051  DISTEL  Symbiotic associations between animals and bacteria are
              extremely diverse and commonplace in nature.  In fact, it is difficult to find
              examples of animal species whose existence is not profoundly influenced by
              symbiotic associations with bacteria.  For example, mitochondria (the
              structures within human cells that generate the energy for metabolic processes)
              are thought to have arisen from ancient bacteria that long ago formed a
              symbiotic association with the ancestor of all living animals.  The support
              provided for this project will allow investigation of a type of symbiosis
              commonly found in clams and worms from deep-sea hydrothermal vents (marine hot
              springs) that can be used as a model system for studying the questions of how
              bacterial symbioses become established and what role they may play in the
              creation of new animal and bacterial species.  This will be accomplished by
              comparing the primary DNA sequence (genetic code) of genes which are found in
              both symbionts and hosts.  Computer analysis will be used to generate family
              trees demonstrating the relationships among symbionts and hosts.  Comparison of
              the branching patterns of host and symbiont trees should reveal the point(s) in
              the lineages these hosts and symbionts first became associated and what impact
              their association has had on the diversification of the partner species.  This
              understanding will lay the historical and conceptual foundation upon which
              future studies of the physiology and ecology of animal bacterial associations
              will be built.  %%%  Symbiotic associations ranging from enteric bacteria in
              the human gut to nitrogen fixing bacteria associated with plant roots or
              luminous light organs in deep-sea fish provide a broad range of benefits to
              their hosts.  Consequently, symbioses between bacteria and animals are
              critically important to our ecosystems, agriculture and health.  This study
              will provide an experimental model system to address major questions about how
              bacterial/host symbioses came to exist and wha t role they have played in the
              history of life on earth.  ***
