Title       : Dissertation Research: Zooarchaeological Analysis of Subsistence and Social
               Organization at the Middle to Late Woodland Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1994   
File        : a9420734

Award Number: 9420734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1994  
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10569              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary K. Whelan BLAMKWWY@UIAMVS  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Whelan    Under the direction of Dr. Mary Whelan, Ms. Margot Neverett will 
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will continue her  analysis of
              abundant faunal material collected during the  excavation of the Gast Farm site
              which is located on an alluvial  fan at the edge of the Mississippi River in
              southeastern Iowa.  Four seasons of fieldwork have been conducted at the site
              and  these reveal two distinct periods of occupation both dating to  the
              Woodland period. The shift from the earlier Havana to later  Weaver phases took
              place approximately 2,000 years ago. Spatially  discrete remains of both Havana
              and Weaver villages have been  discovered. The sites have yielded abundant
              faunal as well as  other cultural remains and in her NSF supported research Ms.
               Neverett will focus on the former. She will travel to La Crosse  Wisconsin and
              Springfield Illinois to examine comparative  collections which will permit
              detailed identification of the Gast  Village faunal remains. With the data
              collected she will then  reconstruct subsistence patterns and determine how
              food was  obtained and distributed in each time period.    The Gast Village
              Site forms part of the Midwestern Hopewell  complex. Hopewell has fascinated
              archaeologists in part because  the large mounds which Hopewell people
              constructed and the exotic  trade objects they obtained provide evidence for
              one of the  earliest complex highly-organized societies in North America. Of 
              equal interest is the decline of the Hopewell peoples because  over a
              relatively short period of time social organization  reverted to a less complex
              level. No new earthworks were  constructed and exotic trade items became rare.
              Archaeologists  have speculated on why this happened and have invoked a number
              of  causes such as environmental change. Ms. Neverett will approach  this
              question through an examination of social relations within  villages on each
              side of the transition and faunal remains  provide a convenient approach.    
              This research is important for  several reasons. It will provide  data of
              interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our  understanding of how
              complex societies arise and decline, and  assist in the training of a promising
              young scientist.
