Title       : Automated Instrument for Small Scale Chemical Peptide Sequencing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9420123

Award Number: 9420123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379969             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Tempst ptempst@mskcc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sloan Kettering Canc Res
	      
	      New York, NY  10021    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Proteins are molecules, consisting of a large number of amino acids.  The order
              in which the amino acids occur is called "sequence". Analysis  of protein
              sequence is an integral part of basic health and life  sciences. Availability
              of this information is a first step towards  understanding protein function at
              the molecular level; it also serves  as a protein fingerprint, allowing
              identification. An important role of  the protein chemist has been to provide
              partial amino acid sequences to  facilitate cloning of the corresponding geles.
              However, the focus of  protein sequence analysis may shift to more function
              oriented  questions, such as formation of complexes in the cell during 
              signalling, cell cycle and differentiation. As many of those proteins  are only
              available in minute quantities, it is imperative that  analytical studies be
              carried out at the highest attainable levels of  sensitivity. Traditionally,
              sequence analysis is done by stepwise  removal of amino acids from the
              N-teminal end of the polypeptide, one  residue at a time. The leaving residue
              is then converted to a more  stable PTH-amino acid for identification by an
              analytical technique,  usually HPLC. The entire process has been automated.
              Optimized  commercial "sequencers" require 2-5 picomoles starting amount of 
              peptide for analysis, almost one order of magnitude more than what can  be
              isolated. Improvements will therefore be required. As existing  sequencers have
              already been optimized to the limit, it is difficult to  picture how this could
              be done without extensive modifications, i.e.  miniaturization. Commercial
              instruments are not easily modified as they  are 'boxed up' and inflexible,
              both in terms of hardware and software.  A novel instrument must therefore be
              built. Our short-term objective is  the development of an automated peptide
              sequencer for the "mid  femtomole" range. We propose to do this by
              miniaturization of reaction  vessels and analytical techniques, all in a very
              proximate arrangement.  We foresee that the  construction of a flexible,
              modularity built  "micro-microsequencer" will also serve as a platform for
              long-term  improvements / modifications to hardware and chemistry, leading to 
              another 5-fold increase in sensitivity (20-100 femtomoles). One (two)  order(s)
              of magnitude gained in polypeptide sequencing sensitivity will  allow
              identification of proteins hitherto known only as 'activities' or  'spots on a
              2DE-gel', and move the health and life sciences into new  areas of inquiry.
              Specifically, we propose to construct an automated  chemical sequencer,
              containing a miniaturized reaction cartridge,  conversion flask and
              reagent/solvent flow path. Cyclically removed  amino acids will be identified,
              initially, by microbore RP-HPLC and,  later, by capillary LC. We propose to
              develop and/or optimize PTHamino  acid separations on micro/capillary columns
              and couple them to the  sequencer in close proximity and automated fashion.
              UV-detection will  be used first and serve, in the medium-turn, as a bridge to
              even better  sensitivities by utilizing amino acid derivatives of higher 
              detectability. We propose therefore, to implement fluorescent-amino  acid
              generating chemistries and accomplish micro/capillary-column  chromatographic
              separation. The proposed instrument will also provide a  unique tool for
              micro-delivery of reaction products and degradation  products, from either
              cartridge or flask to non-chromatographic  analytical instruments with sample
              volume restrictions (e.g. mass  spectrometers, CZE,...). In turn, analytical
              versatility will create  opportunities for further sequencing improvements,
              both in terms of  sensitivity and speed. The significance of achieving the
              objectives  will be our ability to analyze low abundant proteins, isolated with
              the  most powerful fractionation techniques. Applications are ongoing in the 
              areas of i) vesicle targetting and membrane fusion, and understanding  the
              controlling machinery of synaptic transmission, and ii)  interactions of
              negative cell cycle regulator s and their role as  antiproliferative devices
              that, when disrupted, contribute to cancer.  Technology transfer will be
              effected through publications, postdocs,  graduate students, visitor trainees,
              and through the use in sequencing  core facilities.
