Title       : Control of Neuronal Growth: An In Vivo Confocul MicroscopicStudy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1995       
File        : a9420650

Award Number: 9420650
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Susan F. Volman                     
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162288             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hollis T. Cline cline@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nerve cells communicate with one another via a slender  cellular process called
              an axon.  Each nerve cell, or  neuron, has a very specific pattern of axonal
              connections,  and normal function of the nervous system depends on this 
              specific pattern of connections.  Development of the proper  pattern of
              connections in the brain requires a precise  regulation of axonal branching in
              the vicinity of a neuron's  target cells.  The long-term goal of this project
              is to  identify the mechanisms that regulate axonal branching in  the
              developing nervous system.  Recent studies show that  neurons grow by the
              continuous addition and retraction of  branches.  An increase in axonal
              branching, such as that  observed after activity is blocked, might occur
              through a  decrease in the amount of branch retraction or an increase  in the
              amount of branch addition.  To resolve this issue, it  is necessary to
              continuously monitor the living axon over  time.  This can now be accomplished
              using laser scanning  confocal microscopy.  This project will determine the 
              temporal limits for modifications of axonal structure and  test the hypothesis
              that blocking synaptic activity  increases the rate of branch initiation.  
              These results  will provide important new insights into the mechanisms 
              responsible for nerve cell form and function.
