Title       : Board on Chemical Sciences & Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9420478

Award Number: 9420478
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Raber draber@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,1414,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    ABSTRACT  CTS-9420478  National Academy of Sciences  P. I.:  Douglas J.
              Raber      The National Research Council (NRC) requests partial core support
              from the National Science Foundation (NSF) for the continuing activities of the
              Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology (BCST) of the Commission on Physical
              Sciences, Mathematics, and Applications.    The BCST has as its constituency
              the entire chemical community, encompassing chemistry, biochemistry, and
              chemical engineering, in academic, industrial, and government laboratories. 
              Accordingly, the Board serves as the focal point within the National Research
              Council for concerns and issues affecting chemistry in its broadest sense. 
              Board activities require extensive planning (including the determination of
              feasibility, evaluation of scope, and acquisition of funding) for potential
              studies, oversight of ongoing activities, private sector fund raising, and a
              broadly directed effort to communicate with the chemical community.  All of
              these are core activities, which are not chargeable to specific projects.  The
              capacity to develop a new project, while paying costs partially or fully from
              core funds, greatly enhances the freedom and ability of the Board to act
              responsively to important issues in the chemical sciences and technology.   
              The requested funding will allow the BCST to remain a strong and independent
              body that can operate and plan in an environment free from some of the
              pressures and constraints imposed by funding that is directly tied to specific
              projects.  This core support will help the Board to maximize its effectiveness
              in utilizing the scientific talent available to it through the National
              Academies and in aggressively launching new tasks of importance to the
              community, especially tasks that are time-dependent.  Additional core support
              will be sought from other federal agencies and the private agencies and the
              private sector.
