Title       : Corticofugal Regulation of Central Auditory Sensitivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a9907610

Award Number: 9907610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195096             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip H. Jen jenp@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9179,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Humans, and animals process auditory information carried by complex sounds so
              easily and so fast.  This efficient signal processing is based on enormous
              computation taking place in the central auditory system.  Auditory
              physiologists have explained that auditory signal processing or the response
              properties of central auditory neurons are resulted from divergent and
              convergent projections within the ascending auditory system.  However, recent
              studies have shown that the corticofugal (descending) system plays a very
              important role in signal processing.  It has been suggested that the
              corticofugal system regulates subcortical auditory signal processing through a
              highly focused positive feedback which works together with a wide spread
              lateral inhibition.
        Using bats as a mammalian model system, this
              proposal will collect data from three hypothesis-driven experiments in order to
              form a hypothetical working model for corticofugal regulation of midbrain
              auditory information processing.  These studies involve electrophysiology and
              iontophoresis under free field stimulation conditions.  Specifically, this
              application will study (1) how corticofugal system may facilitate or inhibit
              auditory response properties of neurons in the external and central parts of a
              midbrain auditory nucleus (the inferior colliculus) (2) how neurons in these
              two parts of the inferior colliculus may interact during sound stimulation and
              (3) the possible neurotransmitters that may be involved in these auditory
              information transmissions.
        The proposed study of the corticofugal
              system will contribute significantly to the development of a more realistic and
              dynamic model of central auditory signal processing.  In particular, the data
              to be collected will help understand how the corticofugal system contributes to
              the optimization and reorganization of ascending auditory signal processing in
              subcortical auditory nucleus.  This proposed study will advance our
              understanding of the functional role of the corticofugal system during central
              acoustic signal processing which has been given little attention until
              recently.


