Title       : Collaborative Reseach: Nitrogen Limitation and Ultraviolet Stress in Marine
               Macroalgae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a9907305

Award Number: 9907305
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222887             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Malcolm Shick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian Davison  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Davison - 9907305

Physical factors such as light, temperature and nutrient
              availability are known to limit marine productivity and play an important role
              in determining species distribution and community structure. Most understanding
              of the role of physical factors is based on studies with a single variable with
              other conditions being optimized for growth. Consequently, little information
              is available on physiological responses to the natural environment where
              several physical factors may be suboptimal. The ability to understand the
              constraints on marine productivity requires not only an understanding of
              potential synergistic or antagonistic interactions but also an analysis of
              their effects on algae with different ecological strategies. This investigation
              will examine the response of marine red macroalgae to simultaneous nitrogen
              limitation and ultraviolet radiation stress. Both factors are known to be
              important determinants of marine primary productivity and they frequently
              co-occur. This is true not only of the tropics, but also in cold- temperate
              oceans such as the Gulf of Maine. Red macroalgae were selected for this
              research because they provide the opportunity to study interactions between UV
              and nitrogen limitation in a group of algae with similar physiological and
              morphological characteristics but with well-defined differences in UV-tolerance
              and well-characterized contents of mycosporine-like amino acids. Furthermore,
              in contrast to phytoplankton, benthic macroalgae experience a more predictable
              light climate and are relatively long-lived, exposing individuals to a wider
              range of environmental conditions. The red algae studied from the Gulf of Maine
              will include Porphyra umbilicalis, Chondrus crispus, Membranoptera alata and
              Phycodry rubens.  These species range from UV-tolerant intertidal and shallow
              sublittoral species to UV-susceptible species from the deeper sublittoral. The
              investigators anticipate that the costs and benefits of UV-tolerance and the
              impact of nitrogen limitation will vary between UV-tolerant and UV-susceptible
              species. The research will focus on the effect of nitrogen metabolism (limited
              or replete) on (a) short and long-term effects of UV-stress (e.g., short-tem
              inhibition of photosynthesis, lipid peroxidation, and growth), (b)
              UV-photoprotection including contents of sunscreens such as mycosporine-like
              amino acids (MAAs), antioxidants such as ascorbate, gluathione and tocopherols,
              and enzymes of reactive oxygen metabolism such as catalase, superoxide
              dismutase and ascorbate peroxidase, and (c) ability to recover from UV-stress
              (e.g., the role of protein synthesis in recovery). The research will also
              examine the effect of UV-stress on nitrogen metabolism (e.g., nitrogen content
              and rates of uptake and assimilation). The research will involve measurements
              on field-collected material, laboratory experiments under controlled conditions
              and outdoor experiments in flowing seawater and natural radiation manipulated
              by a variety of UV and photosynthetically active radiation (PAR)-filters. The
              research will substantially contribute to an understanding of the effect of UV
              and inorganic nitrogen availability on marine productivity and, in particular,
              elucidate the importance of interactions between these factors. The research
              involves collaboration between faculty at an undergraduate teaching institution
              (Westfield State College, MA) and a Land and Sea Grant research University
              (University of Maine). In addition to graduate education, the project has a
              substantial research experience for undergraduate component, providing
              undergraduates from Westfield State College with the opportunity to become
              involved in research.

