Title       : Knowledge Processes in Learning Societies: Management, Measurement, and Learning
               Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SRS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9907741

Award Number: 9907741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jennifer S. Bond                        
	      SRS  Division of Science Resources Statistics
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt Larsen kurt.larsen@oecd.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Org For Econ Coop & Devel
	      2, rue Andre Pascal
	      Paris, AL  75775    /   -

NSF Program : 8804      SCIENCE & ENGINEERNG INDICATRS
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Across different countries, the need is urgent for more profound analysis both
              in order to understand the knowledge economy's dynamics, and to identify the
              most appropriate routes for policy to support its development.  Without
              analysis, the risk is that the "knowledge economy" will remain a slogan without
              substance.  With this funding, the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and
              Development's Centre for Educational Research and Innovation (CERI) will
              continue its work on knowledge processes in learning societies in the following
              areas:  the management of knowledge; measurement to understand the
              knowledge-based economy, and, a new research agenda for learning societies. 
              

The research plan includes cooperation from the U. S. Department of
              Education and other units of the OECD.  Expected outcomes from the project are
              published reports, a forum on the analytical framework for new indicators for
              the knowledge-based economy, and an international conference for researchers to
              obtain a more profound understanding of how individuals learn which contributes
              to the development of lifelong learning societies.

This project will provide
              new insights into the development of indicators of a knowledge-based economy
              and constitute part of our research effort for future Science and Engineering
              Indicators reports.


