Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Family Environmental Influences on Cognitive and Related
               Outcomes -- An Adoption Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1999 
File        : a9907860

Award Number: 9907860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126876             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirby Deater-Deckard kirbydd@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Despite the realization that genes affect development, the environment remains a
              critically important domain of learning and socialization--affecting children's
              cognitive, social, and emotional development. Although many studies have
              examined the relationship between environmental processes and development,
              nearly all of this research has examined biologically-related family members
              living together. This makes the research difficult to interpret because family
              environmental influences are confounded with potential genetic influences.
              Another limitation of previous research is that the environment is often
              thought of as a between-family phenomenon (for example socioeconomic status),
              despite the fact that many important environmental differences exist within
              families. The goal of the proposed study is to examine the environment by
              examining adoptive families. Because adoptive families are genetically
              unrelated, it is possible to examine environmental effects upon the development
              of cognitive, social, and emotional skills while controlling for genetic
              factors. Additionally, by studying each child within these adoptive families
              individually, it is also possible to examine environmental similarities and
              differences among family members. By understanding the environment and its
              effect on the development of children, it may be possible to develop targeted
              prevention and intervention programs for improving cognitive and behavioral
              outcomes for all children. Additionally, better understanding of the
              environment helps place the emerging genetic research into context.
