Title       : Knowledge and Strategies in Young Children: Two Paths Toward Independent
               Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a9907865

Award Number: 9907865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188018             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce M. Alexander joalexan@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathy Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              While most preschoolers know very little about most topics 
in comparison to
              adults, there are notable exceptions.  Some young children
develop intense
              interests in domains such as dinosaurs or trains, and
doggedly pursue their
              parents and teachers to provide them with books,
videotapes, and toys that
              will help to increase their knowledge in these
areas.  We currently know very
              little about how such elaborate networks of
knowledge are constructed by very
              young children.  We know even less about
how children discover and execute
              strategies to facilitate their learning
outside of the research laboratory. 
              While it seems feasible that possessing
high levels of knowledge in one area
              should be very helpful when children
begin to learn about a new, related area,
              we know very little about the
mechanisms through which existing knowledge
              might influence new learning.
The present research is focused on these issues.
               In particular, we aim to
discover the mechanisms through which children's
              existing knowledge and
strategies influence new learning.  Previous studies
              have shown that
children tend to behave more strategically, gain more
              knowledge, and feel
more excited about learning when it is situated within a
              specialized domain
of information that is considered to be both interesting
              and highly
familiar. Understanding the interplay between children's knowledge
              and
strategies can help teachers make informed decisions about both
              the
sequencing of curricular units, and the timing of learning
              strategy
instruction to best facilitate the development of lifelong learners. 
              



