Title       : Dynamic Composition of Information Retrieval Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2002    
File        : a9907331

Award Number: 9907331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $437184             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shlomo Zilberstein shlomo@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Allan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative project between the Information Retrieval Center and the
              Resource-Bounded Reasoning Lab at UMass. The project is aimed at developing a
              new approach to meta-level control of search and applying it to improve the
              flexibility, adaptability, quality of service, and robustness of information
              retrieval search engines. Currently, such systems are built by integrating a
              fixed set of modules and techniques that perform such tasks as query formation,
              query optimization, query evaluation, precision improvement, and recall
              improvement. The new approach consists of context-dependent mechanisms for
              optimal selection of information retrieval techniques based on a probabilistic
              description of their performance. The approach addresses effectively the high
              level of uncertainty regarding the duration of complex retrieval techniques and
              the quality of the result they produce. The current static approach to
              integration of information retrieval modules continues to produce performance
              gains of about 10% each year, but the systems are extremely specialized for
              each task, and it is not clear how well results will generalize to new types of
              retrieval. This project provides significant advantages because it allows a
              system to configure itself dynamically to the specific task at hand, to the
              person using the system, and to limited computational resources. This study
              will result in systems that are far more flexible in handling a large set of
              retrieval tasks with possible applications to a range of other problems such as
              dynamic selection of tasks for autonomous robots to optimize the quality of
              service. 
http://anytime.cs.umass.edu/shlomo/research/DCIR.html 

