Title       : Semi-Parametric Methods for Nonlinear System Identification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9907584

Award Number: 9907584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kameshwar R. Poolla poolla@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The general research area covered in this proposal is System Identification of
              Structured Nonlinear Systems.

This research is motivated by the fact that
              identification of complex nonlinear systems is of widespread importance in the
              engineering community for control, prediction, design, and diagnostics.  The
              range of engineering applications include chemical processing, semiconductor
              manufacturing, automotive and aerospace applications, and
              bio-engineering.

The broad objectives of  research are to develop novel
              algorithms for the identification of complex nonlinear systems that respect a
              priori information regarding the structure of the interconnection, and that
              exploit the unprecedented computational power available today.

It is
              anticipated that the proposed research will have broad impact in modeling,
              prediction and control for complex nonlinear processes.  For example, the
              identification tools we intend to develop will make possible the development
              and verification of structural models.  Also, these tools will allow for the
              efficient identification of interconnected nonlinear systems of higher
              complexity than previously possible.  This, in turn, will enable
              high-performance control system design for such systems.  Additionally, our
              research will spawn numerical tools for nonlinear structured model
              reduction.

Specific research topics that are addressed in this proposal
              include:
(1)  the development of novel system identification algorithms for
              interconnected  nonlinear systems, (2) the analysis of these algorithms from
              the context of convergence, efficiency, and optimality, (3) the design of
              numerically stable, computationally attractive implementations of these
              algorithms, (4) the study of closely related issues in this context such as
              optimal experiment design, identifiability, undermodeling and noise effects on
              estimation accuracy, and finite-sample algorithm behavior, (5) a theoretical
              investigation of the fundamental limitations on the accuracy to within which it
              is possible to identify components in an interconnected model

A wide variety
              of techniques will be used. These include optimization, nonlinear programming,
              computational geometry, operator theory, numerical linear algebra, and
              probability theory.









