Title       : A Collaborative Study of Prolonged Production and Trophic Transfer to Predators:
               Processes at the Inner Front of the Southeastern Bering Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9907097

Award Number: 9907097
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81795              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephan I. Zeeman szeeman@mailbox.une.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New England
	      11 Hills Beach Road
	      Biddeford, ME  040059526    207/283-0171

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Hunt		U of CA, Irvine	9819251
Zeeman	U of New
              England	9907097
Whitledge	U of AK, Fairbanks	9819273

Each year millions of
              short-tailed shearwaters (Puffinus tenuirostris) migrate from Australia to the
              Bering Sea to forage over the inner shelf.  The evolution of this annual
              trans-equatorial migration implies that extraordinary amounts of prey must be
              readily available to these birds in the Bering Sea.  In 1997 and 1998, unusual
              weather patterns in the eastern Bering Sea resulted in significant changes in
              hydrography and water circulation.  The resultant ecosystem anomalies included
              the first recorded coccolithophore bloom in the Bering Sea, the starvation of
              about 10% of the migrant shearwaters present, and the collapse in both 1997 and
              1998 of the Bristol Bay sockeye salmon fishery.  This research project will
              continue testing the hypothesis that elevated primary production at the inner
              front of the southeastern Bering Sea continues longer than in non-frontal
              waters, and that this production provides an energy source throughout the
              summer for a food web that supports shearwaters, salmon, and their zooplankton
              prey.  Based on findings in 1997 and 1998, additional hypotheses concerning the
              roles of storms and advection of nutrients will be tested using seasonal and
              inerannual comparisons.  This collaborative study will collect and interpret
              observations on physical and biological features in the vicinity of the inner
              front to determine: 1) the availability of nutrients in the euphotic zone, 2)
              the physical processes responsible for enhanced vertical flux of nutrients, 3)
              primary production, 4) the distribution, abundance and trophic ecology of
              near-surface swarms of euphausiids and other macro- and micro-zooplankton, and
              5) the distribution, abundance, and foraging ecology of shearwaters, and 6) by
              stable isotope enrichment, trophic pathways from phytoplankton to shearwaters
              at and away from the front.

The southeastern Bering Sea supports one of the
              world's richest fisheries; walleye pollock, salmon, halibut and crab generate
              over 2 billion dollars in revenue each year.  Despite this, the coastal domain
              and inner front, where shearwaters, young salmon and some crab larvae
              congregate to forage, has not been well studied.  The study is important
              because it will: 1) relate how variation in weather patterns forces physical
              processes that affect ecosystem function; 2) be the first examination of the
              physical processes of the inner front during summer and of the role of the
              front in post-bloom primary production; 3) focus on the ecological role of the
              extended production, and 4) relate the evolution of trans-equatorial migration
              patterns of seabirds to biophysical processes that create predictable sources
              of prey.  These questions are addressed by focusing on species and regions with
              which the investigators are familiar; however, the results can be applied to
              numerous continental shelf tidal fronts and species.  Thus, the results should
              have a general applicability to understanding and managing some of the world's
              most productive seas.


