Title       : Development of Inquiry-Based Earth Dynamics Lessons Using SeisVoIE (An
               Earthquake and Volcano Plotting and Analysis Computer Program) for Grades 7-9
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9907752

Award Number: 9907752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100049             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence W. Braile braile@geo.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9907752
Braile

The project will develop a module for an Earth science unit,
              which emphasizes earthquakes and related seismology and plate tectonics and is
              inquiry-based, using the computer program SeisVolE.  Th module will include
              sample lesson plans in the form of detailed descriptions (for both teachers and
              students) of investigations that can easily be conducted using the SeisVolE
              software and commonly available tools such as spreadsheet and word processing
              software.  The investigations will serve as examples of templates for
              teacher-and student-generated investigations of research questions related to
              earthquakes.  The module is meant to be a part (a few days to a few weeks of
              study depending on the class and the interests of the teacher and students) of
              an Earth science unit, not an entire curriculum, and will be appropriate for
              use in a range of grade levels (depending on scope, complexity and level of
              quantitative analysis of the investigations selected by the teacher).  Thus,
              the module could ultimately be utilized by tens of thousands of teachers
              (middle and secondary level) and their students.  The developed lesson plans
              will be made available at no cost on the Internet (by printing of web pages or
              download of pdf files which can then be printed with imbedded formatting by
              using freely available Adobe software).  At least 15 Earth-science related
              lessons involving plate tectonics, structure of the earth, earthquake and
              volcanic hazards, the relationship of plate tectonics to occurrences of
              earthquake and volcanoes and to other Earth features such as mountain ranges,
              mid-ocean ridges, deep-sea trenches, fault block mountains, etc., and the
              causes of earthquakes, will be developed.  The lessons will facilitate extended
              student inquiry and the integration of education and research experiences. 
              During the project, 80 teachers will be trained in the use of these materials
              as part of field-testing and evaluation of the materials.  Many more teachers
              will be provided with the materials through in-service efforts of the 80
              teachers, through distribution of the full lessons on the Internet, and through
              dissemination at a booth and in presentations at two NSTA national meetings. 
              Filed testing will be conducted and data on the quality and effectiveness of
              the lessons will be collected from the 80 teachers, and from students in their
              classes, during the project.  These data will include pre- and post-tests of
              attitude, skills and, achievement in the content area.  The data will be used
              to refine the lessons and provide an assessment of the materials and of the
              project.  An external evaluator who is familiar with science education, Earth
              sciences, exemplary curriculum materials, and NSF-supported projects will
              conduct the assessment.  An advisory committee of science educators will also
              provide feedback on the materials during development

