Title       : FSML-Purchase of Seabird CTD and Carousel Water Sampler to Support UNCW Center
               for Marine Science Research (CMSR)Research Vessel (R/V Cape Fear)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1999  
File        : a9907379

Award Number: 9907379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49430              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alessandro Bocconcelli bocconcellia@uncwil.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Wilmington
	      601 South College Road
	      Wilmington, NC  284033201    910/962-3167

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The coastal areas of the southeast U.S. are under increasing pressure due to
              rapid population growth.  Indeed, the coastal area extending from North
              Carolina to Florida is the fastest growing region of the nation.  Coastal
              natural resources (barrier islands, estuaries) and critical ecosystems
              (wetlands, marshes, tidal creeks) are at risk.  Water quality for beach-goers
              and for commercial and recreational fisherman is a critical issue: Several
              wetlands and marshes have been damaged, the majority of shellfishing areas are
              closed or have disappeared, and many traditional fisheries are now closed or
              restricted.  The Center for Marine Science Research (CMSR) at the University of
              North Carolina at Wilmington (UNCW)  has been steadily growing to keep pace
              with the needs of the region.  To better address these educational and research
              needs a new marine science facility is being built and a research vessel was
              recently purchased.

This project will support the acquisition of an
              essential and critically needed oceanographic instrument, a
              Conductivity-Temperature-Depth meter (CTD) coupled with a Carousel Water
              Sampler.  The CTD is a state-of-the-art oceanographic sampling instrument with
              electronic sensors to measure the three main parameters characterizing a water
              mass: salinity (conductivity), temperature, and pressure (depth).  A CTD can be
              rated for different depths according to the thickness of the pressure vessels
              containing its sensors.

The CTD-Carousel equipment will be operated by
              UNCW-CMSR primarily from the R/V Cape Fear.  Researchers focusing on inshore
              and offshore water sampling and monitoring will be the primary users.  The use
              of the CTD-Carousel will also have a significant educational component, by
              involving UNCW undergraduate and graduate students during training cruises and
              field trips onboard the R/V Cape Fear.  At sea training will also become an
              essential part of the marine science master's program that will soon be
              underway.  Cape Fear Community College and Brunswick Community College will
              also become involved in research/eductional programs utilizing the R/V Cape
              Fear and the CTD equipment.   


