Title       : FSML- A State-of-the-art Water Level Measurement System for the Baruch Marine
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1999 
File        : a9907650

Award Number: 9907650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23500              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Bushek dbushek@belle.baruch.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard R. Gardner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia Ogburn-Matthews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will support the acquisition of a state-of-the-art water level
              measurement system at the Baruch Marine Field Laboratory's (BMFL) primary
              long-term research site in North Inlet Estuary, South Carolina.   Data 
              obtained from the tide gauge will be used to enhance and support research by
              resident and visiting investigators at the BMFL.  The tide gauge will be a
              "fully integrated electronic data collection, processing and dissemination
              system" equivalent to the "Next Generation Water Level Measurement System"
              (NGWLMS) used by the National Ocean Service (NOS) along the US coastlines and
              accessible via the Internet.  The tide gauge will expand the usefulness of the
              research site and the Baruch Institute's existing long-term data sets from
              North Inlet Estuary (including 20 years of NSF-LTER/NOAA-NERR data).  These
              comprehensive long-term datasets have provided insights into the role of
              abiotic and biotic factors in long-term change.  Interpretation of these data
              with respect to either long-or short-term  changes in water level (e.g., sea
              level rise, storm surges, etc.) has been limited by the relatively poor
              accuracy (+/1 18 mm) of the BMFL's existing water level measurement system. 
              The current system is also highly susceptible to changes in barometric
              pressure, decreasing accuracy to +/1  390mm during extreme low pressure events
              (e.g., hurricanes).  A more accurate water level system (+/1 3mm) will provide
              new opportunities for researches to test hypotheses using both existing
              long-term data and new data.  It will also stimulate new research directions
              and collaborations and will provide new opportunities for comparative research
              between North Inlet and other research sites where similar equipment already
              exists.

The Baruch Institute has begun to develop partnerships with NOS and
              the South Carolina Geodetic Survey (SCGS) for deployment, leveling and
              maintenance of the tide gauge as well as data management and dissemination of
              tide data.  The system specified is compatible with the National Water Level
              Observation Network (NWLON) and NOS will provide a link to the NWLON via NOAA's
              Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES).  The NWLON is
              accessible via the Internet and provides basic data management to facilitate
              use by researchers worldwide in near real time (1 hr delay).  The SCGS will
              level the system to existing benchmarks.  The BMFL will coordinate efforts, and
              provide the basic infrastructure and day-to-day maintenance.  This water level
              measurement system will be a major improvement in design, accuracy,
              availability, and access of data over the BMFL's existing tidal measurement
              system.	 

