Title       : GOALI: Fundamental Studies of Transport of Mixtures in Microporous Membranes
               under Supercritical Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2002   
File        : a9907481

Award Number: 9907481
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320377             (Estimated)
Investigator: Muhammad Sahimi moe@iran.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine S. Shing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore T. Tsotsis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT


	This project is a collaborative academic/industrial research
              (GOALI) project to investigate the transport of supercritical hydrocarbon/CO2
              mixtures in microporous carbon molecular-sieve membranes. The study will
              proceed in two parts: (1) preparation and experimental characterization of the
              membrane along with computational modeling of the evolution of its structure
              during synthesis; and (2) measurement and simultaneous computer simulation of
              the sorption and transport of supercritical mixtures within the membranes.  The
              systems under study are supercritical mixtures composed of CO2 and one or more
              of the following hydrocarbons, butane, isobutane, benzene, and toluene.  These
              hydrocarbons were selected to represent typical aliphatic and aromatic
              compounds and to permit exploration of  factors such as molecular shape. 
              Non-equilibrium grand canonical molecular dynamics (NEGCMD) simulation
              techniques are being used to study the transport of these mixtures in
              microporous materials.  The objective of the molecular calculations is to
              relate and correlate the membrane's molecular structure with experimentally
              observed transport properties and separation efficacy.  The long-term goal is
              to achieve reliable engineering and design of improved materials for molecular
              sieves and catalytic-membrane reactors.   

The results of these studies will
              contribute to applications such as the regeneration of adsorbents by
              supercritical CO2 and the use of membranes under supercritical conditions. 
              Carbon molecular- sieve membranes are capable of withstanding the high
              pressures and temperatures associated with supercritical conditions.  They can
              be prepared with well-controlled porosity and pore size and a very narrow
              pore-size distribution.  Understanding the factors determining the ability of
              these materials to effect separations of supercritical mixtures based on
              differences in molecular mobility within the membranes will promote their use
              in the removal of various contaminants from water, sludges, soils, spent
              catalysts, and adsorbents like granular activated carbon.  The ability to
              remove solutes continuously from supercritical carbon dioxide would produce
              significant reductions in operating costs compared with the energy-intensive
              expansion/re-compression cycle normally used to separate solutes from
              supercritical solvents.


