Title       : Representation and Analogical Transfer in Very Young Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1999 
File        : a9907861

Award Number: 9907861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140876             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin W. Daehler marvin.w.daehler@psych.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                             Between the ages of one and three, children undergo a remarkable
              
improvement in their ability to realize that a word, a picture, or some
              
other symbol such as a model can stand for or represent another object or
              
array. This representational insight is a central and pervasive aspect of
              
human thinking. For example, we see representational capacities being
              
displayed when a preschooler engages in imaginative play, and in the 
older
              child, when he or she understands that the words printed on a piece 
of paper
              refer to some event, feature, or other aspect of the world. The 
ability to
              understand symbols, and what they refer to, is a powerful 
intellectual
              ability that underlies much of human communication, 
thinking, and problem
              solving.

	Some representational abilities emerge over a very short period
              
in early development. To illustrate, if a child 30 months of age 
is asked
              to watch as a toy is hidden behind a piece of furniture in a 
room and is then
              instructed to find a similar toy now hidden behind an 
identical, but much
              smaller piece of furniture in a model of that room 
(about the size of a doll
              house), he or she will have great difficulty 
doing so. A 3-year-old, however,
              just six months older displays this type of 
transfer very easily. The
              difficulty for the younger child is not 
merely one of forgetting where the
              toy was hidden initially since he or 
she can easily find the original toy
              when asked to do so. The problem for 
the younger child seems to be in
              appreciating that the model represents 
the large room and, thus, in
              understanding that information provided in 
the first array (the room) can be
              transferred and help in searching for 
the toy located in the second array
              (the model).

	Younger children, however, show systematic biases in their
              search 
behavior. For example, they often look in the location on the transfer
              
task where they previously found the toy in an earlier search, and these
              
kinds of biases may interfere with their representational insight. 
Several
              studies are outlined to eliminate the influence of these biases 
and to
              examine whether tasks that involve the initiation of distinctive 
actions and
              imitative behaviors, rather than search for an object, 
provide a more
              effective way to demonstrate transfer and representational 
capacities in very
              young children. In addition, new types of transfer 
situations are created to
              assess whether the representational limitations 
extend to tasks involving any
              large array and a model of it or are 
uniquely associated with spaces such as
              rooms (within which the child 
moves about) and models of rooms (where the
              child surveys or overlooks 
the entire space). The findings will provide a
              more complete 
understanding of the early representational competencies of
              very young 
children and help to identify the factors that contribute to
              learning 
and transfer involving symbols and their referents.
