Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Hotlinked Governance: Openness, Effectiveness and the
               World Wide Web in Public Organizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a9907996

Award Number: 9907996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91092              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris C. Demchak demchak@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1387,9139,9178,9251,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The foundations for governance in an information age are developing through the
              World Wide Web, as it becomes the principal electronic gateway for the public
              into government organizations, and a key element in administrative structures
              and functioning.  A key information technology-related attribute of public
              bureaucracies, openness, provides a novel way to measure the change in
              administrative arrangements vital to democratic governance. This project is
              testing three hypotheses: Increases in web technology diffusion into public
              organizations produce increases in organizational openness, which exists to the
              extent that an organization provides comprehensive information about its
              attributes and maintains timely communications directly to all key public
              audiences. Increases in openness in public organizations produce an expansion
              of web-oriented "new knowledge management" practices that are likely to result
              in consolidation of managerial authority. Organizational openness to individual
              citizens via the Web is only indirectly associated with democracy due to the
              variety of possible institutional arrangements. The project builds on the
              unique database begun in 1996 by the Cyberspace Policy Research Group (CyPRG).
              CyPRG scans the Web annually to track national level public agency sites across
              192 nations and 26 sectors, creating a longitudinal dataset for comparative
              studies of technological and organizational change. In order to test these
              hypotheses, the present proposal plans two main activities. The first is to
              monitor and analyze the evolution of web-based openness by continuing and
              expanding the established annual comprehensive identification and evaluation of
              national-level government agencies' Web operations. This effort will also
              review and calibrate the Website Attribute Evaluation System (WAES) as needed.
              WAES measures agency transparency (the extent of data about the agency
              presented on the Web) and agency interactivity (the extent to which the agency
              is open to electronic      interactions with the website visitor) using 39
              specific indicators. The second is the in-depth investigation of effectiveness
              in electronic governance using targeted cross-national interviews. Both
              activities contribute to the subsequent quantitative and qualitative analyses
              that combine data for reciprocal validation. The first activity is critical to
              understanding the phenomenon; the data collected in identifying sites and then
              evaluating them systematically is at the heart of investigations into the
              implications for public agencies and openness of the diffusion of web
              technologies. The second activity helps practitioners and scholars interested
              in more micro levels of analysis. Interviews with webmasters and other
              organizational members provide the best access to charting internal changes due
              to adoption of web technologies. Together the two activities can provide robust
              foundations for explaining this remarkable change.  Lessons then can be drawn
              for successfully integrating the Web into public agency operations and
              enhancing both openness and effectiveness. 
