Title       : Archaeology of the Cascadia Subduction Zone: Cultural Responses to Coseismic
               Subsidence, Tsunamis, and Earthquakes on the Southern Northwest Coast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9907019

Award Number: 9907019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11399              (Estimated)
Investigator: Madonna L. Moss mmoss@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,9278,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Madonna Moss, Mr. Robert Losey will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his research is to use archaeological
              data to examine cultural responses to tectonic events and the effects of such
              events upon the landscape in the Northwest Coast of North America. A growing
              body of geological evidence has documented the occurrence of large earthquakes
              in this region over the last several thousand years and these resulted in
              down-dropping of land in relation to lea level and the generation of large
              tsunamis (tidal waves). It is likely that these may have damaged low-lying
              settlements destroying houses and food stores and that longer term changes in
              the landscape affected how and where people could live.  Prehistoric residents
              depended heavily on fish and shell fish and the distribution of these resources
              may have been rapidly altered. Mr. Losey will investigate several
              archaeological sites in Netarts and Nehalem bays on the northern Oregon coast.
              He will re-examine previously excavated collections and supplement this with
              small scale excavation, sampling and dating of several archaeological sites. He
              will also study Native American oral history concerning tsunamis and
              earthquakes and use these data to examine archaeological settlement patterns
              before and after the 1700 AD event.

Based on previous data Mr. Losey
              believes that the sites selected were occupied both before and after 1700 AD
              and this will be confirmed through radiocarbon dating of carefully selected
              samples. Sediment analyses performed on materials taken from the sites and from
              cores and augers at off-site locations will provide data on local landscape
              changes before and after the earthquake. Detailed analysis of faunal remains
              will provide insight into how local environments were affected by the
              earthquake and how people adjusted to these changes. The large artifact samples
              collected from the sites by previous investigators will also be correlated with
              the newly generated data.

The research is important because it will increase
              understanding of the effects of one specific earthquake upon the people,
              landscape, environments and archaeological record of the poorly known southern
              United States Northwest Coast. It will also assist in training a promising
              young scientist.

