Title       : FSML: Suspended Matter Analysis Laboratory for Education and Research (SMALER)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a9907701

Award Number: 9907701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239616             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Whitlatch   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hans G. Dam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Evan Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Annelie Skoog  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel L. Codiga  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George B. McManus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia Kremer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award will support the development of a facility for marine research and
              education for 
Studying the role of suspended matter in mediating interactions
              within and between the pelagic
And benthic environments.  The University of
              Connecticut has committed $31 million to the
Construction of a new marine
              sciences research and education building located at the Avery Point
Campus,
              Groton, CT, and with this NSF support, the PIs  will acquire instrumentation
              that will allow state-of-art analysis of suspended matter, which includes the
              kinematics of particles (both living and non-living). The laboratory has been
              designed to support projects which encourage cross-fertilization of ideas among
              faculty, visiting scientists and students in differing disciplines.  The
              equipment needs of this facility include particle velocimetry instrumentation,
              with digital image acquisition components for use with existing upright and
              inverted fluorescence microscopes, laser-based particle counters/sizer,
              spectrofluorometer, scanning spoectrophotometer, DOC analyzer, HPLC with UV-VIS
              and fluorescence detectors as well as related support items (e.g., balances,
              drying ovens, muffle furnance).  The facility will enhance collaborations
              between members of the Department of Marine Sciences and scientists in the
              southern New England region.  Interactions with researchers outside of the
              Department constitute a critical component of the facility.  In addition, the
              proposed facility will serve as a vehicle for experiential opportunities for
              undergraduate students within the Department's new Coastal Studies program and
              nearby college programs.  Courses will be enhanced by the use of
              instrumentation not only in demonstrations, but also in supervised, hands-on
              laboratory excercises.  Finally, the laboratory will serve as a training center
              for
