Title       : FSML: Multi-Purpose Computing Facility for Research and Teaching at Rensselaer's
               Darrin Fresh Water Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9907694

Award Number: 9907694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra A. Nierzwicki-Bauer nierzs@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan P. Zehr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles W. Boylen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jackie L. Collier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bradford C. Lister  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Rensselaer's Darrin Fresh Water Institute (DFWI) at Lake George, New York,
              provides a unique resource for the Adirondack Mountain region.  The mission of
              DFWI is to advance environmental education and research on the ecology of
              terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, especially in relation to the impacts of
              human activities on natural resources.  DFWI is actively engaged in teaching at
              both undergraduate and graduate levels and in many forms of public outreach. 
              DFWI also provides physical and administrative support both for basic and
              applied research, ranging from stormwater and groundwater studies, to
              monitoring and developing management strategies for invasive non-native
              organisms, to mapping and remediation of polluted sediments, to hydrologic and
              watershed budgeting, to investigations of plankton community dynamics.  The
              multidisciplinary nature of the programs supported by DFWI is reflected in the
              topics of courses taught on site, which include limnology, ecology, environment
              microbiology, ecological economics, and vertebrate ecology.  With the aid of an
              award from the NSF Field Stations and Marine Labs Improvement program, DFWI
              completed the construction of a year-round research and teaching facility in
              1995.  This  new lakeside laboratory allows DFWI to support research on a
              year-round basis, and to bring modern techniques and approaches into all of its
              research, teaching, and outreach programs.

DFWI facility does not have the
              computer resources necessary to integrate computer-based studio-style
              interactive teaching with the naturally interactive, hands-on, small-class
              teaching style typical of field station courses.  This project will correct
              this shortcoming by building a lakeside multiuse computer facility that will
              provide students, faculty, staff, and visiting researchers at DFWI with access
              to learning tools such as interactive ecological modeling, a range of basic and
              more sophisticated statistical data analysis techniques, and the worldwide
              electronic access that are all essential in science today.  One particular goal
              of these improvements is to provide access for both teaching and research
              purposes to geographically oriented data collection and analysis via geographic
              information systems (GIS) software and portable global positioning system (GPS)
              units.  These tools are finding increasing applications in ecological and
              environmental research, and can now be applied on the same desktop computers
              used for more common statistical data analyses and for computer-based teaching
              tools.  Another goal of these improvements is to provide computational
              resources for hydrological modeling both of watersheds and waterbodies.  The
              linking of GIS tools to sophisticated statistical and hydro-ecological models
              will improve the examination of complex natural systems, and will provide
              facilities at DFWI for teachers and researchers to use multidimensional models
              to aid their understanding of large-scale processes.

