Title       : Local Search Strategies Using Generalized Hill Climbing Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a9907980

Award Number: 9907980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185570             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon H. Jacobson shj@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding to study local search strategies for discrete
              optimization problems, using 
the generalized hill climbing algorithm
              framework.  Generalized hill climbing algorithms provide a 
well-defined
              structure for classifying and studying a large body of local search algorithms
              typically 
used to address a wide variety of (real-world) manufacturing and
              service industry problems that can
be modeled as discrete optimization
              problems.  This project presents and classifies local search
              algorithms
(including simulated annealing, threshold accepting, and tabu
              search, among others) using the generalized 
hill climbing algorithm
              framework, identifies and develops convergence results and new finite-time
              performance measures for such algorithms (that more closely match how
              practitioners would apply them), studies the implications of these convergence
              results and finite-time performance measures on particular algorithm
              formulations, and evaluates the application of such algorithms to manufacturing
              and service industry discrete optimization problems.
     The results of this
              research will provide a well-defined structure for comparing and evaluating
              different types of local search algorithms using a common set of performance
              measures.  This, in turn, will provide a practical vehicle by which new local
              search algorithms can be systematically developed, hence provide the potential
              to efficiently address larger and more challenging manufacturing and service
              industry problems.  Moreover,  an industrial partner has committed to
              implementing several such generalized hill climbing algorithms into a discrete
              manufacturing process design optimization computer software tool that they are
              developing and commercializing through a Phase II Small Business Innovation
              Research (SBIR) contract.  This tool will also include a visualization
              capability of the generalized hill climbing algorithm performance measures
              developed in this project.
    

