Title       : Quasi-Low-Dimensional Transition Metal Compounds: Synthesis and Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a9907963

Award Number: 9907963
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408526             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha Greenblatt martha@rutchem.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this experimental program is to synthesize new materials of
              strongly correlated electron systems that are on the verge of electronic and
              structural instabilities, and to fine-tune the competing electronic
              interactions through the unstable region in a controlled way.  Particular
              emphasis will be placed on the preparation of single crystal specimens to study
              the structural and orientation-dependent physical properties, including
              electrical resistivity, magnetic susceptibility, optical and X-ray absorption
              near-edge spectroscopies.  Metal-insulator transitions associated with the
              onset of charge density waves/spin density waves and/or magnetic ordering; and
              superconductivity will be sought and characterized, and structural and physical
              property relationships will be stressed.  Systems of interest include:  (a).
              transition metal perovskites and Ruddlesden-Popper phases, An+1BnO3n+1 with
              A=rare earth and/or alkali and/or alkaline earth metal; B=Mn, Co, Fe (Mn/Fe),
              Ni and Ru, n=1, 2, 3; (b). niobium cluster compounds; and (c). selected novel
              structure types of low-dimensional ternary and quaternary transition metal
              chalcogenides.
%%%
These studies are expected to yield not only fundamental
              understanding and control of the properties of novel electronic/magnetic
              materials, but also to provide advanced materials for potential applications in
              microelectronics and magnetoelectronics including computers, sensors and
              communications.  These are critical areas for maintaining US technological
              leadership worldwide.  Moreover, the education and training of undergraduate
              and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in solid state
              chemistry/materials science is essential to meet the technological challenges
              of the twenty first century.  

