Title       : Integration of Earth System Science Research and Education: Involving Teachers
               in Scientific Research and Scientists in Inquiry-Based Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9907759

Award Number: 9907759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73412              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Gosselin dgosselin2@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Bonnstetter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9907759
Gosselin

Better Linkages need to be established between University
              science departments, teacher colleges and K-12 educators to create systemic
              change in science education.  These groups have distinctly different
              perspectives regarding science education and the implementation of systemic
              change.  The primary goal of this project is to improve communication and
              understanding between the aforementioned groups.  The specific objectives are
              to: 1. Develop a program to involve in-service and undergraduate pre-service
              teachers in meaningful earth systems research, which will improve their
              knowledge and understanding of scientific principles and practices; 2. Improve
              scientists understanding of the culture of K-12 education and appropriate
              pedagogy and classroom practices, which will enhance student learning at the
              University; 3. Employ relevant evaluation and assessment tools to improve the
              program, refine objectives and document the integration of the research and
              teaching process; 4. Disseminate information and data obtained from this
              project.  To accomplish these objectives, the primary activity of the proposed
              work will be to develop an eight-week earth systems research/education
              experience, which will become part of both the undergraduate and graduate
              secondary science education programs at UNL.  This experience will help develop
              "scientific habits of the mind," "reasoning from evidence" and good "scientific
              practice."  As a result, teachers will be more comfortable with the methods and
              processes of scientific inquiry so that they, in turn, can engage their
              students in investigating their environment.  Participating scientists will be
              introduced to the National Science Education Standards and related pedagogy. 
              Improving the scientists' knowledge of inquiry-based learning will provide new
              opportunities for students to apply scientific principles and practices. 
              Through the use of World-Wide-Web technology and scholarly publications, the
              experiences and results relate to this project will be shared with others.  A
              conceptual model will be developed for building bridges and linkages between
              science departments and K-12 teacher preparation programs.  Initially the model
              will be implemented at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln but can be refined
              for use in other teacher preparation programs.

