Title       : Inorganic Membranes: Microstructural Design, Optimization and Reaction Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9907321

Award Number: 9907321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309137             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arvind Varma avarma@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The successful industrial application of inorganic membranes for separation and
              reaction depends critically on the ability to produce membranes of desired
              microstructural, permeation, mechanical, and thermal properties.  In this
              project emphasis will be placed on the preparation of inorganic membranes with
              controlled microstructure and on the relationship between membrane
              microstructure and properties.  The focus will be on Pd-based composite
              membranes for hydrogen separations and on porous stainless steel membranes for
              reactor applications.  Precise microstructural control of electroless plated
              films by the use of osmotic pressure has been demonstrated in initial
              experiments.  Detailed studies related to the influence of osmosis on membrane
              microstructure and properties will be conducted.  Characterization of the
              microstructural parameters that optimize permeation performance of the
              synthesized Pd-based membranes will be performed.  For porous membranes, issues
              concerning optimal nonuniform membrane permeation patterns will be investigated
              for parallel and consecutive catalytic reaction networks.  The objective is to
              examine, both by experiments and models, the performance of mesoporous
              stainless steel membranes under reaction conditions.  The possibility of
              tailoring the membrane structure and permeation characteristics will be
              investigated to optimize reactor performance.  This project will contribute to
              an understanding of the fundamental relationship between synthesis and
              structure and the effects of structure on membrane properties.
