Title       : Effect of Shaft Surface Microgeometry on Rotary Lip Seal Operation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a9907956

Award Number: 9907956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214528             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Salant richard.salant@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9907956
Salant
The objective of this project is to determine the effects of
              shaft surface microgeometry on lip seal operation, through an understanding of
              the basic physics of lip seal operation. This project is part of a larger
              international program involving researchers in Poland, Lithuania and Germany.
              The European groups will be doing experimental studies, while this project will
              be theoretical. The results of this project will be compared with the
              experimental measurements.

The initial stage of the the project will consist
              of a static contact mechanics and deformation analysis of the lip against the
              various shaft microgeometries, using conventional finite element techniques.
              This will yield the static pattern of cavities and contact regions between the
              lip and shaft, and reveal which microgeometries are most efficient in retaining
              liquid for subsequent formation of the lubricating film.

The second phase
              will concentrate on determining the effects of the shaft microgeometry on the
              fluid mechanics of the lubricating film. This will be done through the solution
              of the Reynolds equation for various lip and shaft microgeometries.

In the
              third phase, the analysis of phase ii will be combined with a deformation
              analysis of the lip to yield an elastohydrodynamic model of the seal under full
              film lubrication conditions. This will allow prediction of the effects of shaft
              surface microgeometry on the steady-state operation of the seal.

In the
              fourth stage, the elastohydrodynamic analysis of stage iii will be combined
              with a contact mechanics analysis to yield a mixed lubrication model, which
              takes account of the asperity contact between the lip and the shaft. This will
              allow simulation of lip seal behavior at low speeds. The mixed lubrication
              model will be used in conjunction with the results of phase i to examine the
              effects of shaft surface microgeometry on the startup and shutdown processes.
              
***


