Title       : Conference on Group Creativity, Spring 2000, Arlington, Texas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9907708

Award Number: 9907708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16710              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Paulus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Much creative work and the development of innovations in science, industry, and
              organizations involves some degree of group interaction. A number of scholars
              in different disciplines have begun to study the creative process in groups. As
              a result, a number of interesting findings and theoretical models have been
              generated. Some aspects of the group process seem to hinder group creativity
              and can lead groups to have rather inflated perceptions of their effectiveness.
               However, under certain conditions groups can enhance the creative process by
              effectively sharing the unique intellectual resources of the group members.
              This conference will bring together scholars from the topic areas of cognitive
              psychology, creativity, groups, and organizations to discuss the factors that
              influence group creativity and innovation.  Fourteen scholars from five
              different countries will make presentations. Because they come from different
              disciplines within psychology, many of these scholars do not typically have an
              opportunity to interact at conferences. Other scholars and graduate students
              will be invited to participate in the discussion process. The aim of the
              conference is to stimulate additional empirical work and theoretical
              development on the topic of group creativity. The conference will also
              facilitate efforts at theoretical integration and the development of new
              research paradigms. An increased understanding of the creative process in
              groups will provide useful information for more effective utilization of the
              creative potential of groups and teams in science and industry. The conference
              presentations will be the basis for a published volume on group creativity.

