Title       : Using State Administrative Data for Longitudinal Analysis of Education,
               Employment & Earnings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9907454

Award Number: 9907454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Podgursky podgursky@BPA.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Mueser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth R. Troske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Michael Podgursky and the
              University of Missouri will purchase a computer system including a Sun
              Enterprise 450 Server and 4 Gateway 450 MHz PCs. The system will allow a group
              of Missouri researchers to store and analyze administrative data from the
              state's Departments of Economic Development, Labor and Industrial Relations,
              Elementary and Secondary Education, Social Services, and Higher Education. It
              includes information on welfare participation, technical and vocational
              education, two- and four- year public education, job training as well as
              numerous other programs, both specialized and general, to enhance the
              employability of Missouri residents. The database also includes quarterly
              earnings for all individuals employed in Missouri who are covered by the state
              unemployment insurance program, the overwhelming majority of workers in the
              state, as well as from other categories. This information provides a powerful
              base for the examination of many policy relevant questions.

Since the
              mid-1980s researchers and public officials have become increasingly interested
              in understanding how individuals transit from being out of the labor market
              into employment and what effects government programs have on these transitions.
              Two types of transitions that have generated the most interest are the
              transition from school to work and the transition from welfare to work.
              Analyses have lead a number of people to question the quality of public
              schooling in general, and in particular, whether schools are providing children
              with the skills necessary to move into the modern workplace. In addition, in
              recent years there has been a dramatic increase in the efforts of both the
              federal and state governments to move single parents off the welfare roles and
              into the labor market by providing various forms of training and job search
              assistance. However questions remain regarding the effectiveness of this
              assistance and the impacts of these programs. They can be difficult to address
              because long term data is only rarely available. The Missouri database provides
              a large systematically collected body of information which can serve this
              function and this NSF award will provide instrumentation which will permit its
              effective utilization.

