Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Meaning of Land Ownership in a Transnational
               Caribbean Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9907080

Award Number: 9907080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8241               (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet H. Momsen jdmomsen@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1092,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Migrant workers from the islands of the Caribbean enter North American cities
              seeking work to obtain income that the small, open economies of their homelands
              are unable to provide.  Some of these migrants choose to stay in New York,
              Toronto, and other large cities, while others work only long enough to save the
              money needed to return home, and others plan to return to their homelands upon
              retirement.  The movement of workers between the islands and North American
              cities has created a particular kind of circuit migration, often based on the
              life-cycle of individuals.  This doctoral dissertation research project
              explores the strategies transnational migrants have adopted to extend the
              borders of their small island nations, thereby increasing their economic
              opportunities while maintaining important ties to their homelands.  Special
              attention will focus on the impact of a particular type of land tenure known as
              family land in the construction and maintenance of transnational migrant
              networks.  The family land tenure system is based on the fact that all members
              of a family inherit equal shares of the land.  In addition to fostering the
              flow of money in the form of remittance payments, the system provides a place
              where migrants can return and acts as a bond between generations.  This project
              will focus on a case study of a transnational community based the island of
              Carriacou in the nation of Grenada, where there is an unusually large amount of
              family land.  Special attention will be given to examining how growing demand
              from non-residents coupled with increased land values has caused friction
              within the native community by accentuating the difference between family
              members who would want to divide and sell family land holdings and those who
              choose not to do so.  Data gathered through questionnaires, in depth
              interviews, focus groups, and oral histories in Carriacou, New York, and
              Toronto will be analyzed to shed light on the ways that Carriacoans at home and
              abroad view land and land ownership.  Data also will be acquired to update
              baseline data on land use and land tenure gathered by the doctoral candidate on
              the island in 1985.  This project will enhance understandings of land-tenure
              systems, migration networks, and the responses of traditional institutions to
              increased external pressures.  It also will increase knowledge about the ways
              that geographic location influences the on the perceptions and behavior of
              people.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
              will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
              independent research career.

