Title       : Variability of the Climate System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9907915

Award Number: 9907915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374717             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin K. Schneider   (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin P. Kirtman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Global Environ Soc
	      4041 Powder Mill Road, Suite 302
	      Calverton, MD  20705    301/595-7000

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1303,1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
ATM-9907915
Schneider

The project is designed to enhance
              understanding of the variability and predictability of the current climate,
              especially that associated with the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), on
              inter-seasonal to inter-decadal time scales.  Since it is impossible  to do the
              type of controlled experiments necessary to accomplish this goal in the actual
              global climate system, a coupled GCM (general circulation model) that simulates
              the observed climatology and variability realistically will be the basic tool
              for the investigation.

The climate will be represented by a multi-century
              control simulation with an updated version of the COLA (Center for
              Atmosphere-Ocean Land Studies) global coupled GCM.  The COLA coupled GCM
              produces a realistic simulation of many aspects of low frequency climate
              variability, including interannual and decadal El Nino/La Nina, and the North
              Atlantic, North Pacific, and Arctic/Antarctic Oscillations.  A series of
              experiments in which the GCM is modified will be made to help understand the
              mechanisms underlying the NAO variability found in the control simulation. 
              These experiments will utilize the anomaly coupling capabilities of the GCM to
              allow one-way or fully coupled atmosphere-ocean or atmosphere-land interactions
              in localized regions, while specifying climatological boundary conditions
              elsewhere.  The mechanisms that will be examined are local atmosphere-ocean
              coupling, local ocean dynamics, remote influence of tropical SST anomalies,
              coupled atmosphere-land processes, and the role of stochastic atmospheric
              forcing.  

The project has the potential to advance knowledge in several
              important areas.  These are: 1) understanding low frequency NAO associated
              variability; 2) indicating whether this type of internal climate variability is
              or is not predictable; 3) evaluating whether internally generated climate
              variability is sufficient to explain observed variability over the North
              Atlantic over the last century, or whether alternative explanations must be
              sought; 4) developing and evaluating a new class of experiments to understand
              climate variability in coupled CMS.

