Title       : A Geochemical and Isotopic Study of the Magmatic-Hydrothermal Transition in the
               Lower Oceanic Crust
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9907070

Award Number: 9907070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: DONALD L ELTHON                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194626             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Humphris shumphris@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wolfgang Bach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The thermal structure of ocean crust along the mid-ocean ridge system is
              controlled by the balance between magmatic heat input from below and
              hydrothermal heat removal through circulating seawater. However, our knowledge
              of the magmatic-hydrothermal transition (MHT) is extremely limited.  This
              proposal is aimed at providing a better understanding of mass and heat
              transport processes across the MHT and their geochemical consequences.  We will
              examine rocks from the lower crust recovered from Ocean Drilling Program (ODP)
              Hole 735B on the Southwest Indian Ridge.  We have preliminary evidence that
              this 1500 m deep borehole in the lower crust penetrates the MHT, and thereby
              provides an exciting opportunity to investigate mass transport between magma
              and hydrothermal fluids.  Downhole variations in the mineralogical composition
              of rocks and fracture-filling veins suggest variable mineralization conditions,
              ranging from interaction of rocks with seawater-derived fluids shallow in the
              hole to impregnation of the rock with magmatic fluids exsolved from solidifying
              magmas in the deeper sections.  We will use the chemical and isotopic
              compositions of minerals, in combination with fluid inclusion work, to
              distinguish between late-stage magmatic crystallization and mineralization in
              response to reaction with magmatic fluids and seawater-derived fluids.  The
              distribution of mineralization types in the crust, variations in mineralization
              temperature and pressure, and observations on the relative timing of
              mineralization events, will provide us with new insights into the dynamics of
              the magmatic-hydrothermal transition.


