Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Community-Based Organizations and the Politics
               of Shelter Delivery in Manila, The Philippines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9907135

Award Number: 9907135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9616               (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan S. Fainstein fainstei@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, the governments of cities in many developing nations have
              increasingly encouraged the involvement of community-based organizations (CBOs)
              in the delivery of housing in low-income areas.  Studies of CBOs have diverged,
              however, regarding the roles that these organizations play, particularly with
              respect to the degree to which see CBOs enable poor residents to participate in
              markets and the extent to which CBOs are controlled by the urban poor as
              opposed to mechanisms of control by other groups.  This doctoral dissertation
              research project will examine the ways that social relationships in the
              community and the political and economic structure of local land markets
              affects the form, function, and effectiveness of CBOs in different locales. 
              The project will consist of an extensive set of comparative studies in
              different communities in the Manila metropolitan area in the Philippines. 
              Detailed analyses will be made of five CBOs, with a survey of CBOs in about 80
              communities providing a broader framework for generalization of conclusions. 
              This project will provide empirical information about the factors that
              facilitate collective action and formation of CBOs in low-income neighborhoods
              as well as the interplay of internal and external factors that affect the
              character and success of these organizations.  In addition to its fundamental
              research value, this study will provide new insights of use to planners and
              community leaders seeking to develop policies and programs to provide more and
              better housing for poorer residents of the world's cities.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.


