Title       : Distributed Supervisory Control: Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a9907213

Award Number: 9907213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224051             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijay K. Garg garg@ece.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We propose to develop theory of distributed supervisory control of discrete
              events systems in the context of two applications - distributed debugging and
              distributed simulation.  Most of the previous work in distributed control is
              based on the assumption that the controllers do not communicate.  Control
              without the ability to communicate leads to very restrictive
              behavior.
Recently, there has been some important work to incorporate
              communication in the theory of distributed control.  Ricker and Rudie have used
              the modal logic for supervisory control.  Barrett and LaFortune have also
              tackled the problem of communication.  They provide necessary and sufficient
              conditions for control by communicating supervisory controllers (with myopic
              and non-myopic expectations of future communication).  Although these works
              provides many insights, they have limitations in application to real systems,
              For example they assume that there are no communication delays and that
              controllers are synchronized on the initial state of the system.  These
              assumptions are not true in the present day communication networks in which
              communication delays play an important role in decision making.  The objective
              of the proposed project is to remove such assumptions and then apply the theory
              to some distributed applications.
The first application we will consider is
              that of debugging distributed programs.  Many of the problems in distributed
              debugging can be cast into the framework of observation and Control.  While
              issues in observation of a distributed program has been studied by various
              researchers, the issue of control has received less attention.  The abstraction
              of automatic control provides great power to the user while testing a
              distributed program.  The ability to control the message ordering is useful for
              the programmer to test the program with different message and event ordering. 
              Similarly, if a distributed program is interacting with an external observer,
              the relative speed of different processes may affect the outcome.  In the
              proposed method, the system will automatically control the speed of various
              processes so that the desired predicate becomes true.
The second application
              that we will consider is that of distributed simulation.  There are primarily
              two approaches for distributed simulation - conservative and optimistic. 
              Recently, we have developed a third approach called K-optimistic algorithm
              which allows the optimism to be changed during the execution of the program. 
              Our hypothesis is that with the proper control of optimism, the K-optimistic
              algorithm can run faster than both conservative as well as optimistic
              algorithm.  We propose to develop an adaptive control algorithm for distributed
              simulation and measure its performance with respect to traditional
              algorithms.
We note here that the proposed project requires expertise in
              supervisory control of discrete, event systems as well as distributed systems. 
              We have worked extensively in both of these areas and one of the goals of the
              project is cross-fertilization of ideas from one discipline to the other. 


