Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Paradox of Range Degradation: Borana
               Pastoralism and Bush Encroachment in Southern Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9907052

Award Number: 9907052
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Bassett bassett@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5209,9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The pastoral system that has evolved on the Borana Plateau of southern Ethiopia
              has been cited as a highly productive and environmentally sound system.  Its
              productivity is linked to the "opportunistic" nature of livestock management,
              particularly the mobility of herds and continual variation in the grazing
              pressure in response to the availability of forage and water.  This system is
              presumed that engender conditions that stabilize vegetative patters, but recent
              studies have shown that this supposedly well-managed rangeland is increasingly
              experiencing the growth of shrubs and woody bushes in semi-arid and arid areas.
               This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the relationship
              between the pastoral practices of livestock raisers and biophysical dynamics of
              environmental change in the Borana Plateau.  Analyses of aerial photos and
              satellite images, household surveys, and field observations of range conditions
              will be used to examine human-environmental interactions at three study sites: 
              Hidi Lola in a humid zone, Did Hara in a semi-arid region, and Hobok in an arid
              zone.  Among the variables to be examined are herd mobility patterns, fire
              regimes, the geographic distribution of pasture and water, and the social and
              material conditions that influence the ability of households to engage in
              opportunistic grazing.  This project will illuminate the complex relationship
              between pastoral range management and vegetation change.  The results will
              contribute to current theoretical debates in political ecology regarding the
              relative importance of social and ecological forces as factors altering
              environmental conditions, and they will provide perspectives that transcend
              romanticized and overly simplistic characterizations of indigenous
              resource-management systems.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
              award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
              establish a strong independent research career.

