Title       : Appropriate Agricultural Techniques: The Information Problems in Settling in the
               North American Arid Plains, 1900-1925
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9907139

Award Number: 9907139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128044             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary D. Libecap   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research examines the information problems facing settlers on the arid
              agricultural frontier of the northern Great Plains from 1900-1925. It also
              estimates the extent and economic cost of abandonment of dry-land homesteads
              after 1916 in eastern Montana and Colorado and western North and South Dakota
              and Nebraska. The apparent widespread collapse of dry-land homesteads in the
              region is one of the few examples of frontier settlement failure in the U.S.
              experience. The agricultural frontier in this region was quite different from
              that which existed to the east where precipitation levels were higher. To adapt
              to new conditions, farmers experimented with a variety of techniques and crops.
              But they often had conflicting sources of information, and the land laws
              limited the farm sizes that were available. Further, there was little
              understanding of the climate. The questions of the choice of appropriate
              technology, crops, and farm size for an arid region that comprised the
              information problems facing settlers at the turn of the century in North
              America have not been systematically examined. The nature of the information
              available to settlers, how it changed over time, and how settlers responded, as
              well as the extent of homestead failure and the size of the economic costs
              involved are issues of importance for understanding American agricultural
              development.

More broadly, the issue of appropriate agricultural technology
              addressed in this research also is relevant for issues in contemporary economic
              development. Increasingly, agricultural frontiers are shifting to remote areas
              where they confront migrants with conditions that are very different from their
              home region. Migrants are faced with information problems about farming
              techniques that are similar to those encountered by settlers on the North
              American frontier early in this century. In developing areas, such as the
              Brazilian Amazon, concerns have been raised as to whether migrants from
              southern Brazil have adequately adapted to the region. Farm failures and
              environmental destruction have been linked to inappropriate practices. How
              similar information problems were resolved earlier in this century,
              successfully and unsuccessfully, may provide insights into current migrations
              to agricultural frontiers.

Until 1900, migrants to northern agricultural
              frontiers in the United States encountered similar levels of precipitation.
              Adequate rainfall allowed for familiar crops and farming practices and the
              formation of small farms as recognized by the Homestead Act's 160 acre
              allocation. Settlers could use established practices without serious
              modification. Migrants to the high plains, however, were the first to face much
              more arid conditions. At the time, there was dispute as to whether or not the
              climate would change with cultivation. Ultimately, successful adaptation
              required adoption of new agricultural techniques, different crops, and much
              larger farm sizes. But adaptation required an understanding of the climate of
              the region, the nature of appropriate dry-land farming practices, the identity
              of new crops to be planted, and changes in the federal land laws. Each of these
              requirements, however, involved an important information problem. And changing
              the land laws encountered political opposition.

This research examines the
              information problems facing farmers and how they were addressed. The sources of
              information, including government agencies (experiment stations, extension
              service, and other USDA bureaus), railroads, land developers, and local and
              state governments, are to be analyzed to determine how they differed and how
              they changed over time. Practices that were helpful or hindered adaptation will
              be identified. The learning process will be followed. Records from experiment
              stations, the census bureau, state agriculture and banking departments will be
              used to identify the characteristics of farms that successfully adapted to arid
              conditions. The extent of homestead failures and the economic costs involved
              will be estimated. A decision model is used as a framework for analyzing the
              choices facing farmers on the arid frontier.

