Title       : Collaborative Research: Fragmentation of Marine Snow by Swimming
               Macrozooplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1999   
File        : a9907360

Award Number: 9907360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178296             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeannette D. Yen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9906827
Alldredge 

Processes which alter the sizes and abundances of large,
              rapidly sinking detrital particles, known as marine snow, in the ocean can
              dramatically impact the flux of carbon and its availability to various
              components of the pelagic ecosystem.  Consumption by animals, bacterial
              decomposition, solubilization, and disaggregation by physical mixing and
              current shear have all been proposed as processes by which large particles are
              consumed or transformed into smaller more slowly sinking forms.  However,
              recent compelling evidence from both the lab and the field indicates that the
              vertically migrating krill, Euphausia pacifica, fragments marine snow in the
              water column through its swimming activities alone.  Moreover, these impacts
              are significantly and positively correlated with euphausiid abundance. 
              Preliminary laboratory observations verify that the shear stresses created by
              the appendages of these large macrozooplankton as they cruise near aggregates
              breaks the marine snow into more numerous, but smaller, and more slowly sinking
              particles.  The investigators will verify and quantify this new process and
              evaluate the significance of animal fragmentation relative to other particle
              generating and consuming processes in nature.  This research will generate the
              first quantitative information on the role of macrozooplankton swimming on the
              dynamics of large particles in the water column, revealing new links between
              biogeochemical processes and animal behavior.  It will increase our
              understanding of the role of zooplankton biology in particle dynamics, carbon
              cycling and small-scale physics in the ocean.  Data generated by this study may
              help explain the exponential loss of sinking carbon with depth seen in most
              areas of the ocean, as well as previously reported diel patterns in particulate
              flux.  

