Title       : FSML: A New Generation Flow Cytometer with High-Speed Sorting for Aquatic
               Sciences Research and Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9907566

Award Number: 9907566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: THOMAS QUARLES                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135093             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Sieracki MSieracki@Bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project supports the acquisition of a new generation flow cytometer with
              high-speed cell 
Sorting to replace the 17 year old Coulter EPICS V cell
              sorting instrument at Bigelow Laboratory's
J.J. MacIsaac Facility for Flow and
              Imaging Cytometry.  This shared-use instrument will be available to aquatic
              science researchers for a wide range of research applications, and for training
              undergraduate students, and researchers in aquatic sciences.  In addition to
              improved reliability, the upgraded instrument will provide several major
              advantages over the present one including: 1) increased sensitivity for
              detection of submicrometer particles, 2) the ability to sort larger
              particles(30-60 M), dual-laser excitation capability, and 4) improved computer
              hardware and software for easier instrument setup, control, and data analysis 
              capabilities.  Acquisition of this instrument is an integral part of Bigelow
              Laboratory's scientific plan to build upon our capabilities in microbiology,
              phycology, single-cell analysis and species-based ecological approaches to
              questions in biological oceanography.  The MacIsaac Facility is a unique center
              for advanced research, development and training in automated methods for
              studying particles in naturals waters.  In the past 6 years the Facility has
              served over 25 investigators from 20 different institutions in the U.S. and
              internationally.  It is a center for innovation, having spawned several new
              research and development directions, including the recent invention of an
              imaging-in-flow instrument for microplankton (20-200 gm) analysis.  As part of
              the shared-use MacIsaac Facility the new instrument wil enhance several areas
              of new research opportunities for researchers in acquit sciences.  These
              include the development of new single-cell fluorescence methods for studying
              bacteria, phytoplankton and microzooplankton physiology, the physiology of
              harmful algae species, ecological studies of plankton populations, the
              application of "phylogenetic stains" for aquatic plankton, the chemical and
              optical properties of aquatic particles, and the molecular genetics of
              subpopulations.  The new generation flow cytometer with high speed sorting will
              significantly enhance the continued education and training activities in this
              technology.  Bigelow Laboratory courses and workshops attract graduate students
              and postdoctoral researchers from around the world.  A modem instrument for
              education and training is essential for maintaining this leadership role.  The
              instrument wil be integrated into the J. J. MacIsaac Facility, which has
              actively served the international acquatic science  

