Title       : GOALI: Gas Turbine Blade Tip Leakage Flow and Heat Transfer: Strategies for
               Blade Tip Cooling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a9907773

Award Number: 9907773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284778             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinath V. Ekkad ekkad@me.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald S. Bunker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chander Prakash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sumanta Acharya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT


Proposal Number: CTS 9907773

Principal Investigator: S. Ekkad
              and S. Acharya

This award is to support an investigation of the fundamental
              issues pertaining to blade tip aerodynamics and heat transfer, and to provide
              guidance to the gas turbine industry for improved blade-tip cooling strategies
              that will aid in improving blade life and reduce maintenance requirements for
              gas turbine engines. This is a GOALI proposal submitted jointly by Louisiana
              State University and General Electric Company. General Electric will be
              primarily responsible for the technology transfer and in testing, using
              industry-standard procedures, of improved designs and concepts resulting from
              the proposed research at LSU. 

The experimental study will be conducted on a
              five blade linear cascade with high-pressure compressed air flow facility
              capable of providing engine representative flow conditions. An engine typical
              PT,rel,inlet/PS,exit will be simulated to ensure real pressure-driven leakage
              flow across the tip from pressure surface to suction surface. A 2-D turbine
              blade cascade will be used for this study. A typical clearance gap will be set
              for the middle blade of the five-blade cascade. Relative motion of blade with
              the shroud will be simulated with a moving belt acting as the shroud. Velocity
              and pressure measurements will be obtained on the pressure and suction surface
              and the shroud and tip regions. Detailed mass/heat transfer measurements will
              be obtained on the pressure surface, the suction surface and the tip region
              using the Naphthalene sublimation technique. Two blade tip designs, plain and
              squealer, will be studied. Tip film cooling designs for experimental testing
              will be developed based on numerical simulations and existing industry
              designs.
The numerical study will involve a combination of
              Reynolds-Averaged-Navier-Stokes (RANS) calculations with suitable turbulence
              models, and Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS). The RANS calculations will be
              used to perform analysis for different blade-tip and tip-cooling configurations
              under realistic engine conditions in order to determine the most promising
              concepts. These promising concepts will then be investigated in detail in the
              experimental study. The DNS calculations will be performed at lower Reynolds
              numbers with the intent of understanding the underlying flow physics, and to
              evaluate and improve the turbulence models being used in the RANS procedure.
              The latter is necessary in order to strengthen the RANS based assessment of
              blade-tip and tip-cooling configurations.


