Title       : Attention and the Learning of Literacy and Numeracy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a9907831

Award Number: 9907831
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $747925             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael I. Posner mip2003@mail.med.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce D. McCandliss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Weill Med Coll of Cornell
	      1300 York Avenue
	      New York, NY  100214805    /   -

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this proposal is to examine the role of attention training in
              providing a basis for the rapid learning of high level skills involved in
              reading and using numbers.  In addition we wish to examine changes in the brain
              that accompany initial exposure to reading and number processing.   Prior
              research using imaging and high density electrical recording has led us to
              believe that we should see signficant impact on specific brain areas involved
              in understanding words and using digits in order to determine quantity.        
                   


The ability of the child to attend to the relevant sensory input and
              to select the appropriate strategies are critical elements of these skills.  We
              plan to compare groups of 5 year olds who undergo training of executive
              attention with age matched control without such training.  After the training
              we will examine the ability of the two groups to profit from systematic lessons
              designed to improve specific subskills of reading and number processing.  These
              sessions will last ten weeks.  

 We will use fMRI and high density
              electrical recording to examine changes in brain areas and in connections that
              might occur as a result of the learning. Our previous work has revealed
              specific brain areas critical to reading that should be changed with
              acquisition of the skill and quite different brain areas critical to the
              estimation of quantity.  We hypothesize that the learning of the two skills
              will influence quite different brain regions. 
     
 If we are successful
              with our attention training we expect that the trained children will acquire
              the skills more rapidly and then produce higher correlations between the two
              skills.  If the attention training both improved the learning of the two
              individual skills and increased the correlation between them it will support
              the idea that attention training is a general component that should be
              considered as an adjunct of all early child curricula. 

     				 


