Title       : Seismic Attenuation Structure and the Fine-Scale Structure of a Seismic Zone at
               the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, 35 degrees N
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a9907170

Award Number: 9907170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David E. Epp                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61078              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Detrick rdetrick@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew H. Barclay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The magma plumbing system at slow-spreading ridges is poorly understood,
              especially in comparison with out understanding of ridge structure and
              processes at faster spreading ridges.  How magma is stored in and transported
              through the crust, and how this magmatic system intereacts with faulting, are
              two crucial, but unknown, aspects of crustal accretion at slow-spreading
              ridges.  Recent seismic tomography experiments at the Mid-Atlantic Ridge at 35
              degrees N have imaged an intriguing distribution of low seismic P wave
              velocities beneath the inner valley of a magmatically-robust spreading segment.
               As the shallower low-velocity regions lie directly beneath seafloor volcanic
              features, the tomographic images may indicate the presence of high temperatures
              and partial melt associated with a crustal magma plumbing system.  However, the
              low-velocity regions may instead be due to increased porosity, an alternative
              interpretation that is supported by an observed increase in Vp/Vs with depth. 
              Microearthquake hypocenters at the center of the same segment devine an
              along-axis trend within a narrow depth range (3-4 km) beneath the inner valley
              floor.  Most of the focal mechanisms are consistent with extensional faulting,
              but strike-slip and other anomalous mechanisms are also present.  The
              hypocenters appear to be associated with a western valley-bounding fault.   At
              the same time, the earthquakes are located near a change in character of the
              low-velocity anomalies from a centrally-located, pipe-like body below 4 km
              depth to an along-axis region of anomalously low velocities in the upper crust.
