Title       : Constraints on Organic Carbon Inputs to Continental Margin Sediments: A Coupled
               Molecular Isotopic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1999  
File        : a9907129

Award Number: 9907129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500316             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy I. Eglinton teglinton@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann P. McNichol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-9907129


The role of marine sediments, particularly those on
              the ocean margins, as long-term repositories of terrigenous organic carbon is
              one of the most complex issues of low-temperature geochemistry and
              biogeochemistry.  Several decades of research have produced conflicting
              estimates of the abundance and distribution of terrestrially-derived carbon in
              these sediments.  In this project, this classic problem will be tackled again
              with recently developed, state-of-the-art analytical tools.  Using techniques
              to determine the 14C composition of individual sedimentary organic compounds
              developed with previous NSF funding, the investigator and his colleagues at the
              Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will investigate the relative importance
              of various sources of terrigenous organic matter to the sedimentary organic
              pool stored on continental margins.  There are three major objectives:  (1)  to
              determine the contributions to the sedimentary pool of organic carbon derived
              from vascular plants and relict sedimentary rocks; (2) to determine the
              relationship between drainage basin characteristics and the quantity,
              composition, and age distributions of continentally-derived organic carbon; and
              (3) to determine the relationship between organic carbon contributions and
              particle characteristics for river-influenced margin sediments.  In addition to
              further informing the current understanding of carbon storage in the sediments
              of the ocean margins, it is expected that the new information should assist in
              ongoing efforts to constrain global organic carbon budgets.


