Title       : Institute for Theoretical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  2002   
File        : a9907949

Award Number: 9907949
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederick Cooper                        
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17298600           (Estimated)
Investigator: David Gross gross@itp.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1286      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9162,9179,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Institute for Theoretical Physics (ITP), located at the University of
              California at Santa Barbara, will continue to provide a meeting ground where
              scientists get together and engage in the exchange of ideas with the goal of
              stimulating new research collaborations, breakthroughs, and advances in
              numerous areas of physics.  The ITP sponsors thematic programs from as short as
              three weeks to as long as six months.  Program topics are selected by the ITP
              Advisory Board from proposals solicited from the scientific community.  Topics
              are chosen on the basis of their potential to stimulate progress in an area
              that is particularly timely and/or novel and are often of a multidisciplinary
              or interdisciplinary character.  In association with the long-term programs,
              the ITP generally sponsors two conferences to receive input from the community
              and to disseminate results to a wider audience.  In addition, shorter
              mini-programs are conducted when propitious.

The ITP is the permanent home
              of four researchers, who are also tenured faculty at UCSB, and who provide
              scientific leadership in their specialties and help the Director guide the ITP
              and endow the ITP with experience and continuity over time.  Each is a world
              class scientist in his own right who occasionally helps organize a program but
              continually interacts with resident program organizers and other visiting
              scientists.  

The ITP also sponsors a group of Postdoctoral Fellows who are
              exposed to the wide range of forefront topics and scientific leaders.  Through
              the ITP Scholars Program, the ITP fosters the research efforts of faculty not
              at major research universities and reaches out to faculty not normally served
              by ITP programs. The ITP also plays an educational role by bringing Graduate
              Student Fellows from other universities to visit the ITP for a semester or
              year.

The ITP is governed by the Director, assisted by the Deputy Director
              and the four permanent members, with the counsel of an Advisory Board
              consisting of a diverse group of scientists having a wide variety of
              experiences and expertise.  

Under this award, the ITP will receive
              financial support from the NSF Divisions of Astronomical Sciences, Materials
              Research, Mathematical Sciences and Physics.  It also receives substantial
              financial support from the University of California at Santa Barbara. 

