Title       : Cloud Halos and their Roles in the Atmospheric Radiation Balance and Climate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2001   
File        : a9907010

Award Number: 9907010
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179308             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Seinfeld seinfeld@its.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Flagan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent observations indicate that the air surrounding growing cumulus clouds is
              sometimes nearly saturated with water vapor.  Calculations show that these
              vapor shrouds or "halos" around clouds can account for a significant increase
              in the absorption of solar radiation.  The purpose of this project is to
              measure the vapor field around cumulus clouds with high accuracy and resolution
              and to use the information in calculations of radiative transfer and in
              assessing the consequences of cloud-environment interactions on cloud
              microphysics.   The specific objectives are as follows:
- To measure the vapor
              field in and around convective clouds with sufficient detail to characterize
              the 3-dimensional vapor structure relative to cloud edges;
- To measure
              concurrently the size distribution, composition, and optical properties of
              aerosols within the cloud halo;
- To analyze the resulting measurements in
              order to provide several completely documented cases for use in radiative
              transfer calculations;
- To carry out radiative transfer analyses including
              absorption and heating rate calculations for the observed distributions of
              water vapor, aerosols, and cloud;
- To determine the implications of the
              radiation analysis for climate modeling.
The measurements will be conducted
              with the CIRPAS Twin Otter aircraft, equipped with a new instrument called the
              Fast Water Vapor Monitor developed by Aerodyne Research along with instruments
              for measuring aerosols, CCN, cloud droplets, and liquid water content. 
              Computer codes with different degrees of complexity will be used for the
              radiative transfer calculations.  The results bear on the question of anomalous
              cloud absorption, which refers to the discrepancies that have been observed
              between the observed solar absorption by clouds and the absorption calculated
              using Mie scattering theory applied to populations of cloud drops.  This is a
              collaborative research project between Cal Tech and Aerodyne Research, Inc. 
              The Aerodyne component of the collaboration is supported by ATM-9910744, Dr.
              John T. Jayne, PI.

