Title       : Collaborative Research: Functional Analysis of the Synechococcus PCC 7942 Genome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a9907528

Award Number: 9907528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia L. Hartzell Hartzell@UIdaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip A. Youderian  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Many organisms, including bacteria, fungi, plants, and animals, have a circadian
              "clock" that coordinates rhythms of gene expression and physiology that serve
              to anticipate changes in the day/night cycle, and which persist under constant
              conditions in the absence of environmental cues. The photosynthetic
              Cyanobacteria are the simplest organisms known to display circadian rhythms;
              among the cyanobacteria, Synechococcus elongatus has the smallest known genome
              (~2.7 Mb). This unicellular organism requires light for growth, and offers many
              advantages for understanding the molecular mechanism of the circadian clock,
              including its transformability and efficient systems of homologous
              recombination. The genes required for clock function and synchronization by
              light in S. elongatus will be identified in the context of determining its
              complete genome sequence.
Because S. elongatus has a very small genome, it is
              a model organism in which to isolate and characterize mutations that affect the
              clock mechanism, its sensitivity to light, and its connection to cellular
              functions. A cosmid library consisting of 45 kb inserts of S. elongatus genomic
              DNA will be made, then ordered by the genetic method of complementation. This
              ordering method will reveal the organization of this organism's biosynthetic
              functions, functions common to all complex genomes. Subclones in this library
              will be mutagenized with the insertion element MudS to generate mutant pools
              corresponding to each region of the genome. These MudS insertions will be
              crossed onto the S. elongatus genome to generate mutants, and simple screens
              will be used to identify insertions in genes required for clock function and
              regulation. These MudS insertions will also be used as starting points for the
              determination both of the genome sequence, and of the locations of these
              mutations within the genome sequence. This new function-based approach to
              genome mapping and sequencing will be more informative and less costly than
              current, random sequencing approaches. The sequence of the S. elongatus genome,
              when combined with an understanding of the effects of mutations in the genome,
              will reveal the most minimal set of functions required for both the clock
              mechanism and photosynthetic metabolism. Because of the close evolutionary
              relationship between S. elongatus and plant chloroplasts, understanding the S.
              elongatus genome will provide a simpler basis for understanding the more
              complex genomics of higher plants.

