Title       : Hawaii Networked Learning Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1999 
File        : a9907894

Award Number: 9907894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191764             (Estimated)
Investigator: Violet H. Harada   (Principal Investigator current)
              Justin S. Mew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel D. Suthers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victoria Kajioka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hawaii Dept of Education
	      
	      Honolulu, HI  96816    /   -

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

The Hawai'i proposal expects to promote educational reform of science,
              mathematics and technology education in 64 rural schools, serving 44,380
              students, representing 25% of the total student population in the state of
              Hawaii.  The proposal is submitted on behalf of a consortium of higher
              education institutions, the state department of education, rural schools, and
              business and community organizations in Hawai'i and requests $191,764 over
              twelve months for planning and development activities. 

The goal is to seek
              significant and sustainable improvements in standards-based science,
              mathematics and technology education for students in rural economically and
              educationally disadvantaged areas of the the state. 

The objectives
              include:

Conducting a comprehensive assessment specifically related to the
              status of science and technology teaching and learning in the
              state.

Gathering baseline data on student achievement aligned with
              standards-based instruction.

Building a coalition of support and
              understanding for a systemic approach to improving practices.

Increasing
              community and business involvement in identifying local resources that need to
              be converged and aligned.

Expanding and deepen the use of technology and
              telecommunications as effective teaching and learning tools.

Generating a
              sustainable implementation plan for systemic reform in science and technology
              education.


