Title       : Collaborative Research: Can Larvae Utilize Dissolved Settlement Cues in the
               Wave-Driven Flow on Coral Reefs?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1999 
File        : a9907545

Award Number: 9907545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237103             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael G. Hadfield   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hadfield
9907545

The objective of this project is to determine whether
              water-borne chemical cues can affect the settlement of larvae of benthic marine
              invertebrates in habitats subjected to the wave-driven water flow that
              characterizes many coastal habitats. This question will be addressed by
              studying the nudibranch Phestilla sibogae, whose larvae metamorphose in
              response to a species-specific metabolite of its prey, Porites compressa, an
              abundant coral that forms reefs in shallow, wave--dominated habitats in Hawaii.
              The well-studied coral-eating nudibranch P. sibogae will serve as a model for
              benthic invertebrates that live on coral reefs and rely on recruitment of
              larvae from the plankton to found and replenish populations and maintain
              genetic continuity across small and large distances. The expertise of Hadfield
              in larval biology will be combined with that of Koehl in biomechanics and
              Koseff in environmental hydrodynamics to address the following questions:  (1)
              How does ambient water flow disperse dissolved cues in nature?  (2) Do P.
              sibogae larvae recruit in the field in microhabitats where advection and mixing
              of dissolved cues is low?  (3) Do larvae of P. sibogae respond to water-borne
              cues in ways that affect their retention and settlement on a reef in
              wave-driven water flow? 
This mechanistic study of the role of dissolved cues
              in larval settlement at sites exposed to wave--driven flow goes beyond earlier
              studies of such processes in unidirectional flow. This investigation of the
              effects of rigid canopy-forming organisms on small-scale flow and mass
              transport in coastal habitats complements similar studies in flexible
              macrophyte canopies, and also complements larger--scale flow studies of coral
              reefs. The project has a potential impact on both larval ecology (larval
              recruitment processes can have profound effects on the dynamics and genetic
              structure of populations, and on community structure in coastal benthic
              habitats), and on coral reef ecology (reef structure can alter the small-scale
              flow and transport of water-born nutrients, food, wastes, and propagules to the
              community of organisms living in these important tropical ecosystems).
***

