Title       : Motivation for Learning: The Variable Role of Concepts of Self and Sociocultural
               Identities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1999 
File        : a9907804

Award Number: 9907804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187252             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin L. Maehr mlmaehr@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Pintrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                               The achievement of all students in schools, but especially in
              mathematics and science, is a national concern for American schools.  Moreover,
              there are concerns about the achievement of minority students in mathematics
              and science.  There are many suggestions for educational improvement, but one
              that seems to offer important benefits for students is the use of small
              collaborative groups.  Students that work in small groups to solve academic
              tasks seem to do achieve at higher levels and also have more positive attitudes
              towards learning.  At the same time, there may be difficulties in the use of
              small groups for learning in that some students may not feel competent in
              groups, some students may not participate equally, and some minority students
              may feel left out of the group or may feel incompetent in the groups.

	The
              proposed study will examine how small groups can be structured to increase the
              likelihood that all students, but especially minority students, can achieve
              more and have more positive attitudes towards learning.  The study will involve
              the use of different conditions to structure group learning of mathematics
              tasks.  One condition will have the groups focus on mastery and understanding
              of mathematics.  A second condition will have the groups focus on doing better
              than other groups in a more competitive mode.  A control condition will include
              students working individually on the same math tasks.  It is expected that
              working in small groups under a mastery condition will have benefits for all
              students, but especially for minority students.  The results will help us
              understand how different conditions can improve the operation of small group
              learning.  These results can be used to guide teachers in improving their use
              of small groups in classrooms.


