Title       : The Ultraviolet Impacts Network: Linking Education in Atmospheric and Health
               Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1999    
File        : a9907674

Award Number: 9907674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79924              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melanie A. Wetzel wetzel@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      P.O.Box 60220
	      Reno, NV  895060220    702/673-7311

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9907674
Wetzel

The proposed project will establish an Ultraviolet Impacts
              Network (UV-IN), a geosciences education network of community college faculty
              and students.  The UV Impacts Network is designed to improve instruction in the
              physical concepts and processes, which control ozone depletion, and the
              resulting influences on ultraviolet (UV) climatology and health risk.  This
              program addresses several of the recognized needs in the advancement of
              geosciences education and incorporates enhanced knowledge related to climate
              change processes, physical interactions between the sun, atmosphere, and Earth
              surface, as well as, relevance to human health risk and environmental
              management.  Faculty and students at each college participating in the network
              will have access to an extensive UV data network and will attend a
              team-training workshop.  The faculty-student team training workshop will be
              held during the summer of 2000, at which a total of 20 teams will have hands-on
              experience with instrument selection and installation, data collection and
              posting of data on web pages, methods training for accessing auxiliary
              information such as climate and health databases, instruction on the scientific
              aspects of ozone climatology and atmospheric transmittance of UV radiation, and
              demonstration of methods for health impacts assessment.  After training and
              presentations at the workshop, participating faculty-student teams will work
              together to develop site-specific curriculum plans for monitoring UV flux
              climatology and interpreting local and regional characteristics of UV exposure
              risk.  These plans will be required to involve monitoring and assessment
              activities which engage multiple classes at each college, such as Meteorology,
              Geography, Ecology, Health Science, Recreation, Medical Technology, and
              Environmental Sciences.  Each plan will also include involvement of local
              health and environmental agencies, and the provision of new career information
              and internship opportunities.  The participating colleges will develop a
              "distributed knowledge" resource by exchanging course plans, datasets, and
              analysis and discussion via Internet (web) communications.  The combined data
              and interpretive information will be used for student inquiry projects and lab
              exercises to allow study of how spatial and temporal trends and variability of
              ozone and other climate parameters influence the risk factors for ultraviolet
              exposure.  A follow-up conference/workshop will be held during second summer,
              to allow discussion of the UV Impacts Network progress and to assist faculty in
              continued implementation of the Network activities at their colleges.  This
              proposed project will build on participation in the USDA national UV-B
              monitoring network, as well as, an NSF-sponsored educational project entitled
              Nevada Student Teacher Education Program, and will foster increased
              capabilities of community college faculty and students in geoscience research
              and environmental assessment.

