Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Landscape Ecology and Institutions of
               Conservation in the Southern Yucatan Peninsular Region of Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9907026

Award Number: 9907026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Billie L. Turner bturner@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Many important questions confront those who seek to do research on the patterns
              and processes associated with land-use and land-cover change in different parts
              of the world.  Among those questions are:  Do different institutions that use
              and manage resources produce different landscape-level patterns of land-use and
              land-cover change, and do these different patterns have different consequences
              on ecosystems and natural communities?  This doctoral dissertation research
              project examines the evolution of landscape-scale forest-cover patterns in the
              southern Yucatan peninsular region of Mexico, paying special attention to how
              forest cover is affected by distinct social institutions promoting forest
              conservation.  The primary research questions ask whether distinct conservation
              institutions give rise to different landscape-level patterns, and whether
              diverse landscape-level patterns reflect different ecosystem and
              community-level consequences.  Interviews with and surveys of leaders of key
              conservation institutions will elicit information about conservation strategies
              and implementation plans.  Programs creating incentives and disincentives for
              local land-users, particularly smallholder farmers, will be investigated. 
              Qualitative and quantitative data will be gathered on subsidization of
              smallholder activities that maintain forest cover, and on explicit mechanisms
              controlling the area, spatial pattern and timing of deforestation.  Spatial
              extents of control exercised by the key institutions will be mapped, digitized,
              and analyzed to assess their statistical relationship to current landscape
              pattern indices and to changes in patterns over the last 15 years.  Pattern
              indices such as forest fragmentation and connectivity will be computed from a
              remote-sensing-derived land-use and land-cover classification.  The landscape
              study will then be grounded in point assessments of local successional forests
              for ecosystem function attributes (carbon and nitrogen stocks, soil moisture
              and relative biomass) and community composition (species and structural
              diversity).  This study will incorporate methods of landscape and community
              ecology with spatially explicit geographic research to study the role of local
              conservation institutions of the southern Yucatan region in changing landscape
              patterns, ecosystem functions, and biodiversity.  The project will shed new
              light on the ecological and institutional dynamics of land-use and land-cover
              change and on temporal and spatial scalar issues in linking local and
              landscape-level studies of land-use patterns and processes.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.
