Title       : Human-Induced Landscape Change -- A Digital Archive Created by Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1999      
File        : a9907724

Award Number: 9907724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74717              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Bierman pbierman@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine A. Massey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9907724
Bierman

Human hands have changed dramatically the New England
              landscape over the past 250 years.  Only 100 years ago, much of now-forested
              New England was cleared of trees as agriculture and development drove the rapid
              conversion of forest to farmland.  The bare hills of post-colonial Vermont
              eroded rapidly and sediment surged down hillslopes, choking the region's
              rivers.  Just as importantly, landscape response to natural events including
              floods and windstorms affected post-colonial settlers and their livelihood. 
              Currently, geologic archives of landscape response to climate change and human
              impact (pond and alluvial fans sediments) are being read by NSF CAREER-funded
              graduate and undergraduate students pursuing a variety of research projects at
              the University of Vermont.  The investigators will integrate this funded
              research with the hands-on education of high school students and explore
              another archive, one that preserves evidence of human-induced landscape change
              at an instant of time.  In an integrated research and education program
              designed to involve high school science students and their teachers directly in
              active, on-going geologic research, the project will build a digital library of
              photographs documenting two centuries of landscape change.  Specifically,
              students across Vermont will compile historic photographs that show first hand,
              human/landscape interaction in New England including clear-cutting, gully
              erosion, storm damage, and landslides.  Students will scour their own community
              and personal resources locating images that show Vermont landscapes as they
              were 75 to 150 years ago.  Such photographs can be found in the student's
              homes, in the homes of their older relatives, in local historical societies,
              and in local libraries.  The investigators will work directly with teachers and
              their classes in 18 different Vermont high schools.  Using for guidance a
              standards-based manual, teachers will assist students as they find at least two
              historic photographs clearly showing human/landscape interaction.  The students
              will attempt to relocate the place from which each photo was taken.  The site
              will be mapped using hand-held GPS and the scene rephotographs in detail using
              local reference sources including interviews, library research, and field
              observations.  All images will be brought to the students' schools and scanned
              using equipment that will be loaned to each school for 6 to 8 weeks.  The final
              result will be a pair of photographs, new and old, georeferenced and captioned
              by the student to explain the historic impact and the landscape response.  As
              each class finishes its town, a statewide database, housed and available
              publicly on the Web, will grow.  Created by students involved in on-going
              research using modern technology, this photo archive will be a digital resource
              for people around the world.  The impact will be long lasting in terms of both
              formal and informal science education.  The long-term goal is for the archive
              to include photographs from every town in Vermont showing human-induced
              geologic change.  The effort will be supported by the University and local
              foundations interested in education reform.

