Title       : Women in Marine Science (WIMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9907682

Award Number: 9907682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75264              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah K. Smith dsmith@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9907682
Smith

The project will develop a Web site that will engage the
              public and school children in the day to day science of women marine
              scientists.  The primary goal is twofold: to encourage young women to pursue
              careers in science and to remove the mystery that surrounds being a scientist. 
              Over the course of a year the site will highlight 12 woman scientists in a
              monthly magazine format.  While the Web site would have impact on all the
              sciences, we will focus on women marine scientists since this is one of the
              fields within which women remain inadequately represented.  In addition it will
              underscore the diversity of career paths in science and the diversity of the
              women who choose science as career.  The science of the women on the Web site
              will cover many of the subdisciplines within marine science.  The women will
              have backgrounds in chemistry, biology, physics, engineering, mathematics,
              geology, or geophysics.  The women will be at different career paths directed
              toward research, teaching, administration, or perhaps a combination of these
              and at various universities and research institutions across the country. 
              Other of the women will have gone directly into marine science from a
              bachelor's degree working, for example, as programmers, laboratory technicians,
              and data analysts.  The project will use the unique capabilities of the World
              Wide Web to profile each of the 12 women marine scientists.  The science of
              each of the women will be presented in a way that shows how their interests fit
              into understanding the Earth.  What are they trying to understand?  What do
              they do to understand it?  What have they learned to date?  What are their
              future goals?  The site will make several types of information available.  The
              basic principals of the science of each woman will be explained clearly in a
              mini science lesson.  It will also provide views of the scientist's offices and
              laboratories and the daily activities therein, a recently published paper, and
              a short scientific talk.  By placing all of this information on the Web, users
              will be able to pick and choose what interests them most and they will be able
              to follow paths to areas that they want to learn more about.  In addition,
              there will be a forum for the public to ask their own questions.  In order to
              reach students in an effective way, the site will identify one or two schools
              in the local area of each of the women scientists and make them aware of the
              Web site and its goals and provide the teachers with a guide to using the Web
              site.  A separate but important part of the Web site will offer an historical
              perspective on women in marine science.  The objective in this section is to
              tell the stories of pioneering women in marine science and to convey to the
              public the way in which women's roles in marine science have changed in the
              last half-century.  As the new millennium approaches it is appropriate to step
              back and assess what women scientists have accomplished, how they are no longer
              considered 'unique' but instead are an accepted and integral part of the
              scientific community.  Finally, the WIMS Web site will be a first step towards
              Web-based women in science seminar series.  The World Wide Web provides
              opportunities for students, teachers, and the public to draw on the knowledge
              of myriad, geographically dispersed educators and experts without the necessity
              of travel.  This type of resource is critically needed to enhance the learning
              experience for under-represented groups.

