Title       : The Hidden Earth - Visualization of Geologic Features and Their Subsurface
               Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2001  
File        : a9907733

Award Number: 9907733
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80380              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Reynolds sreynolds@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Piburn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9907733
Reynolds

This project will create a series of computer-based modules
              in geology that will improve introductory geology student's spatial skills and
              their ability to visualize geologic structures expressed in landscapes or
              hidden beneath the earth's surface.  Computer-based materials largely will be
              built with the program Bryce3D.  This program allows the creation of detailed
              and realistic, two-dimensional representations depicting three-dimensional
              perspectives of simple and complex geologic structures and landscapes.  The 3D
              models can be rotated, sectioned, disassembled, or successively unburied.  A
              series of images can be used to depict sequential geologic histories, such as
              deposition of successive layers, followed by erosion into realistic-looking
              landscapes.  This approach is an analog of strategies that have been shown in
              previous research to be effective in the development of spatial reasoning. 
              This project will embed spatial learning in the context of real-life, complex
              problems that are authentic.  They will be taken from among actual problems
              that geologists deal with in everyday life.  The hypothesis is that this will
              increase the development of spatial ability and improve the transfer to
              relevant problem solving.  Materials will be designed to encourage various
              aspects of critical thinking, such as development and testing of hypotheses. 
              The model used for the treatment will be one in which students are pre-tested,
              trained to a criterion level of success, and post-tested.  Experimental methods
              will be both experimental and quasi-experimental, and data will be both
              qualitative and quantitative.  Support in being provided jointly by the
              Directorate for Geosciences and the Division of Undergraduate
              Education/Directorate for Education and Human Resources.

