Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rural Livelihoods, Resettlement, and Land Use
               Change in South Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9907061

Award Number: 9907061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Campbell djc@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Despite the failure of many African nations to achieve wide-spread land-reform
              programs to redress colonial land-distribution patterns, substantial
              land-redistribution has taken place through numerous individual transactions. 
              This process has been especially pronounced in South Africa, where land
              redistribution is taking place largely outside the auspices of the state. 
              Although some studies have been conducted of different facets of the
              land-redistribution process, very little attention has focused on the impacts
              of redistribution on rural livelihoods, especially food security and land uses.
               This doctoral dissertation research project will focus on land-use change and
              its impact on livelihoods in South Africa, examining areas where previously
              dispossessed people have moved onto, rural people formerly dispossessed are
              moving onto "white" farms as well as areas from which resettlers have come. 
              One key emphases of this study is determination of whether people in both newly
              resettled and source areas have more or less livelihood security than in their
              previous situation.  Another emphasis is on assessment of land-use
              intensification, extensification, or abandonment occurring in the areas "left
              behind" and whether these changes help or hinder household livelihoods.  This
              study will draw upon archival sources in South Africa and in the U.S. to assess
              land uses in the Northern Province throughout recent history.  A pilot study
              and initial key informant interviews will give direction to the study and lay
              the groundwork for the more structured interview schedule, which will be
              conducted in rural areas near Sovenga (Mankweng) in the Northern Province.  A
              questionnaire-based survey will provide most of the data for the study, with
              follow-up interviews and group discussions assisting in analysis and
              verification of findings.  This project will provide new insights into the
              impact of resettlement on the food security and other facets of the livelihood
              of resettlers and those who remain in the areas where they previously lived. 
              The research results also will shed new light on the relative contributions of
              agriculture, non-farm activities, and remittances/pensions have on rural
              livelihoods and the efficacy of land redistribution on the lives of rural
              people.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
              will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
              independent research career.

