Title       : Gordon Research Conference - Isotopes in Biological & Chemical Sciences, to be
               held in Ventura, CA January 9-13, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9907192

Award Number: 9907192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Vern L. Schramm vern@aecom.yu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlyle B. Storm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9907192
Schramm
Partial support is provided for the Gordon Research Conference
              on Isotopes
in Biological and Chemical Sciences held in Ventura,
              California,
January 9-13, 2000.  This longstanding conference has
              traditionally brought
together researchers from physical, organic, and quantum
              chemistry,
atmospheric and geosciences, and biological sciences.  The
              conferees of
this meeting consist of (1) scientists with theoretical and
              physical
interests, (2) researchers interested in the atomic-level
              understanding of
chemical structure and reaction rate and, (3)
              experimentalists with
biochemical and biological interests and, (4) scientists
              who apply isotopic
methods to earth, atmosphere and archaeology problems.  The
              uniting theme
is the application of isotopic methods to solve important
              scientific
problems.  As a result of its interdisciplinary nature, the
              Conference has
served as a breeding ground for the generation of new
              concepts,
methodologies and theories in these fields.  Examples include
              the
remarkable applications of isotopes to enzymatic reactions, including
              the
role of nuclear tunneling in enzyme reactions; magnetic field effects
              in
enzymatic reactions; and the recent successes in understanding
              enzymatic
transition states.  The discoveries of anomalies in the oxygen
              isotope
ratios in the upper atmosphere have stimulated theoreticians to
              develop a
new theory of chemical reactivity.  Nuclear size and shape explain
              the
anomalies in the isotope exchange equilibria involving heavy
              elements,
unexplained for a half century.  In recent years, the Conference
              has
demonstrated its usefulness in bridging applications of isotopes
              between
chemical and biological systems.  This trend is reflected in the
              current
program, which includes new aspects of hydrogen transfer in catalysis,
              both
in chemical and in enzyme systems.  This year's program also
              explores
recently developed techniques for characterization and quantization
              of the
isotopic phenomena.  Four examples are ultra-sensitive carbon dating
              by
accelerator mass spectrometry, direct methods of measuring kinetic
              isotope
effects, pressure-dependence of isotope effects to establish
              proton
tunneling and NMR methods to establish low-barrier hydrogen bonds. 
              The
atmospheric geosciences address ozone layer chemistry by means of
              new
isotopic data and mechanistic explanations.  One particularly
              strong
component of this Conference is that it provides a continuing format
              for
the interaction of theoreticians with experimentalists.

Nature has
              provided scientists with useful tools to investigate natural
processes in
              biological and chemical changes.  Isotopes of normal atoms are
created in
              stars, in space, at the boundaries of space and in research
laboratories. 
              They can be used to report on the age of fossils, the nature
of ozone
              reactions in the stratosphere and the functions of molecules in
living cells. 
              Every second year, scientists from diverse areas of research
gather to discuss
              advances in the use of isotopes to discover new
knowledge.  Advances in
              technology for the use of isotopes, and isotopic
application to important
              problems in biology are shared with scientists
from around the globe.  The
              Gordon Research Conference - "Isotopes in
Biological and Chemical Sciences"
              provides a forum for information exchange
between theoretical and experimental
              sciences, preparing both for new
advances at the frontiers of science.

	

