Title       : Collaborative Research: Constraint Satisfaction, Database Query Evaluation, and
               Information Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a9907419

Award Number: 9907419
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188388             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phokion G. Kolaitis kolaitis@cse.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This interdisciplinary research is carried out in a collaboration between
              Professors Phokion Kolaitis at the University of California, Santa Cruz and
              Moshe Vardi at Rice University. Constraint satisfaction and conjunctive query
              evaluation are two fundamental and ubiquitous problems in artificial
              intelligence and database systems, respectively. Since these problems are known
              to be computationally intractable in the worst case, researchers in artificial
              intelligence and database systems have sought to discover tractable cases of
              constraint satisfaction and conjunctive query evaluation, as well as to design
              heuristic algorithms for solving these problems. Thus far, however, these
              studies have been largely carried out in parallel and with relatively little or
              no interaction between the two areas. Recent research work has established that
              there are strong and exact connections between constraint satisfaction and
              conjunctive query evaluation. The main goal of this project is to further
              explore the connections between constraint satisfaction and conjunctive query
              evaluation, and to examine the applicability of techniques developed for each
              of these problems to the other problem. To this effect, a novel game-theoretic
              framework is being developed to unify seemingly unrelated results, identify
              additional tractable cases of these two problems, and design heuristics for the
              general case. Moreover, algorithms and heuristics developed by the artificial
              intelligence community are being evaluated in regards to their efficacy in
              conjunctive query evaluation, and vice versa. Results obtained in the course of
              this project will enhance the interaction between artificial intelligence and
              database systems, and will advance knowledge transfer between these two areas. 
