Title       : Dissertation Research: A Bioarchaeological Analysis of Prehistoric Social Status
               and Health in the Moche Valley, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9907973

Award Number: 9907973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip L. Walker pwalker@anth.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Moche, who controlled much of Peru's northern coast from AD 200-600, were on
              eof the first societies in South America to develop state level social
              organization. Although Moch civilization has been well-studied
              archaeologically, much less is known about the rise and collapse of societies
              that preceded the Moche in this region, and how these earlier transformations
              influenced the process of state formation. Most importantly, little is known
              about how changing socail conditions, particularly increasing socail
              stratification, affected the health and material well-being of theinhabitants
              of this region. The proposed research seeks to address these issues with
              analysis of a collection of prehistoric burials from Cerro Oreja, a large site
              located in the Moche Valley with a 1,500 tear history of occupation. As Cerro
              Oreja was the paramount center in the valley during the critical period
              immediately preceding Moche state formation and expansion, the site provides an
              excellent vantage point from which to observe cultural change.The skeletal
              sample from Cerro Oreja has great potential as a source of information on
              prehistoric health and social status, due to its large size, quality of
              contextual information and degree of chronological and spatial control.
              Bioarchaeological methods will be used to assess how the changing
              socio-political organization of this population influenced the relationship
              between social status and health. The health status of individuals classified
              as elites and commoners will be compared to evaluate the proposition that high
              status individuals are better buffered against the effects of nutritional
              stress, disease, and chronic conditions associated with strenuous physical
              activities. Changes in the health status of people of different social groups
              will be analyzed through examination of material form three cultural phases
              that culminated in hte formation of the Moche state. This research will produce
              data useful for evaluating models generated by archaeological research to
              explain the evolution of the state on the Moche Valley. The data obtained will
              also increase our knowledge of disease processes in ancient societies from
              Andean South America. Finally, this investigation will contribute to our
              understanding of the interplay between health, class, and socio-economic
              organization.
