Title       : Prior Knowledge, Analogical Transfer and Multiple Perspectives in Child Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1999 
File        : a9907839

Award Number: 9907839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131942             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stellan Ohlsson stellan@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Moher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew E. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to determine how children acquire new ideas (as
              opposed to facts or skills). The approach is to identify generic obstacles to
              learning, design a path around those obstacles, create a learning scenario--a
              set of linked situations, materials and activities--that supports that path
              and, finally, investigate what children learn in that scenario. One obstacle to
              learning is that the learner's main tool for interpreting new information is
              his or her prior knowledge, so new information tends to be distorted to be
              consistent with the latter. This obstacle can be overcome by learning an
              analogue to the target idea in some other domain and then transferring that
              idea to the target domain. A second generic obstacle is the cognitive strain
              associated with the need to coordinate multiple perspectives, a frequent task
              in science class. This obstacle can be overcome by engaging the learner in a
              dialogue that makes the relations between the multiple perspectives explicit.
              These two hypotheses are embedded in a scenario for teaching very young
              children that the Earth is round. Virtual reality technology is used to provide
              an unfamiliar context in which to acquire the concept of a spherical planet and
              physical models are used to support the application of that concept to the
              Earth. Two studies will be carried out in an economically and ethnically
              diverse school to assess whether this scenario is effective. The results will
              inform current debates in psychology about the function of prior knowledge,
              analogical transfer and multiple perspectives in learning and provide
              guidelines for the future use of virtual reality in science instruction. 



