Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Geophysical Electromagnetic Prospecting for
               Groundwater and Economic Minerals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a9907439

Award Number: 9907439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary M. Poulton mpoulton@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : Y851      STATE-OES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 1325,5944,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9907439
Poulton

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project by two teams lead by Dr. Mary M. Poulton, Department of Mining and
              Geological Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona and Dr. Safwat
              A. Hussain, Department of Geological and Geophysical Sciences, The National
              Research Center, Cairo, Egypt.  Others participants are Dr. Ken Zonge,
              President of Zonge Engineering and Research Organization, Tucson, Arizona and
              Mr. Hesham El-Kaliouby, who is a Ph.D. candidate at Cairo University.  These
              teams plan to seek an accurate interpretation method for transient
              electromagnetic (TEM) data that can readily be applied to ground water and
              mineral exploration.   Conducting rocks and minerals exhibit electrical
              properties, which are characterized by a dispersive complex resistivity in the
              low frequency range, called induced polarization (IP).  These IP effects may be
              detected using TEM methods.  The researchers plan to develop a method to
              exploit the IP effect and gain valuable information about the electrical
              properties of aquifers and minerals.  It will be necessary to analyze the
              forward problem of finding a voltage response due to the presence of a target
              having different parameters such as electrical properties, shape, depth, and
              location, and then to find inverse solution through the use of a neural network
              to find the properties of the target.  

Scope: The US team is well qualified
              for this project.  Dr. Poulton is especially experienced in the development of
              neural networks and use of neural network interpretation of electromagnetic
              geophysical data for environmental applications.  Dr. Ken Zonge has useful
              practical experience in this area, and his organization, Zonge Engineering, has
              the necessary resources.   The collaboration between Egyptian and US scientists
              is particularly useful to achieve the objectives of the project.  The proposed
              activity would help locate ground water resources, an important issue for Egypt
              and other Middle East countries.  The project will help the Egyptian scientific
              human resources through the interaction with US experts.  The data obtained
              will help US scientists with developing basic and applied sciences.  This
              proposal meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas
              of mutual interest.  This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint
              Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
              countries to carry out these cooperative activities

