Title       : FSML: Romberg Tiburon Center for Environmental Studies Animal Care and
               Experimental Aquaculture System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1999 
File        : a9907670

Award Number: 9907670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99798              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alissa J. Arp aarp@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Bollens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Cochlan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/469-2141

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1228,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Romberg Tiburon Center for Environmental Studies is a marine laboratory
              operated by San Francisco State University (SFSU), a predominantly
              undergraduate institution with a 57% minority enrollment.  The Romberg Tiburon
              Center (RTC) is the only academic research facility on San Francisco Bay, one
              of the largest estuaries in the U.S.  It is a facility with a tightly focused
              research mission aimed toward gaining fundamental understanding of the physical
              and biological processes of San Francisco Bay and its surrounding environments.
               Research scientists at RTC have trained and supported over 80 graduate and
              undergraduate students in the last five years and have extensive collaborations
              with fellow university, and federal and local environmental agency scientists. 
              Current research projects being conducted by the Center's 18 research
              scientists and their students range from studies of detoxification mechanisms
              of estuarine invertebrates to studies of plankton dynamics in the Antarctic. 
              Three new researchers, and a new tenure track faculty member, joined RTC in
              August 1998.  As continuing evidence of its dedication to The Center, the
              University has committed to hire four additional tenure-track faculty in the
              next 5 years.  Additionally, RTC initiated a Visiting Scientist Program in 1996
              that supports a visiting scientist at the Center annually.  This dramatic
              increase in personnel has resulted in a diversification and enrichment of
              research and teaching, and a corresponding dramatic increase in undergraduate
              and graduate use of the Center.

A remaining fundamental missing piece in the
              research and educational program at RTC is a facility to provide flowing
              seawater for care and experimental manipulation of estuarine and marine
              organisms.  Several RTC faculty and staff (4) have current NSF support for
              research projects that include aspects of experimental work on live organisms. 
              Other faculty and scientists have funding from DOE, NIH, and the California
              Department of Water Resources to conduct research which requires flowing bay or
              seawater.  San Francisco Bay Area collaborators have expressed strong interest
              in a facility with a state-of-the-art bay and seawater system for research,
              animal care and aquaculture located on San Francisco Bay.  The primary
              objective of this proposal is to create a modern seawater facility by providing
              the tanks, water tables, heating unit and a system of state-of-the-art computer
              hardware and software for precise control of the system.  This facility will
              support the numerous research and educational activities of internal RTC
              scientists and external local educators and scientists.


