Title       : SGER: Development of Austempered Ductile Cast Iron with Simultaneous High Yield
               Strength, Fatigue Strength, and Fracture Toughness by a Two-Step Austempering
               Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1999     
File        : a9907772

Award Number: 9907772
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susil K. Putatunda sputa@chem1.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The focus of the high risk, high potential research is to investigate a
              means of improving the mechanical characteristics of a relatively new, widely
              used material, ductile cast iron, through a new and novel heat-treating
              process. Higher yield strengths generally reduce the fracture toughness of
              materials. Austempered ductile cast iron (ADI) has emerged as a promising
              engineering material, however in manufacturing situations, simultaneous high
              yield strength, high fatigue strength and high fracture toughness have not been
              obtained in ADI. In this exploratory research, a novel and innovative concept
              of two-step austempering is proposed to solve this problem. 
     The project
              will establish the feasibility of two-step austempering process and will also
              establish the right combination of processing parameters so that unique
              microstructure consisting of (a) very large volume fraction of fine ferrite (b)
              very fine austenite and (c) very high carbon content in austenite and (d)
              stable austenite can be produced. This unique microstructure should provide
              simultaneous high yield strength, fatigue strength and fracture toughness in
              ADI. This will lead to a high reliability, low cost engineering material with
              greater durability. Furthermore, it will generate a new class of structural
              material. Once the validity of this concept of two step austempering has been
              established, it should be possible to apply this approach in other materials
              such as low and medium carbon and alloy steels, to produce materials with
              simultaneous high yield strength, fatigue strength and fracture toughness.

