Title       : Exploring the Limits of Life on Earth: Environmental Extremes of the
               Neoproterozoic 'Super' Glacial and Interglacial Cycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1999 
File        : a9907640

Award Number: 9907640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Christie-Blick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Sohl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Chandler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The geoloica1 record of the Neoproterozoic Era (1,000-543 Ma)
              indicates that Earth's climate alternated between warm equable conditions anti
              severe glacial conditions in which continental-scale ice sheets extended at sea
              level equatorward of 20 latitude. Macroscopic multicellular organisms make
              their first unequivocal appearance in the fossil record just prior to the
              Varanger glacial interval (600-575 Ma). Researchers have speculated that the
              extreme climatic conditions of tile Varanger glaciation may have acted as a
              catalyst for the rapid evolution of more complex metaoans such as the Ediacara
              fauna in the latest Neoproterozoic. For this to be so, however, the ancestral
              metazoans first had to endure what was quite probably the harshest global
              climate to have existed since the beginning of Earth history. and then had to
              survive an equally harsh phase of rapid global warming.  This project seeks to
              better quantify the range of paleoclimatic conditions through which the early
              metazoans survived from the height of the Varanger glaciation to the warm,
              post-glacial conditions. What combination of climate forcing
factors and
              feedbacks can best reproduce the extreme glacial conditions, and yet provide a
              means of returning to a warmer, more equable climate? What were Earth surface
              conditions like in terms of temperature and aridity?

The project will employ
              existing geological data to create improved reconstructions of Neoproterozoic
              paleogeography. Thc reconstruction will then be used as boundary conditions for
              a series of climate model simulations using a state-of- thc-art global climate
              model (GCM). Building upon our body of previous simulations, which used an
              older, coarse-resolution GCM. we have designed a sequence of experiments that
              will examine the Neoprotenozoic extreme cold phases, extreme warm phases, and
              transitional phases from one state to the other.  The new simulations add
              realism and accuracy that will allow for a better description of regional
              climate conditions and help us delimit the range of forcings and feedback
              processes that operated during this pivotal period in Earth history. Rigorous
              and quantitative examination of the results will provide detailed new
              information about how such a severe climatic deterioration could have occurred
              here on Earth, and how the climate system recovered to more equable state. This
              project should yield valuable insights into the long-term ability of Earth life
              forms to adapt to extreme environmental conditions, and will expand our view of
              other planetary environments that may have supported, or be capable of
              supporting, Earth-like life.







