Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Hydrologic and Geochemical Response of Conduit-
               and Diffuse-Flow Karst Systems to Variable Seasonal Climate and Individual
               Storm Characteristics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9907221

Award Number: 9907221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Brook   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,9198,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Karst landscapes develop predominately through processes of solution, as ground
              water dissolves limestone, dolomite, or other soluble rocks.  One of the most
              significant questions confronting karst studies is why humid tropical karst
              terrains are more accentuated and more varied in landform styles than are karst
              landscapes of cooler environments.  Different stages of development, climate,
              carbon dioxide in soils, geologic structure and lithology, and runoff all have
              been suggested as explanations.  This doctoral dissertation research project
              will examine the role that the hydrologic and geochemical characteristics of
              aquifers play in the removal of material by ground water through the analysis
              of two different kinds of aquifers located in close proximity to each other. 
              The Lost Cove of southeastern Tennessee has an aquifer dominated by highly
              concentrated conduits through which ground water flows, while ground water
              movement in the Pocket Branch valley of northwestern Georgia is highly diffused
              through the aquifer.  Networks of environmental monitoring stations will be
              established in the two study area, with regular records of climate, hydrology,
              and soil and water chemistry taken by automatic sensors or through repeated
              field observations.  The data collected with these monitors will be analyzed to
              more fully define the major hydrologic and geochemical differences between
              conduit-flow and diffuse-flow karst systems in response to seasonal climate
              variations and individuals storms.  The results will help identify which flow
              system removes material more rapidly and will explain why and when removal
              occurs.  This research also should help determine which system sequesters
              greater amounts of carbon, thereby increasing its capacity to serve as a buffer
              against increasing carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

