Title       : Efficient Indexing for Spatiotemporal Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a9907477

Award Number: 9907477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $436804             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vassilis J. Tsotras tsotras@cs.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dimitrios Gunopulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Indexing spatiotemporal data is an important problem for many applications
              (global change, transportation, social and multimedia applications). The goal
              of this project is to provide efficient access methods for data whose geometry
              changes over time. Two time-varying spatial attributes are considered, the
              object position and extent. Based on the rate by which these spatial attributes
              change, the discrete and continuous spatiotemporal environments are identified.
              In the discrete environment, spatiotemporal data changes in discrete steps.
              Efficient ways to answer historical queries on any past state of such
              spatiotemporal data are examined. In particular, selection, neighbor,
              aggregate, join and similarity queries are addressed using a "partial
              persistence" methodology. In the continuous spatiotemporal environment, data
              changes continuously. Instead of keeping the data position/extent at discrete
              times (which would result in enormous update/storage requirements) the
              functions by which this data changes are stored. This introduces the novel
              problem of indexing functions. Using this approach, selection, neighbor and
              aggregation queries about future locations of moving objects in one and two
              dimensions are addressed. The methods used in this project are expected to
              achieve at least 30% improvement over traditional access methods. The
              applicability of the completed work reaches multiple settings, including
              Geographic Information Systems, multimedia databases and transportation
              systems. Dissemination of project findings is provided through the project's
              web page: http://www.cs.ucr.edu/~tsotras/spatio-temporal.html. 
