Title       : The Albert Einstein Distinguished Educator Fellowship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a9907382

Award Number: 9907382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77400              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. P. White tricoal@triangle-coalition.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter L. Purdy  (Principal Investigator former)
              Arthur H. Livermore  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Triangle Coalition Tech
	      1201 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  20005    202/289-2911

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Triangle Coalition for Science and Technology Education is an organization
              consisting of education associations, businesses, scientific, mathematics and
              technology societies, and a network of local and state alliances.  It has a
              fifteen year history of fostering science, mathematics and technology education
              initiatives.  An important element of the Coalition's work is to inform members
              of Congress, federal agencies, and their staffs about the importance of
              preparing, passing , and funding legislation that provides support for programs
              directed at the preservice training and inservice professional development of
              science, technology, and mathematics teachers.  

In 1990, the Triangle
              Coalition initiated the Albert Einstein Distinguished Educator Fellowship
              program for outstanding science and mathematics teachers.  Fellows demonstrate
              exceptional expertise in teaching science, technology and/or mathematics in
              elementary or secondary schools and have an interest and willingness to be
              involved in public policy areas.  All candidates have been recognized for
              excellence through the Presidential Awards for Excellence in Mathematics or
              Science Teaching or some similar award.  Einstein Fellows bring to Congress and
              selected federal agencies involved in education the insights, extensive
              knowledge and practical experience of teachers working in science and
              mathematics classrooms.  

This project supports one Einstein Fellow assigned
              to NSF's Division of Undergraduate Education (DUE) for an 11-month period and
              who works with program directors in DUE on teacher education issues and
              programs.  The Fellow serves as a valuable resource by assisting in programs
              focusing on effective mathematics and science classroom teaching, preservice
              teacher preparation, projects that link teacher preservice and inservice
              activities, and national teacher organization activities.  

The project
              provides personal support for the Fellow while working at NSF in addition to a
              variety of supporting activities and programs designed specifically for all
              Fellows in the DC area.      

