Title       : Interactions of Exocellular Proteins, Polysaccharide and Cations During
               Bioflocculation in Suspended Growth Bioreactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a9907333

Award Number: 9907333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185101             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew J. Higgins mhiggins@bucknell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9907333  Higgins  The objective of this project is to develop a fundamental
              understanding of the interactions between cations and exocellular biopolymers
              produced by microorganisms during processing of wastewaters in suspended growth
              bioreactors.  The project will address  factors that affect aggregation of
              bacteria into flocs, their settling characteristics and dewaterability. 
              Previous work has shown that lecitins, a class of proteins produced by many
              bacteria, can provide bridging opportunities for the formation of bioflocs. 
              The initial focus of this work will be to determine the role that lecitins play
              in binding polysaccharides and cations as a step toward obtaining a better
              understanding than now exists of biofloc formation.  Laboratory bioreactors
              will be used to study the effect of operational factors including the source of
              cations and their concentrations.  Sources to be investigated will include
              calcium, magnesium, sodium and iron and operational conditions will include
              mean cell residence time.  Floc samples will be analyzed for their stability,
              settling and dewateringl properties.   

Results of this project are likely
              to improve the engineering design and operation of wastewater treatment
              processes that are based on use of suspended growth biofloc reactors.  This
              research therefore has the potential of significantly improving the efficiency
              of biological treatment processes with the resulting decrease in capital and
              operation expense and/or improvement in the efficiency of processes based on
              use of suspended biologically active flocs.***

