Title       : SGER: Regulation of Expression of the Cholinergic Gene Locus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9907572

Award Number: 9907572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan K. Blusztajn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brygida Berse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mallory Pathology Assoc
	      784 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02118    617/424-5310

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              J.K. Blusztajn
SGER 9907572

Development, maintenance, and regulation of the
              processes by which nerve cells communicate with one another, termed
              neurotransmission, depends on the expression of the appropriate
              neurotransmitter genes.  Therefore, elucidation of the mechanisms involved in
              the regulation of expression of these genes is fundamental to our understanding
              of neurobiology.  Cholinergic neurons, a class of nerve cells that uses as its
              neurotransmitter a chemical called acetylcholine (ACh), are essential for
              multiple functions of the nervous system, including the control of skeletal
              muscles, autonomic activity, the central regulation of movement, and processes
              underlying learning and memory.  These cells express two proteins: choline
              acetyltransferase (ChAT), responsible for ACh synthesis, and the vesicular ACh
              transporter (VAChT), responsible for ACh transport into storage vesicles. 
              Remarkably, the genes encoding these proteins are organized into an
              evolutionarily conserved, integrated unit: the cholinergic gene locus.  This
              unique genomic organization, which likely provides for coordinated regulation
              of expression of ChAT and VAChT, also conveniently permits the study of the
              regulation of cholinergic properties with a single, focused approach.  The
              molecular mechanisms underlying the complex regulation of the cholinergic gene
              locus remain largely unknown.  Specifically, it is not known if coordination of
              VAChT and ChAT expression occurs because the two genes are adjacent  to one
              another but regulated independently, or if the cholinergic gene locus is
              regulated by one integrated mechanism.  The overall goal of the studies
              described in this proposal is to identify the molecular, biochemical, and
              cellular mechanisms that regulate the coordinated expression of the cholinergic
              gene locus.  In order to realize this goal the studies will be performed on
              SN56 cells, which have been characterized extensively in this laboratory and
              which can be considered the best experimental model of cholinergic neurons
              currently  available.  The experimental approach will employ molecular biology
              techniques.  Specifically, the coordinated regulation of ChAT and VAChT
              expression will be investigated using an artificial gene called a double
              reporter gene construct in which the sequences encoding VAChT and ChAT have
              been replaced with two different genes whose expression can be readily
              detected. The part of the gene locus that controls expression of the genes will
              remain, and its activity can be measured by monitoring expression of  the
              reporter genes. These constructs will be introduced into the SN56 cells and the
              activity of the reporter genes as well as of the expression of the endogenous
              ChAT and VAChT will be determined.  Once it is established that
regulation of
              expression of the double reporter gene construct mimics that of ChAT and VAChT,
               the structure of the construct will be systematically altered in order to
              determine those segments that provide for the coordinated expression of ChAT
              and VAChT.  The information thus obtained will contribute to current
              understanding of the cholinergic system, of the mechanisms regulating
              neurotransmission, and of the fundamental mechanisms involved in regulation of
              expression of clustered genes.

