Title       : Assessing Inner Space Through Exploration of the Deep Sea Floor Facilitating
               Education and Outreach Through Scientific Discovery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a9907680

Award Number: 9907680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81540              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Fornari dfornari@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan E. Humphris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9907680
Fornari,

The oceans cover two-thirds of our planet, and yet the
              Earth's "inner space" is largely unknown to students and the general public. 
              Marine scientists work from ships all over the globe to study the seafloor
              using towed systems, remotely operated or autonomous vehicles, and
              submersibles, such as Alvin.  Every day they make new discoveries as they study
              and learn about the ocean floor environment-the volcanoes that erupt beneath
              the ocean, the spectacular hot springs that are driven by heat from the
              interior of the Earth, and the exotic communities of organisms that form oases
              of life around the hot springs.  The advent of real-time, web-based
              communications now provides an unparalleled opportunity for students and the
              general public to share and participate in the exploration of the deep ocean. 
              The project will develop a web site for middle school (grades 6-8) and the
              general public that will provide near real-time, daily access to deep
              submergence and oceanographic research that is conducted using the facilities
              of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI).  Multidisciplinary field
              programs will take place over the next two years (1999-2001) in the Pacific and
              Indian Oceans.  These cruises involve scientists from many leading
              oceanographic institutions and universities, and focus on various problems
              associated with mid-ocean ridge volcanism, and the chemical, physical and
              biological processes associated with hydrothermal venting at the ridge axis. 
              Backed by educational modules, the web site will allow students and the general
              public to share in the daily challenges and discoveries of scientific research
              at sea, and to learn about basic scientific principles through studies of the
              natural environment.  The "Access to Inner Space (AIS)" web site will consist
              of two major components.  A series of Information Modules (InfoMods) will
              provide both general information about the oceans and the people that study
              them, as well as cruise-specific information about the natural systems to be
              studied during each cruise, the participating scientists, and the data and
              sample-collecting methodologies and technologies to be used.  Various Seagoing
              Modules (SeaMods) will provide the mechanism to enable students and the public
              to access daily updates of the progress of the cruise, including data modules
              with suggestions of how students might use the data to discover something
              interesting, and images of seafloor features and animals, and shipboard
              activities.  Post-cruise, the material will be edited and repackaged so that
              students can follow the progress of the voyage through the SeaMods, with
              illustrative materials to explain the scientific principles underlying the
              collection of data and its analysis.  This material will then be made available
              both on the AIS web site and on CD-ROMs.  The project will draw on teaching
              organizations, partnerships and societies (Sea Education Association,
              Massachusetts Marine Educators, Woods Hole Science and Technology Education
              Partnership), as well as educational materials developers (Turnstone Publishing
              Group) to 1) develop the educational modules, 2) correlate materials with
              national science education standards, and 3) test the modules in the classroom.
               The web site will be advertised through these same groups, as well as through
              the National Science Teachers Association (NSTA) and the National Marine
              Education Association (NMEA).  Finally, the web site will be provided through
              "kiosks" in selected museums and aquaria.  These would house a computer link to
              the web site, thereby allowing the general public to participate in the daily
              activities of the cruises when they are in progress, or to look at the results
              from the most recent cruise and its educational modules.  This project
              represents the first stage of a long-term goal to provide routine access to
              daily oceanographic research using ships and vehicles based at WHOI.  The
              intention is that the conceptual approach developed as a result of this work
              will have broad application for ocean-going marine scientists, and for
              universities and institutions that operate research vessels, and will allow
              them to use similar techniques to promote ocean science education and public
              outreach at their institutions in the future.  In consideration of these
              long-term objectives, WHOI has committed a significant amount (~2.5 times the
              funds requested from NSF) of cost sharing for this project.

