Title       : Dissertation Research: The Origin and Molecular Evolution of the Genes Encoding
               the Primate Hormone Chorionic Gonadotropin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9907251

Award Number: 9907251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maryellen Ruvolo ruvolo@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chorionic gonadotropin (CG) is a hormone which has a critical signaling role in
              establishing pregnancy.  The hormone has been found exclusively in primates,
              and its genetic basis has been characterized only in humans and in two monkey
              species.  No other mammals studied to date possess this hormone. This study
              will focus on elucidating the currently unknown origin and molecular
              evolutionary history of the genes encoding the two CG subunits.  

The
              researchers will test numerous primate and related mammalian species for the
              presence of genes encoding the beta subunit of CG (CG-beta).  How is it that
              humans have come to possess six copies of this gene, and baboons five copies,
              while other mammals have none?  In which species did the gene first arise?  The
              well-established techniques of Southern blotting and hybridization will be used
              to test for the presence of CG-beta genes and to map the number of gene copies
              present in each species' genome. The origin of the CG-beta genes will be traced
              by mapping the genes' presence or absence onto a tree showing the known
              relationships of the species tested.  Also, for those species possessing the
              gene, CG-beta genes will be sequenced using the polymerase chain reaction
              (PCR).  DNA substitution rates and patterns will be analyzed to reveal whether
              and when selection has adapted CG to its current role.

Chorionic
              gonadotropin presents a rare opportunity to study a gene from its origin to
              subsequent proliferation.  Therefore it promises to make a unique contribution
              to the study of molecular evolution.  This study will also provide valuable
              information about the evolution of the reproductive process in Primates. We
              know that the structure of the placenta has changed dramatically in primate
              evolution, from a placenta which is non-invasive in the lower primates to one
              which highly invades the mother's tissues and establishes an intimate
              connection between mother and fetus in humans. Some of this morphological
              change must be correlated with changes in the genes controlling reproductive
              function.  CG is one of probably several genes responsible for this major
              remodeling of the primate reproductive process over time.  Working out the
              evolution of the genes for the CG hormone, which is crucial for human
              reproduction yet does not exist outside the primates, is an important step in
              understanding how human reproduction has evolved.

