Title       : High Hopes: Careers in the Atmospheric Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9907730

Award Number: 9907730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89240              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dave Hendry   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Anthes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Windham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fdtn Advan in Sci & Edu
	      4801 Wilshire Blvd Suite 215
	      Los Angeles, CA  900103813    213/937-9911

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9907730
Hendry

The project will produce and distribute motivational and
              instructional programming for classroom use that will stimulate student
              interest in the sciences.  The materials will consist of a demonstration
              videotape and supplementary materials for use by middle and high school
              teachers, career counselors, and university admissions departments.  The
              overall goal of this project is to draw more young people, particularly
              students of color, into careers in the sciences.  The videotape will feature
              interviews with UCAR's Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and
              Science (SOARS) students and mentors as well as footage from field experiments.
               It will give students, beginning at the 6th grade level, an opportunity to
              hear from ethnically diverse, young adult role models who have gone through the
              process of making a commitment to the atmospheric sciences.  Supplementary
              materials, featuring activities developed with guidance from teachers within
              the teacher enhancement programs, Project LEARN (Laboratory Experience in
              Atmospheric Research at NCAR) and LEARN: Atmospheric Science Explorers at the
              National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), will give middle and high
              school students an idea of what it is like to de scientific research, both
              through classroom activities and through gathering data in the field.  High
              Hopes will be distributed through several channels including the National
              Educational Telecommunications Association (NETA), an organization that, for
              many years, has been responsible for arranging U.S. distribution of classroom
              television programming.  High Hopes will also be distributed and tested through
              UCAR's consortia of universities and colleges totaling 83 institutions.  The
              ultimate goal of High Hopes is to help every student understand that, if they
              work hard and seek effective support, they too can pursue the opportunities of
              the students who are featured in the video program.  High Hopes will equip
              teachers to better help their students come to this realization.  It will play
              a role, so critical in this country as demographics evolve, in increasing the
              ethnic diversity of students committing to careers in the sciences.

