Title       : Japan STA Fellowship: Chitin Perception in the Model Legume Lotus japonicus: A
               Molecular and Biochemical Comparison to a Chitin Binding Protein in Rice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1999       
File        : a9907799

Award Number: 9907799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4100               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Day   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0521400   Plant Productivity                      
Program Ref : 5921,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9907799
Day

The proposed research by Dr. Robert Bradley Day will examine
              several questions regarding chitin perception in plants. Clearly, chitin as a
              chemical signal molecule and elicitor of a number of responses in both plants
              and animals has begun to emerge in recent years as a candidate molecule for
              studying gene activation and expression following delivery of an external
              stimulus. The major hypothesis to be tested by Dr. Day is that chitin
              perception by rice in response to fungal pathogenesis (a harmful relationship)
              shares a common recognition event with chitin perception in the
              Rhizobium-legume symbiosis (a beneficial relationship). At a technical level,
              the identification of a chitin-binding protein in the model legume Lotus
              japonicus which is homologous to that identified in rice will lead to a better
              understanding of chitin perception in general, and of its role in cellular
              interactions. 

This award supports a two-year Science and Technology Agency
              of Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Robert Bradley Day at the
              National Institute of Agrobiological Resources, Ministry of Agriculture,
              Forestry and Fisheries, Tsukuba, Japan. Dr. Day will work with Dr. Naoto
              Shibuya, Director of the Department of Biotechnology, on a project entitled,
              "Chitin Perception in the Model Legume Lotus japonicus: A Molecular and
              Biochemical Comparison to a Chitin-Binding Protein in Rice." The experiments in
              the proposed project will contribute to an understanding of the role of chitin
              perception, and to a better understanding of the mechanism of signal exchange
              and the structure-function specificity of this which appears to dictate this
              complex interaction. There are clear long-term practical applications to
              agriculture of the findings from this basic research work. The proposed work
              will benefit through collaboration with the Japanese host laboratory, where Dr.
              Day will have access to the necessary experimental systems, equipment and
              expertise.
***


