Title       : Collaborative Research Network - A Network for Global Change Research in the
               Americas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a9907233

Award Number: 9907233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10119200           (Estimated)
Investigator: Eduardo Banus banus@dir.iai.int  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brad Wilcox  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Global Change Research
	      c/o INPE, Av.dos Astronautas
	      Brazil, BR      /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1314,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI) was created by the
              Agreement Establishing the Inter American Institute for Global Change Research,
              done at Montevideo on May 13, 1992.  The IAI was created to coordinate and
              promote scientific research related to global change in the Americas.  The
              Institute has an evolving Scientific Agenda identifying particular areas for
              research. The US has played a leading role in the creation of the IAI and has
              been an active participant in the IAI since its creation.  The IAI proposes to
              carry out a plan of research according to a Science Agenda that has been
              defined by the scientific community of the Americas in a series of meetings
              held over the last five years, and has been agreed upon by the member States. 
              The Scientific Agenda is complementary to the research priorities of the US
              Global Change Research Program.  The IAI will supervise fourteen research teams
              that in total sum ninety-eight separate research institutions that will carry
              out Collaborative research on Scientific Agenda items.  The fourteen teams are
              led by the following institutions, and will carry out the following
              projects:
1. Centro de Investigaciones Cientificas y de Educacion
 Superior
              de Ensenada (Mexico):  An Eastern Pacific
 Consortium for Research on Global
              Change in Coastal and
 Oceanic Regions
2. Escuela Politecnica del Litoral
              (Ecuador):  Multi
 Objective Study of Climate Variability for Impact

              Mitigation in the Trade Convergence Climate Complex Region 3. Florida
              International University (USA):  Andean Amazon
 Rivers Analysis and Management
              (AARAM) Project
4. Fundacao Oswaldo Cruz (Brazil):  Diagnostics and

              Prediction of Climate Variability and Human Health Impacts
 in the Tropical
              Americas
5. Scripps Institute of Oceanography/University of
 California at
              San Diego (USA):  Enhanced Ultraviolet-B
 Radiation in Natural Ecosystems as
              an Added Perturbation
 Due to Ozone Development
6. The Network for Social
              Studies on Disaster Prevention in
 Latin America (Peru):  ENSO Disaster Risk
              Management in
 Latin America: A Proposal for the Consolidation of a
 Regional
              Network for Comparative Research, Information and
 Training from a Social
              Perspective
7. Universidad Autonoma de Mexico (Mexico):  Climate
 Variability
              and its Impacts in the Mexican, Central
 American and Caribbean Regions
8.
              Universidad de Buenos Aires (Argentina):  Development of
 a Collaborative
              Research Network for the Study of Regional
 Climate Variability and Changes,
              their Prediction and
 Impact in the MERCOSUR Area
9. Universidad de Buenos
              Aires (Argentina):  The Effects of
 Biodiversity on Ecosystem Functioning: A
              Comparison Across
 the Americas
10. Universidad de los Andes (Venezuela): 
              Comparative
 Studies of Global Change Effects on the Vegetation of Two

              Tropical Ecosystems: the High Mountain and the Seasonal
 Savanna
11.
              Universidade do Sao Paulo (Brazil):  An International
Consortium for the Study
              of Global and Climate Changes in
  the Western South Atlantic
12. University
              of Florida (USA):  Cattle, Land Use and
 Deforestation in the Amazon: A
              Comparative Study
13. University of Saskatchewan (Canada):  Biogeochemical

              Cycles Under Land Use Change in the Semiarid Americas 
14. University of
              Western Ontario (Canada):  The Assessment
 of Present, Past and Future Climate
              Variability in the
 Americas from Treeline Environments
The teams were
              selected on the basis of submitted proposals evaluated for technical merit
              using a peer-review system. Twelve of these teams have US scientists involved
              as co-Investigators, and all have US scientists indirectly involved as
              affiliated researchers.  Results from this research will be available to the US
              scientific community, as a condition of US funding, through an electronic data
              and information system connected to the Internet.  The IAI receives additional
              support for its activities from the other Parties to the Agreement Establishing
              the IAI: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Chile, Cuba,
              the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Jamaica, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay,
              Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela.  This additional support takes the form of direct
              contributions to the IAI Budget, in-kind contributions, or in-kind contribution
              pledges made at the time of proposal submission in the form of investigator
              salaries, ship-time, computer time, logistical support, etc.
