Title       : Live @ the Exploratorium: The Faultline Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1999    
File        : a9907707

Award Number: 9907707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68213              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Semper robs@exploratorium.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Exploratorium
	      3601 Lyon Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941231099    415/563-7337

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9907707
Semper

The Exploratorium will produce Live @ the Exploratorium: The
              faultline Project, a series of Webcasts, related Internet resources, and museum
              activities that provide the public with an interactive connection to research
              on earthquakes.  The project, conducted in partnership with NSF-funded research
              efforts, will link scientists and experts to on-site and online audiences,
              providing the public with the opportunity to directly experience seismic
              research and to interact with experts in the field.  This project is intended
              to explore the use of new interactive technologies to develop a connection
              between geoscientific research and the Exploratorium's audiences, which include
              the general public visiting on field trips and using Exploratorium Internet
              resources.  The objectives of the twelve-month project are 1. To produce a
              multi-episode Webcast program from points along California faults using
              innovative remote communications technology, in which geoscience experts and
              interesting geologic sites are remotely connected to museum visitors and
              Internet visitors for interactive presentations and discussions moderated by
              Exploratorium scientific staff; and 2. To develop Internet content, including
              original materials, interactive online exhibits, archives of the live Webcasts,
              and links to other sites, that enable Internet users to access in-depth
              information about earthquakes.  The Exploratorium will enlist the support of
              partner organizations, including the American Geological Institute, the
              Southern California Earthquake Center, the U.S. Geological Survey, and
              geoscientists engaged in seismic research to develop Web resources, produce the
              Webcast programs from remote science research stations and geologic formations,
              and to promote the project to a wide public audience.  Evaluation will include
              tracking Internet visitor patterns of use and responses to an online
              questionnaire regarding educational value.  Results of the project will be
              disseminated through the Exploratorium Web site, to partner organizations, and
              through presentations at national science and museum conferences.  The project
              will serve as a pilot project for a full-scale Webcast program linking the
              public with scientific research activities around the world.

