Title       : Phytoplankton Photochemical Budgets: Translating Optical Measurements to
               Productivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2002     
File        : a9907702

Award Number: 9907702
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387014             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd M. Kana kana@hpl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugh L. MacIntyre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1389,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Detailed measurements of phytoplankton photosynthesis using mass spectrometry,
              variable fluorescence, and light absorption have detected a significant energy
              loss process under light saturation conditions. The energy loss to productivity
              is tentatively identified as cyclic electron flow around photosystem II. This
              phenomenon alters the relationship between the quantum yields of carbon
              assimilation, oxygen evolution, and photosystem II, making fluorescence-based
              estimates of primary productivity (carbon-based) inaccurate. The research
              will
characterize specific environmental conditions (fluctuating light and
              nutrient availability) that are expected to affect the expression of this
              process. Experiments will be conducted on six taxonomically diverse microalgal
              species using O-18 mass spectrometry, C-14 bicarbonate assimilation, variable
              fluorescence, and light absorption measurements to measure a) total electron
              flow through photosystem II, b) true gross oxygen evolution, c) light dependent
              oxygen
uptake, and d) carbon assimilation. These data will be used to
              partition the energy flow between light absorption, photochemical activity,
              non-cyclic electron transport, and electron transport to carbon production,
              thereby identifying the magnitude and environmental control of energy
              dissipation processes that are hidden from conventional methods. The project
              has a significant bearing on the use of bio-optical and fluorescence methods
              used in Biological Oceanography to assess primary productivity remotely and in
              situ.

