Title       : Surface Forces at Electrified Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9907687

Award Number: 9907687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Kyle Vanderlick vandertk@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1317,1414,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-9907687
T.K. Vanderlick
Princeton University

Summary

The aim of this
              proposal is to use direct force measurements to investigate the structure and
              properties of electrified interfaces.  Such interfaces are, of course, of
              premier importance in the far-reaching and significant field of
              electrochemistry.  In addition, however, electrochemical based forces play
              significant roles in biology (e.g. establishing the conformation and function
              of biomolecules), in physical chemistry (e.g., swelling of clays), in
              engineering (e.g., stabilization of colloids and emulsions), and in many
              industrial processes.

While the electrode/electrode interface is one of the
              most complex solid/liquid interfaces, its structure can be effectively
              interrogated through the measurement of surface forces.  Such interrogations
              can take advantage of the range and strength of electrostatic interactions, as
              well as the ability to modify interactions by changing the applied potential to
              the electrochemically active surfaces.  Forces acting between surfaces reflect
              the structural details of the surfaces themselves as well as that of the medium
              trapped between them.

The primary tool for the proposed investigations is an
              "electrochemical surface forces apparatus."  This new device extends the unique
              capabilities of the surface forces apparatus to systems in which one, or both,
              interacting surfaces is metallic and under applied potential control.  The
              proposed work is divided along three themes providing opportunities for a range
              of significant scientific and technological advances.

The first theme of
              research is to use force profiling to elucidate the basic structure of
              electrode/electrolyte interfaces.  The objective is to measure, as a function
              of separation, the forces of interaction between surfaces where one, or both,
              are typical electrode materials, namely gold (Au), silver (Ag) or platinum
              (Pt).  Forces will be measured as a function of the potential applied to the
              surfaces and also the nature of the electrolyte.  The role of specific
              adsorption of anions will be explicitly investigated.  The most basic
              experiment will involve interactions between molecularly smooth mica and one
              electrochemically active surface, acting as a working electrode.  Specific
              objectives include establishing the potential of zero charge for the various
              electrochemical systems; testing DLVO predictions for interactions between
              dissimilar surfaces; establishing the limits of application of DLVO theory, and
              probing the short-range structure of electrode/electrolyte interfaces.

The
              second theme of research is to study the adhesion and associated deformations
              of electrified surfaces.  The framework of contact mechanics will be used to
              study the loading and unloading behavior of electrified surfaces under
              potential control.  One system of investigation will be mica in contact with
              gold.  The electrochemical nature of gold surfaces (three distinct potential
              regimes: Au/AuOH/AuO) provides a rich foundation for these
              investigations.

The third theme of research focuses on a variety of
              electrode modifications schemes for selective and active control of surface
              forces.  The goal is to demonstrate how certain molecular adsorbates or coating
              formed on electrodes can serve to alter their interactions with other surfaces
              in useful and novel ways.  Systems for study include ionizable self-assembled
              monolayers which respond to pH changes; self-assembled monolayers that release
              attached molecules when electrical potentials are applied the underlying metal
              substrate; and adsorbed surfactant monolayers which undergo structural changes
              with applied potential.  Alteration of electrode surfaces by underpotential
              deposition of metals will be also examined.

