Title       : Integrating Research Data into K-16 Geoscience Education with Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1999 
File        : a9907735

Award Number: 9907735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69083              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kent C. Kirkby kirkby@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9907735
Kirby

This project has developed techniques to translate research
              data sets and numerical models into three-dimensional interactive computer
              visualizations.  These innovative visualizations represent one of the most
              effective ways to integrate research into all levels of elementary, secondary,
              and undergraduate geoscience education.  The visualizations run on personal
              computers so that educational institutions, Independent Study and Distance
              Learning programs can use them.  The visualization modules can effectively
              expand geoscience education well beyond traditional lecture and lab settings
              and allow students to manipulate data sets in a manner that has previously been
              limited to research environments.  The current projects expands these
              visualization efforts into a number of new research areas, translates
              additional data sets for educational purposes and develops partnerships with
              existing geoscience initiatives to disseminate the materials and develop K-12
              versions of the undergraduate modules.  The project will produce three new
              computer modules centered about visualizations of research data sets and
              quantitative models.  These visualizations are integrated into text,
              animations, and still images that provide background for the visualizations, a
              framework in which to explore the material, and establish the relevance of the
              material to modern Earth Systems and human society.  The modules are
              specifically designed to cross traditional discipline boundaries and tie
              diverse subjects together.  This gives the modules a unique pedagogical
              perspective compared to more traditional course materials.  A flexible format
              greatly expands the modules utility, allows them to be used as visuals in a
              lecture, self-guided students tutorials or resource material.  The modules can
              be distributed over the Internet or as  CD-ROMs.  They will work on Macintosh
              or Windows-based personal computers and are in HTML format so the materials run
              on commercial browsers.  This technology allows the material to be presented in
              a computer environment that is already familiar to students and educators. 
              Reliance on commercial software and Internet technology also maximizes the
              accessibility and longevity of the materials.

