Title       : Collaborative Research: Supporting Effective Access Through User-and Topic-Based
               Language Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a9907018

Award Number: 9907018
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $466773             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Bruce Croft croft@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Allan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative project combines the expertise and experience of Professors
              Bruce Croft and James Allan at the University of Massachusetts in the
              development and testing of information retrieval models and systems, with that
              of Professor Nicholas Belkin at Rutgers University in user modeling and user
              studies in interactive systems. Tools to support information retrieval and
              filtering have become common, but in many important respects their performance
              is mediocre. They make mistakes that are obvious and aggravating to users, and
              relevant documents are usually mixed with many others that are totally
              unrelated. These problems significantly lower the productivity and
              effectiveness of people using the tools, whether in education, science,
              business, or government. This project investigates a new approach to user and
              topic modeling that has the potential to significantly improve the
              effectiveness of information access and filtering. This approach is based on
              recent research on language models for information retrieval. Language models
              appear to capture the important aspects of user and domain modeling that have
              been observed in earlier experiments, and retrieval techniques based on
              document language models have been shown to be very effective. This project
              combines standard research methodology using TREC data, experimental and
              observational user studies in laboratory settings, and studies of the impact in
              operational environments with many users. It will significantly advance
              understanding of the impact of user- and topic-models on the important problems
              of information indexing, retrieval, and access. 
