Title       : Dissertation Research: At the Edge of the Aztec Empire: An Archaeological and
               Ethnohistorical Study in Chacalapan, Southern Veracruz, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9907262

Award Number: 9907262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6580               (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman D. Hammond ndch@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Norman Hammond, MS Chantal Esquivias will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation. Her research will focus on the Postclassic
              period on the Southern Veracruz Gulf coast of Mexico and she will supplement
              her prior archaeological survey with stratigraphic excavation. She will also
              conduct archival study in Seville Spain. During the Postclassic period, which
              ended with the arrival of the Spanish, the Mayan peoples moved away from large
              temple centers and broke down into smaller groups. At the same time the Aztec
              empire arose in the highlands of Central Mexico and extended its influence over
              a broad area. Archaeologists wish to understand how such empires function and
              maintain control over multiple ethnic groups distributed over broad geographic
              regions. A number of strategies ranging from direct empirical control to looser
              forms of alliance have been proposed and likely different approaches were
              employed in different situations. Southern Veracruz lies at, or slightly beyond
              the boundary of the Aztec empire and MS Esquivias will examine how this area
              was affected by it. To accomplish this goal she will combine archaeological
              excavation with archival analysis. Spanish documents describe the social
              organization of the region at the time of conquest and enumerate land claims
              and land holdings. On this basis it should be possible to reconstruct many
              aspects of social and political organization. Archaeological data will allow MS
              Esquivias to address questions of Aztec influence directly. Very little is
              known about the Postclassic in this region and she will conduct test
              excavations at a number of sites to  establish a ceramic sequence. She will
              search for diagnostic ceramic types and use these to gain insight into
              Postclassic settlement pattern. From work in other areas, it is known that
              several kinds of ceramics are Aztec related and the presence or absence of such
              materials in Southern Veracruz will serve to determine Aztec penetration into
              this region.

This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
              data on a little known region which will be of interest to many archaeologists.
              It will yield new information on how empires functioned and assist in training
              a promising young scientist.

