Title       : Wari Administration and Residential Space in the Osmore Drainage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a9907167

Award Number: 9907167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11974              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Moseley moseley@anthro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Michael Moseley, MS Donna Nash will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. Her archaeological research will focus on the region
              surrounding the site of Cerro Baul which is located in the Osmore drainage in
              Southern Peru. During the period from ca. 500 - 1000 AD two states, termed
              "Wari" and "Tiwanaku" arose in the Southern Andes and this situation provides a
              rare opportunity to study the interactions between early simple state level
              societies. The Osmore drainage appears to mark a boundary between the two and
              archaeological remains of both are found in this region. While it is often
              possible to assign sites to one state or the other based on ceramic remains, in
              other cases such determinations are more difficult because distinctively
              decorated sherds are lacking. MS Nash plans to approach the problem through an
              analysis of household organization. Based on work at large high status sites a
              distinctive Wari pattern which combines domestic and ritual/administrative
              activities within single structures has been observed. Although it has been
              postulated to be the case, it is not certain whether this same pattern also
              exists in the more numerous lower status dwellings. In prior work MS Nash and
              her collaborators have located a number of small Wari structures and with NSF
              support she will excavate ten of them. From the distribution of ceramics,
              lithics and other remains recovered she will determine both the nature and
              placement of activities. Because some sites will likely contain little
              habitation debris MS Nash will collect soil samples and determine chemical
              signatures which are activity related.

This research is important for
              several reasons. It will provide insight into the political and social
              organization of an early state society. It will also develop a spatial
              signature which will help to define the Wari presence in other regions of Peru.
              Finally it will assist in training a promising young scientist.

