Title       : Computing at the LHC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a9907895

Award Number: 9907895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marvin Goldberg                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Willis willis@nevis1.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael H. Shaevitz  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1221      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL USER
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9907895
Shaevitz
The Large Hadron Collider at CERN is expected to turn on in
              2005, At that time, each of the detectors, CMS and ATLAS, is expected to
              produce over a petabyte of raw data per year.  From these raw data, complex
              codes using the very latest object oriented software techniques will
              reconstruct the collision products of millions of "events".  These codes will
              require fast access to huge databases that contain the complete detector
              description, which includes millions of calibration constants.  In addition,
              roughly an order of magnitude more "events" than the real data will be
              generated via Monte Carlo techniques to determine trigger, reconstruction, and
              other
efficiencies.  All these computer operations will occur at the
              CERN
laboratory in Geneva Switzerland and at several regional centers located
              throughout the world.  CMS and ATLAS each will establish a regional center in
              the USA. All of the collaborating universities and laboratories in CMS and
              ATLAS (about 50 for each collaboration in the USA) will need fast and
              convenient access to the reconstructed data, both real and simulated, to
              perform physics analysis.  This is essential if the physicists distributed
              throughout the USA are to have maximum impact on the physics output of these
              pioneering experiments. Through the R&D efforts outlined in this proposal, the
              process through which the analysis of the physics produced by
the LHC
              detectors at CERN can be analyzed by research groups in the US can take place
              in a timely manner. 

9907895
Shaevitz
The Large Hadron Collider at CERN is
              expected to turn on in 2005, At that time, each of the detectors, CMS and
              ATLAS, is expected to produce over a petabyte of raw data per year.  From these
              raw data, complex codes using the very latest object oriented software
              techniques will reconstruct the collision products of millions of "events". 
              These codes will require fast access to huge databases that contain the
              complete detector description, which includes millions of calibration
              constants.  In addition, roughly an order of magnitude more "events" than the
              real data will be generated via Monte Carlo techniques to determine trigger,
              reconstruction, and other
efficiencies.  All these computer operations will
              occur at the CERN
laboratory in Geneva Switzerland and at several regional
              centers located throughout the world.  CMS and ATLAS each will establish a
              regional center in the USA. All of the collaborating universities and
              laboratories in CMS and ATLAS (about 50 for each collaboration in the USA) will
              need fast and convenient access to the reconstructed data, both real and
              simulated, to perform physics analysis.  This is essential if the physicists
              distributed throughout the USA are to have maximum impact on the physics output
              of these pioneering experiments. Through the R&D efforts outlined in this
              proposal, the process through which the analysis of the physics produced
              by
the LHC detectors at CERN can be analyzed by research groups in the US can
              take place in a timely manner. 


