Title       : Community-Based Rain and Hail Studies - Practical Geoscience Education for All
               Ages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1999    
File        : a9907671

Award Number: 9907671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88203              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger A. Pielke Sr. pielke@atmos.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nolan J. Doesken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Rutledge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victoria M. Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9907671
Pielke

Rain is the simple outcome of complex atmospheric processes,
              the most universally apparent portion of the hydrologic cycle, and the
              lifeblood of agriculture.  Hail is a less common but more dramatic form of
              precipitation that can damage property and crops and, on occasional, injure
              animals and humans.  In 1998 a project was initiated in Colorado using
              interested students grades 4-12 along with adults and senior citizens to
              observe and record the detailed local rain and hail patterns associated with
              summer precipitation.  This project was very successful in getting kids
              involved with scientists and community leaders in simple but very important and
              practical local research examining small-scale variations in rain and hail and
              their consequences.  This project will build on the successes of the highly
              regarded 1998 demonstration.  The enthusiasm of students and teachers, and the
              universal weather curiosity of adults and senior citizens, will be tapped to
              help create community-based rain and hail observation networks.  Volunteers,
              teachers, student leaders, community business partners, local scientists, and
              interested government officials will work together, using internet
              communications and other helpful tools, to generate maps showing very detailed
              local patterns in rain and hail associated with each passing storm.  These
              maps, and what goes into making them, become the scientific information source
              for classroom education, applied research, business and utility applications,
              media distribution and community interest and support.  This project is called
              the Collaborative Community Rain and Hail Study (CoCo RaHS).  A variety of
              tools will be developed so that communities across the country can set up their
              own local projects.  Tools and materials will include a promotional training
              video, a leadership handbook detailing steps in setting up a project, high
              quality but simple low-cost instruments for measuring rain and hail, computer
              software for handling data, and a CoCo RaHS website.  Educational materials and
              lesson plans for teachers will be written to take advantage of this unique
              participatory science education project and help achieve several of the
              educational standards that are now a foundation for science education. 
              Strategies for encouraging community participation and support will be
              developed to help connect local scientists and practitioners with classroom
              teaching opportunities, to provide student opportunities to work with
              scientists in research discovery, and to demonstrate the direct and immediate
              local impacts derived from observed rain and hail patterns.  One scientific
              application of national importance will be emphasized.  Doppler radar has been
              used increasingly in recent years to remotely estimate rainfall rates, locate
              areas of flash flooding, determine where hail is occurring and locate other
              severe weather events.  This technology is extremely useful, but is still prone
              to error and uncertainty.  Through collaboration with radar scientists with the
              National Science Foundation-supported CSU-CHILL National Radar Facility, new
              algorithms for remotely distinguishing rain from hail will be tested and
              rainfall estimation procedures will be evaluated from the perspective of
              polarimeteric radar (CSU-CHILL) and conventional Doppler radar (NEXRAD).  This
              project will demonstrate that science does not need to be incomprehensibly
              complex to be significant.  It will show that community members of all ages can
              make scientific contributions that help their community and also support
              national research efforts.  This project will help propel a new generation of
              application-minded young scientists.

