Title       : US-Egypt Workshop: High Energy Physics, Cairo, Egypt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9907570

Award Number: 9907570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Qaisar Shafi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bartol Research Institute
	      University of Delaware
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5944,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9907570
Shafi

Description:  This award is for support of a US-Egypt
              Symposium on High Energy Physics scheduled for November 4-11, 1999 in Cairo,
              Egypt.  The US organizer is Dr. Qaisar Shafi, Professor of Physics, Bartol
              Research Institute, University of Delaware.  The Egyptian organizer is Dr.
              Shaaban Khalil, of the Department of Mathematics, Ain Shams University, Cairo,
              Egypt.  This is the first such meeting to be held in that region, and includes
              the following topics for discussion: status of the standard model, Neutrino
              Physics, Phenomenology of the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model,
              Experimental searches of Supersymmetry, Supergravity, String Theory, Dualities,
              M-theory, and Particle Physics and Cosmology.  In addition to the US
              participants, there will be participants from several European research centers
              such as CERN and from universities in Europe.

Scope:  This award will allow
              US scientists to participate in a meeting, with physicists from Egypt and other
              countries in the region, to discuss recent advances in various areas in the
              field of high energy physics.  The US group is expected to include five
              graduate students and postdoctoral scientists.  Lectures will be presented
              mainly by the US and the European participants and also by physicists from the
              region.  The US participants include some of the most eminent scientists in the
              field. Other participants from Europe are also among the best known high-energy
              physicists.  This meeting is to encourage physicists and students of physics
              from the region to participate in this exciting area, especially in the
              theoretical part, which does require expensive equipment or facilities.  It
              will also encourage them to participate in experimental work in the United
              States and Europe.  The participation of graduate students and postdoctoral
              staff will give them early international science experience.  This proposal
              meets the INT objective of supporting meetings with high potential for
              increasing US-foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit. 

