Title       : FSML: Collaborative Planning for the Woodlake Environmental and Bath Field
               Stations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1999  
File        : a9907585

Award Number: 9907585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23875              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Tumeo m.tumeo@csuohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              B. Michael Walton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cleveland State University
	      East 24th and Euclid Ave
	      Cleveland, OH  44115    216/687-2000

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Cleveland State University, representing the partners of the Woodlake
              Environmental Field Station, and the University of Akron will conduct a
              collaborative, coordinated planning effort for two field stations located in
              the Cuyahoga watershed of Northeast Ohio.  A central goal for the field
              stations is to support a research focus in urban ecology, especially studies of
              environmental change at the urban fringe and the effects of urban encroachment
              on previously undisturbed habitats and protected parklands.  The vision is that
              the stations will become regional and national centers for such research, and
              that work conducted there will contribute in a significant way to our
              understanding of urban ecosystems.  Also, the field stations will serve as core
              facilities for a consortium of researchers from several institutions.  The
              Woodlake Environmental and Bath Field Stations are also intended to become
              important regional and national resources in environmental education.  The
              broad ecological, socioeconomic, and land use coverage of this network will
              facilitate exciting educational opportunities highlighting the effects humans,
              their institutions, and activities  have on ecosystems.

To insure that the
              facilities, equipment, research and educational programs of the two field
              stations are properly developed and integrated for use in the broader
              scientific community, this project will  support  visits to other field
              stations and workshops in three areas: research, education, and station
              management.  The site visits will allow the examination of the infrastructure
              and land-management practices of several successful field stations, allowing
              the development of similar models at the two stations.  In the workshops,
              guidance will be sought from managers of established field stations and from
              distinguished researchers in the field of urban ecology. 

