Title       : Ontogeny and Dynamics of Cnidarian-Algal Symbioses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a9907319

Award Number: 9907319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Alice Coffroth coffroth@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Symbioses between cnidarians and dinoflagellates in the genus Symbiodinium are
              widespread in the marine environment. Their importance to reef-building corals
              and reef nutrient cycles is well documented, but surprisingly little is known
              about the ontogeny of the symbiosis and the demographics of zooxanthellae
              populations within their hosts. This project will examine the dynamics of the
              symbiosis in gorgonian corals that produce azooxanthellate planula larvae, from
              initial uptake of zooxanthellae through to the host adult colony and host
              population. Data on genetic structure of symbiont communities and in situ field
              studies will be used to elucidate the mechanisms by which zooxanthella
              populations within a host are established and maintained. Diversity of
              zooxanthellae within and between gorgonian hosts will be examined to establish
              whether there are taxa specific to given habitats or given host species.  This
              will identify the level of Symbiodinium-host specificity.

Molecular
              techniques (DNA fingerprinting, microsatellite polymorphic loci and restriction
              fragment length polymorphism in small subunit ribosomal genes) will be used to
              characterize algal genotypes in the initial zooxanthella colonization of
              planulae.  Variation in zooxanthella populations within single host colonies
              and within and among host populations and species will also be characterized in
              this manner. In many gorgonian species multiple zooxanthella taxa initiate the
              symbiosis while only one dominant taxon is present in the adult symbiosis. Both
              in situ and lab controlled colonizations of azooxanthellate planulae of the
              gorgonians Plexaura kuna, Pseudoplexauraporosa, Pseudopterogorgia efisabethae
              and Briareum asbestinum will be followed to elucidate the mechanism by which
              these associations change over the course of host development. The zooxanthella
              populations in adult gorgonians will also be characterized to determine the
              diversity of the colonizing algal populations, whether changes in zooxanthella
              populations can be induced and whether zooxanthellae within a given host
              reflect host-algal specificity, environmental selection among zooxanthellae or
              simply a stochastic, founder effect.

Understanding the dynamics of
              zooxanthella populations has important ramifications for studying the symbiosis
              and understanding how the symbiosis responds to environmental changes. It is
              now recognized that zooxanthellae are a diverse group. If this diversity is
              widespread within single host colonies or if the association is in a state of
              continual flux, then changes in functional and physiologic traits may reflect
              changes in the within host algal community structure. An understanding of these
              processes is essential to understanding the symbiosis. For instance,
              physiologic adaptations to conditions such as temperature and light may in fact
              be mediated by the demographics of the algal symbionts. In this case it will be
              critical to examine each component of the symbiosis and consider the population
              dynamics and ecological responses of both the coral and the algae to understand
              and conserve reef ecosystems. The first step, however, is to quantify this
              diversity and address how this diversity is established. 

