Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Maize Breeding and Sustainable Agriculture in
               Portugal: The Relative Contribution of Farmer & Scientist Knowledge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9907162

Award Number: 9907162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11976              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Cleveland clevelan@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project addresses a critical problem for agricultural
              development in Portugal and elsewhere in the world where farmers and scientists
              are attempting to collaborate in the co-management and development of natural
              resources. Currently there is growing concern for developing sustainable
              agricultural systems that build on local knowledge and skill. This has
              motivated much interest in collaborative plant breeding between scientists and
              farmers. However, there are critical areas of plant breeding in which the
              relative comparability of farmer and scientific knowledge remains unclear. The
              researcher  will conduct an ethnography of plant breeding knowledge
              specifically focusing on the "procedural" or "working knowledge" which is
              common to both farmers and scientists. The goal is to understand how farmers
              and scientists construct their respective knowledge about crop biology and farm
              ecology in relation to daily work routines and technical practices, the
              physical processes involved in acquiring experience, and the social and
              material contexts in which theoretical, empirical and intuitive knowledge is
              produced. The researcher will examine these processes using a combination of
              visual and other descriptive data for samples of farmers and scientists,
              including a case study of collaboration between a scientist and a
              farmer-breeder in Northwest Portugal.


