Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Integrated Assessment and Projection of
               Land-Use/Cover Change in the Southern Yucatan Peninsular Region of Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9907952

Award Number: 9907952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5423               (Estimated)
Investigator: Billie L. Turner bturner@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven M. Manson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1094,9179,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Global environmental change confronts humankind in many important
ways. 
              Tropical deforestation is one of the most pressing problems because
of its
              significant roles as a source and sink of greenhouse gases, a
depository of
              biotic diversity, a determinant of local climate, and as the
resource base for
              a rapidly growing population worldwide.  Much of the work
on tropical
              deforestation to date has focused on science independent of
policy relevance. 
              The proposed research seeks to redress this situation.
It develops an
              explicitly policy-oriented model to project trends and
scenarios of tropical
              deforestation for one of the remaining large blocks of
tropical forests in
              southern Mexico.  As this area is subject to growing
immigration and resource
              extraction, resource managers and institutions are 
faced with a bewildering
              array of immediate and longer term decisions.  
The model therefore considers
              deforestation as the result of peasant farmer
decision making in the context
              of an array of complex biophysical and
socioeconomic environments.  A new type
              of simulation model will be
developed, one that captures the "reality" of the
              situation but yet provides
outputs that are policy relevant.  The model does
              so by: (1) examining how
individual decision making is affected by
              environmental and socioeconomic
constraints; (2) incorporating explicit
              spatial and temporal patterns of
forest change; (3) assessing the role of the
              value of information and
uncertainty; and (4) permitting stakeholders and
              policy makers to evaluate
scenarios of alternative land-use and institutional
              strategies.  The model
is not conceptually derived but based on household
              surveys, archival
research, and spatial data including aerial photography,
              satellite imagery,
and maps of land-use and biophysical characteristics.

