Title       : Conference on Geographic Information and Society to be held at the University of
               Minnesota; June 20-22, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1999     
File        : a9907904

Award Number: 9907904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric S. Sheppard shepp001@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,1345,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This conference on 'Geographic Information and Society' will be the first in a
              series of international conferences targeted broadly at researchers in academic
              disciplines engaging GIS-related activities, as well as practitioners in
              community organizations, government, and industry.  The motivation for such a
              conference series derives from an evolving recognition, spurred by academic
              debates over the past decade, that there are societal and theoretical
              implications of how people, space, and environment are represented within a
              geographical information system (GIS).  Specifically, GISs tend to embed a
              powerful, yet limited, conceptualization of Cartesian space (i.e., an inert,
              three-dimensional spatial reference framework) deep into the practices that
              surround their applications.  This perspective does not easily allow the
              realistic representation of such contextually rich and societally mediated
              concepts such as poverty, place, race, or neighborhood.  In this way, complex
              constructs are simplified and reduced to rigid, geometric categorizations
              (points, lines, and bounded areas) simply to accommodate the limitations of the
              technology.  The inherent danger is that geographic and social meanings may be
              misconstrued or misrepresented, and yet, these communicated meanings form the
              foundation for urban and environmental planning and for political and social
              practices.  These specific concerns regarding GIS follow on earlier ideas
              presented at specialist workshops conducted under the auspices of the National
              Center for Geographic Information and Analysis, and they are part of a larger
              engagement of the implications of information technologies for future societies
              in general.  

The conference will facilitate the exchange of ideas and
              catalyze further research on topics such as the ethical and legal aspects of
              GIS, uses and value of geographic information, grassroots organizations and
              access to information technologies, geographic representation of societal
              phenomena, and the ethics of geographically targeted marketing practices.  The
              award will be directed exclusively to facilitating the involvement of graduate
              students in the conference and will not be used to underwrite other portions of
              the conference.


