Title       : Modeling Human-Body Soft Tissues for Surgical Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2001      
File        : a9907060

Award Number: 9907060
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379761             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Claude Latombe latombe@robotics.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

IIS-9907060
Latombe, Jean-Claude
Stanford University
$122,673 -
              12 mos.

Modeling Human-Body Soft Tissues for Surgical Applications

This
              is the first year funding of a three year continuing award. The goal of this
              research is to develop a general-purpose  computational scheme for representing
              the geometry and physics of  human-body soft-tissue structures and simulating
              their displacements 
and deformations in real-time when external forces are
              applied by surgical instruments. The ability to realistically model soft
              tissues on a computer has the potential to radically change the ways surgery is
              currently taught and practiced. Virtual environments simulating deformable
              tissues will allow medical students to extensively practice delicate operations
              and confirmed surgeons to re-train themselves and maintain their skills for
              infrequent operations. Soft-tissue simulations will become essential to plan
              and rehearse surgical operations. The on-line availability of the models will
              make it possible to give intra-operative assistance to the surgeons. It will
              enable the introduction of roboticized instruments that will perform
              operations, either automatically or in interaction with surgeons. Research on
              soft-tissue modeling will directly benefit domains such as robotics, where the
              modeling of environments containing deformable objects is increasingly
              important; computer vision, where the task of tracking objects undergoing
              continuous deformations is central to understanding image sequences; and
              computer graphics, especially for the animation of virtual
              characters.

Previous research on soft-tissue modeling provides foundations
              on which the proposed research is based. In particular, as several researchers
              have suggested before, tissue structures will be modeled by meshes of point
              masses connected by elastic links, the so-called mass-spring elastic meshes.
              The research program includes both the theoretical development of a
              computational scheme based on the elastic mesh concept and the
              implementation/experimentation/evaluation of this scheme within a
              state-of-the-art virtual reality environment. The experiments will be conducted
              in the context of two applications: micro-anastomosis (the suturing of small
              blood vessels) and craniofacial surgery. This experimental effort will be
              critical to the validation of the results.

The unique features that this
              research expects to achieve are the following: - Modeling of complex tissue
              structures. Most existing models can only represent a tissue with uniform and
              isotropic elastic properties. Techniques will be developed to specifically
              model multiple adjacent soft tissues and their attachment to bones. - Realistic
              modeling of the mechanical response of individual tissues. To simplify
              computations a number of models assume linear elastic models. But human-body
              tissues are nonlinear and exhibit some 
hysteresis. These properties will be
              captured in the new modeling scheme. - Modeling changes in tissue topology.
              External forces may cause topological changes in tissue structures, such as
              tissue cutting or tearing and formation of new contacts. A significant portion
              of the effort will be directed toward the effective modeling of such
              changes.
- Dynamic simulation. A simulator may only compute static equilibrium
              states of a tissue. Instead, by taking inertia and viscosity into account, it
              may compute the successive shapes of the tissue as it deforms toward
              equilibrium. The research will focus on 
the second type of simulation. -
              Automatic construction of tissue models. Techniques will be developed to
              automatically generate complex elastic meshes and adjust their mechanical
              parameters from various imaging sources (e.g., video, laser scans, Computed
              Tomography, Magnetic Resonance Imaging).

The research will be conducted in
              close collaboration between the Computer Science Department, the Functional
              Restoration Department, and the Stanford-NASA National Biocomputation Center. A
              key mission of this center is to accelerate the transfer of imaging and
              visualization technologies to operating rooms and surgical training.


