Title       : FSML: Facilities Development: Implementation of 1997 Planning Workshop
               Recommendations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9907662

Award Number: 9907662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie M. Holland mholland@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford A. Ochs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Benson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred Thomas Mikell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The University of Mississippi Field Station (UMFS), established at Bay Springs
              18 km northeast of The University's main campus in 1986, is a research facility
              in northern Mississippi dedicated to long-term ecological research.  Staff,
              visiting investigators, and students conduct research in disciplines as diverse
              as hydrology, botany, soil science, genetics, herpetology, pharmacology,
              toxicology, ecology, limnology, fisheries biology, and physiology.  Use of the
              facility is often intense.  Areas of research strength emphasize ecosystem
              processes.  Complementary education programs involve research training for
              graduate and undergraduate students, use by college classes, and K-12 and
              community environmental education.  UMFS supports research and education by
              providing access to study areas and organisms on its 740 acre (296 ha.)
              preserve.  The Station's 223 research ponds, five spring ponds, and 220 acres
              (90 ha.) of associated upland habitat are among its greatest assets.

As
              articulated during the 1997 planning workshop, the overall vision for UMFS is
              to become a regionally, nationally, and internationally important station for 
              field research, teaching and service over the next 18 years.  The Center for
              Water and Wetland Resources (CWWR) at UMFS represents a major step towards
              fulfilling this goal.  The May 2000 dedication ceremony for the CWWR complex 
              will coincide with UMFS-hosted international conference on wetlands.  The
              dedication ceremony and the conference are envisioned to attract much interest
              in the scientific community.  The response to date has been very
              encouraging.

Among the numerous recommendations offered by the 1997 workshop
              participants two are developed in the proposal.  Construction of housing and
              construction of a Multipurpose-Fabrication Building for The University of
              Mississippi Field Station will be supported by this project.  Field Stations
              are often defined by having resident scientists and students on site conducting
              research throughout the year.  Visiting scientists and researchers from other
              parts of the globe can be encouraged to visit UMFS by providing on-site
              housing.  The Multipurpose-Fabrication Building will also serve as a field and
              lab/equipment design, development and maintenance shop.  There are currently no
              facilities on site to build or repair equipment needed for research use.  A
              Fabrication Lab would also serve as an area to house all of the existing
              equipment currently at the Field Station.  A building that can provide such
              practical convenience is essential to the mission of the Station in providing
              support for educational and research activities. 

