Title       : Dynamic Properties of Picoplankton Over the Annual Cycle in Near-Polar Lakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2001  
File        : a9907776

Award Number: 9907776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346375             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don K. Button dkbutton@ims.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9907776
Button   

This project will examine the dynamic properties of
              picoplankton over the annual cycle in near-polar lakes. Investigations will
              focus on describing typical bacterial species from a near-arctic freshwater
              system during the severe transition in primary productivity and temperature,
              infer the presence of key organics in their
maintenance, and quantify the
              contribution of these mostly undescribed organisms to carbon dioxide production
              rates. The study site, Harding Lake, is known to have a relatively stable
              bacterial biomass over the annual cycle. However physical properties of the
              bacteria, DNA distributions, kinetic constants and associated amino acid
              concentrations and primary productivities vary
dramatically between summer and
              winter. Focus is on the predominate
cultivation-resistant bacteria with
              attention to the small low-DNA forms. These
will be isolated and probed for
              their activity and ability to utilize various
carbon sources including those
              expected from the hydrolysis of plant material.

 A number of novel
              approaches will be used. These include recently perfected
measures of
              population, biomass per cell, cell volume, DNA content, and genome  size by
              flow cytometry. A chromosome-ratio method for growth rate will be verified at
              low values, temperature corrections reevaluated, and the method used as a probe
              of in situ rates of growth with verification by dilution culture.
DAPI-DNA
              assays will be corrected for A+T bias by simultaneously evaluating G+C content
              of individual bacteria, thereby improving subpopulation resolution.
Additional
              single-cell activity probes include RNA, reducing power and membrane potential
              for following activity in dilution cultures and more thoroughly
characterizing
              in situ populations over the annual cycle. Extinction cultures
that depend on
              naturally produced sources of carbon are used to isolate bacteria
without bias
              toward large fast-growing forms. Cultures are partitioned against
raw
              lakewater through diffusion membranes to improve culturability. Data are
used
              to determine viabilities as well as the number of species present
              by
incorporating novel formulae as well as DGGE techniques to identify the
              number
of species in developing populations. Useful carbon sources are
              evaluated
according to flow cytometry patterns from the extinction cultures
              following
nutrient amendments. Substrates used are taken as an indication of
              those present and kinetic measurements suggest their concentrations. Ability to
              use substrates at small concentrations is compared directly according to
              specific affinity and oligotrophic capacity as recently defined. Isolated
              species are identified by 16-S ribosomal RNA analysis, and in situ carbon
              dioxide evolution is calculated from growth rates according to the active
              (total less very low-DNA) biomass and associated rates of growth. Temperature
              effects on both uptake and growth are evaluated without carbon-source amendment
              to determine if rates at low temperatures collapse, or if sufficient membrane
              potential is sustained to
maintain the required specific affinities.


