Title       : Large-Scale, Long-Term and Virtual Experimental Environments for Electronic
               Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9907935

Award Number: 9907935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew B. Whinston abw@uts.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anitash Barua  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              While the Internet economy is growing rapidly, little is systematically known or
              understood regarding key business issues in this new domain. Emerging theories
              of electronic commerce and organizing electronic business are based on the
              physical economy. However, the literature on testing of related models and
              assumptions is sparse, primarily due to difficulties in collecting relevant
              field data. Field experimentation can provide valuable insights into electronic
              markets and can be a strong complement to the experimental economics
              discipline. The principal investigators have developed Experimental Digital
              Economy (EDE), an extensive technological environment for creating a long-term
              virtual electronic market. Real digital goods are produced and traded through
              EDE and consumed by agents based on real incentives. It enables the testing of
              propositions and hypotheses generated from economics based modeling of
              competition and consumer behavior in an electronic market, and can also lead to
              systematic discoveries. Prior experiments with EDE have led to insights
              regarding successful business strategies (e.g., mass customization, selling
              format, etc.) and processes (e.g., customer care, coordination) for digital
              products companies. The proposed research will explore the effectiveness of
              various market mechanisms (e.g., posted prices and auction systems,
              intermediary-based certification and reputation building, etc.) for information
              and software goods.





