Title       : Multiobjective Robust Control of Linear Parameter Varying Systems and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1999  
File        : a9907051

Award Number: 9907051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario Sznaier msznaier@frodo.ee.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9907051
Sznaier

Robust  control  of  linear  time  invariant  systems  has 
              undergone extensive  developments.  In  the  past  two  decades,  leading  to
              powerful formalisms such as H-infinity, mu-synthesis/analysis and, more
              recently, L-1 optimal control, that have been successfully applied to
              challenging practical problems.  In contrast,  practical tools for handling
              linear parameter varying plants have just emerged and are  still  far  from 
              complete.  Among  others,  issues  yet  to  be resolved include
              non-conservative handling of multiple performance specifications,  complexity 
              of  both  the  design  method  and  the resulting  controllers,  and  the 
              development  of  identification methods  compatible  with  these  design 
              techniques.  The  proposed research is aimed at removing these limitations by
              incorporating into the LPV framework the capability to deal exactly with a
              broad class  of  performance  specifications  and  model  uncertainty. 
              Specifically, the objectives of the proposed research are:

Development of
              tools  for robust  identification and model validation of LPV
              systems.

Development  of  an  analytical  framework  for  synthesizing
              robust multiobjective LPV systems. This framework will:
(a)	Handle multiple
              performance specifications in a non-conservative fashion;
(b)	Identify the
              intrinsic limits  of performance of the system as well as the limiting factors;
              and
(c)	Address the issue of controller complexity.

Application of the
              resulting theory to the synthesis of robust controllers  for  active  vision 
              systems  and  experimental validation using a Bisight robotic head and
              dedicated image processing hardware.

The  proposed  research  will  combine 
              elements  from  functional analysis  and viability theory,  successfully used
              by the  PI  to solve multiobjective  robust identification and control problems
              for LTI plants.  Preliminary results show that this combination has the 
              potential  to  address,  in  a  unified  framework,  both  the identification
              and synthesis aspects of the problem.
This  research effort will  result in an
              expanded robust  control framework  for  LPV  systems,  capable  of  addressing
               realistic problems necessitating neither potentially conservative
              approxi-mations nor multiple trial and error type iterations. Moreover, in
              addition to advancing the state of the art in control theory, we expect  that 
              by  removing  some  of  the  limitations  of  currently available LPV tools, it
              will foster progress in related areas.  An example  is  computer vision,  an
              area where  recent technological advances  have  rendered  a  number  of 
              practical  applications feasible,  provided that  certain  related  control 
              issues  can be resolved.  These  applications  range  from  intelligent 
              highway systems to remote surgery and have the potential to broadly impact
              society.  
***   
   


