Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Structure of the Tanacross (Athabaskan) Verb
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9907059

Award Number: 9907059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19246              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marianne Mithun mithun@humanitas.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Holton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5221      ARCTIC SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Mithun, Holton
U.Cal. Santa Barbara
OPP-9907059

This
              dissertation project will prepare a grammatical description of the structure of
              the Tanacross verb.  Tanacross, a distinctive Athabaskan language spoken by
              roughly 30 middle-aged or older residents of Tanacross village and its environs
              in eastern Alaska, has received little study.  The dissertation will provide
              both a thorough description of the language and theoretical insights into
              synchronic and diachronic Athabaskan linguistics.  Among the Athabaskan
              languages, Tanacross is of particular interest due to the evolution of a unique
              system of compound tones, reflecting the historical loss of verb suffixes. 
              Only two other Alaska Athabaskan languages (Han and Upper Tanana) have been
              reported to have such a system, and none has been described in detail.  With
              the exception of the Koyukon and Ahtna languages, very little work has been
              devoted to the description of grammatical structure in Alaska Athabaskan
              languages.  This dissertation thus contributes to the further understanding of
              Athabaskan verbal morphology.  Topics to be covered include verb structure,
              prefix template, verb stem variation, and verb theme categories.  The resulting
              documentation will benefit both the Athabaskanist and general linguistics
              community as well as the continued efforts toward language revitalization
              within the Tanacross community itself.

