Title       : FSML: Planning Activities for the Further Development of the Kansas Ecological
               Reserves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2001  
File        : a9907723

Award Number: 9907723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Martinko martinko@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. John O'Brien  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Experimental and Applied Ecology Program (EAEP), which administers the
              Kansas Ecological Reserves ( KER), proposes to undertake a comprehensive,
              two-phases planning excercise to guide development of KER over the next 5
              years.  To initiate this process, EAEP has identified 3 principal objectives:
              1. Increase use of KER facilities for education. 2. Enhance use of KER for
              experimental ecological research. 3. Create a framework for regional
              (cross-site) research, by developing partnerships with other field research
              facilities.  

The major activities planned for Phases I will be a strategic
              planning workshop, and a follow-up review conducted 2-3 months later. 
              Participants in the workshop will be members of the EAEP faculty advisory group
              and staff, assisted by experienced workshop facilitators from the University of
              Kansas Institute for Public Policy and Business Research (IPPBR).  IPPBR staff
              have developed a workshop format specifically intended for interdisciplinary
              research groups such as EAEP.  The product of the workshop will be a draft
              strategic plan for KER which will be reviewed by the group and relevant
              administrators at the second meeting.  The final product of Phase I will be a
              long-term strategic plan for KER.  A task group will be formed to advise and
              assist the director of EAEP in preparations for Phase II of the planning
              exercise.

During Phase II EAEP will develop specific plans for
              implementation of the strategic goals, focused on a 5-year time frame.  The
              major activities in Phase II will include one or two large workshop meetings. 
              Participants in this meeting (or meetings) will include the EAEP advisory
              group, plus individuals from institutions other than KU.  Depending upon
              decisions made in Phase I, researchers from other universities, state or local
              officials, and representatives of federal agencies, non-profit organizations,
              or the business community may be invited.  Issues to be covered in these
              meetings will include: Detailing and setting 5-year priorities within the
              framework of the strategic plan for KER; identifying funding opportunities that
              could enable these goals; and discussing procedures for coordination and
              cooperation among an expanded community of potential users of KER facilities. 
              Particular effort will be made to include individuals who have had experience
              developing field research facilities at other institutions.

The final
              product of Phase II will be a detailed, comprehensive plan for KER facilities
              development for the next 5 years, and agreements for cooperation with field
              research facilities at other institutions 

