Title       : Teacher Preparation PI Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9907291

Award Number: 9907291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115915             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward D. Britton tbritto@wested.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WestEd
	      730 Harrison Street
	      San Francisco, CA  94107    415/565-3070

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9103,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Several divisions and programs within the National Science Foundation's
              Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR) are collaborating to
              convene a conference for Principal Investigators conducting research on or
              involved with projects in teacher preparation.  The National Center for
              Improving Science Education (NCISE) is providing skillful support for the
              conference, including site selection, advance registration, exhibitor
              arrangements, and production of a proceedings document.  The workshop's
              purposes are to:  (1) permit participants to exchange research and best
              practices to increase the effectiveness of their currently funded work; and (2)
              influence participants to make their current and future research and projects
              address the nation's pressing needs in teacher preparation.

Because NCISE
              has its own research experience with the substance of the proposed conference,
              it can ensure that the mechanics of the conference are designed to best fulfill
              its substantive goals.  NCISE staff is performing the following main
              functions:

     helping to design the macro-agenda for the conference, and
              helping NSF program officers decide all of the major agenda elements.

    
              finding and negotiating with an appropriate conference site with the needed
              facilities and services and negotiating the best possible contract.

    
              leading design of the micro-agenda, and being responsible for recommending
              exact timing of all events, their operation, their space assignment and other
              matters pertaining to the conference.

     registering all participants,
              including receiving and processing all participant applications, including
              confirming registration.  Also creating a participant contact information
              document.

     arranging food and beverage, facility, and audiovisual needs.
               Continental breakfast and lunches and a reception will be provided to increase
              participants' networking and to maximize participation in sessions.  Signage
              will be created to ensure smooth flow of people among sessions.

     making
              exhibitor arrangements.  Special attention will be paid to arranging facilities
              and audiovisual equipment for exhibitors.

    providing on-site registration
              and other conference support.  Checking in participants and providing them with
              conference materials.  "Shadowing" hotel staff to ensure contracted services
              are delivered on schedule and as arranged.

     producing conference
              proceedings.  NCISE will coordinate production of a post-conference document.  
               

