Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Cryopreservation of Starfish Oocytes, Eggs, and
               Embryos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9907387

Award Number: 9907387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mehmet Toner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 5940,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              +9907387
Toner

Description:  This award is for support of a joint research
              by Dr. Mehmet Toner, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts and
              Dr. Kristen C. Sadler, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bosphorus
              University, Istanbul, Turkey.  The two scientists to study the cryopreservation
              of starfish oocytes, eggs and embryos.  Starfish gametes and embryos provide a
              useful model system for studying many basic cell biological and developmental
              processes.  However the seasonal availability of gametes confines the scope of
              projects that can be carried out with this system since there is currently no
              means of preserving the gametes of any marine organism.  Tremendous strides
              have been made towards preserving mammalian gametes, and Toner's laboratory has
              developed a highly successful theoretically optimized protocol for
              cryopreserving mammalian oocytes.  This project will draw upon the achievements
              in mammalian gamete cryopreservation to develop a similar protocol for starfish
              gametes.  This will benefit from Sadler's research on starfish and will aid the
              international community working with this system.  Since the cryobiology field
              has mainly focused on preserving mammalian cells, little is known about the
              biological consequences of freezing non-mammalian cells.  The project will draw
              upon Sadler's expertise to address fundamental questions about the effect of
              cryopreservation on cell function by analysis of cell cycle dynamics,
              fertilization competency and developmental potential of the cryopreserved
              starfish gametes and embryos.

Scope:  This award will allow a US scientist
              at Mass General Hospital and a scientist at Bosphorus University to collaborate
              in a project in which both have unique expertise and complementary
              capabilities.  Toner has expertise in the field of cryopreservation of
              mammalian cells, and most notably has succeeded in the design of a
              theoretically optimized cryopreservation protocol for mouse oocytes. Sadler has
              knowledge of starfish oocyte biology as well as the material and the facilities
              for the studies with the cryopreserved cells.  The results would be useful for
              researchers world-wide who are studying female gametes from marine
              invertebrates, as well as those who do not have the resources to collect and
              maintain marine organisms.  This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting
              US-foreign scientific collaboration in areas of mutual benefit. 

