Title       : The Cognitive Basis of Seam Effects in Panel Surveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1999 
File        : a9907414

Award Number: 9907414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209654             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance J. Rips   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1614,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates a type of error called the "seam effect" that occurs
              in national surveys and that affects the quality of their data.  Some panel
              surveys, such as the Survey of Income and Program Participation and the
              Consumer Expenditure Survey, interview respondents three or four times a year;
              however, questions on these surveys ask for information about each of the
              preceding months.  For example, a respondent might be interviewed in April and
              asked during that interview to provide information about his or her
              expenditures for each of the months of January, February, and March.  The same
              respondent might be interviewed in July for expenditures during April, May, and
              June.  Previous analyses of the data from these surveys show that
              month-to-month changes in respondents' answers are much greater when the data
              come from successive interviews than when they come from the same interview. 
              In the example just mentioned, changes in the level of expenditures would be
              greater between March and April (data gathered from separate interviews) than
              between other adjacent months (data gathered from the same interview).  Prior
              studies strongly suggest that these differences are not due to true changes
              between March and April, but are due to response error.  The purpose of this
              project is to develop a model of this effect that can help predict its severity
              and that will aid in eliminating it or adjusting for it statistically.

The
              studies in the project investigate the seam effect using a procedure in which
              respondents answer questions about information supplied in the experiments
              themselves.  In this way, the experiments control variables that might alter
              the size of the effect, and they monitor the respondents' accuracy.  The
              strategy in these experiments is to vary separately factors that might affect
              respondents' memory for earlier information (e.g., the importance or salience
              of that information) and factors that might affect respondents' willingness to
              estimate or to guess at an answer.  Because the first set of factors may have
              more impact on later parts of the response period and the second set of factors
              more impact on earlier parts, their combined influence can increase or decrease
              the size of the seam effect.  These experiments test this hypothesis.  This
              research is supported by the Methodology, Measurement, and Statistics Program
              and a consortium of federal statistical agencies under the Research on Survey
              Methodology Funding Opportunity.

