Title       : Exploratory Study to Identify Sites Appropriate for Future Investigations of
               Spatial Patterning at Open-Air Stone Age Sites, South Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9907029

Award Number: 9907029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Kent skent@odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Susan Kent and her collaborators
              will conduct one season of archaeological fieldwork in the Caledon River region
              of South Africa. During a preliminary survey she located eight open air sites
              which, based on surface material, are attributable to the Middle and Late Stone
              Age (MSA and LSA) periods. It is likely that significant areas of each of these
              sites are preserved intact beneath adjacent sediments but this is uncertain.
              Dr. Kent will direct small scale excavations at each locale to determine
              stratigraphy and to assess the richness of archaeological materials and the
              extent they have been moved by post depositional processes. Faunal, lithic and
              sedimentological data will be analyzed. If significant amounts of intact
              deposits exist at both MSA and LSA sites Dr. Kent will submit a follow-up
              proposal for larger scale excavations.

Archaeologists wish to understand the
              long term changes which led to the appearance of behaviorally modern humans.
              Both archaeological and biological data indicate that this transition occurred
              in sub Saharan Africa. By Late Stone Age times, ca. 40,000 years ago, humans
              exhibited the same range of behavioral capabilities as their modern
              counterparts. However the Middle Stone Age (from ca. 250,000 to 40,000) is less
              well understood and was likely the time of significant modification. Through
              analysis of the distribution of archaeological materials across sites it is
              possible to reconstruct the spatial component of behavior and gain indirect
              insight into social organization. The comparison of MSA and LSA spatial
              patterning Dr. Kent believes will  allow one to elucidate directional change.

