Title       : Inclined Piezocone Penetration Aspects - Theoretical Interpretation and
               Experiment Verification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a9907951

Award Number: 9907951
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162312             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mehmet T. Tumay mtumay@eng.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Murad Y. Abu-Farsakh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***
9907951
Tumay
Rapid growth and boom in surface construction and
              underground infrastructure in
U.S. cities and suburbs increases the demand on
              geotechnical engineering.
Geotechnical engineers are facing increasing
              challenges to improve in-situ
testing tools for accurate site characterization
              of soil properties and
efficient evaluation of geomedia improvement. The
              piezocone penetrometer test
(PCPT) is a simple, fast, and repeatable test that
              can provide continuous
soundings of the subsurface. The PCPT test data can be
              effectively utilized for
soil stratigraphy and identification, and the
              evaluation of engineering soil
properties.

The use of piezocone
              penetrometer for site investigation is currently limited
to vertical testing.
              The vertical intrusion of the cone penetrometer is not
always possible due to
              existing obstructions and/or lack of access. Moreover,
in many cases the soil
              strength parameters and/or flow characteristics are
needed at an inclination
              plane due to the nature of soil (i.e. bedding,
inclined foundation) or the
              alignment of reinforcing structure (i.e. soil
nails, batter piles). The use of
              piezocone for inclined penetration has not yet
been thoroughly investigated. 
              

The main objective of this research is to extend the application of
              piezocone
penetrometer by intrusion at different inclination angles, and to
              bring out the
fundamental aspects (experimental and theoretical) of the
              inclined penetration.
Many questions remain to be answered and interpretation
              methods need to be
developed before the inclined piezocone penetration is
              applied to practice. The
influence of the angle of inclination and soil
              anisotropy on the cone tip
resistance, sleeve friction, generated pore
              pressures and their dissipation
will be investigated. The inclined piezocone
              penetration will be analyzed using
the finite element methods.  The outcome of
              this research will set the standard
towards the inclined use of the piezocone
              penetrometer for site investigations
in locations where it is impossible to
              perform vertical penetrations, and
whenever strength and consolidation
              parameters at a horizontal or inclined
direction are needed, as in soft ground
              tunneling.

This research will have a significant impact toward improving
              subsurface
investigation and introducing a new technique of inclined piezocone
              penetration
testing and its interpretation to accurately evaluate soil
              properties for
better design and analysis. It will also help in understanding
              the effect of
the soil's inherent and induced anisotropy so that better
              interpretation
methods can be developed.
*** 
