Title       : FSML: Field and Laboratory Instrumentation in Support of Interdisciplinary
               Marine Research at Dauphin Island Sea Lab, Alabama
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1999  
File        : a9907691

Award Number: 9907691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: THOMAS QUARLES                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103245             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan R. Pennock jpennock@disl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Envrnmtl Sci Conso
	      101 Bienville Blvd.
	      Dauphin Island, AL  36528    251/861-2141

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
The Dauphin Island Sea Lab (DISL) serves Alabama's research and instructional
              needs in the marine sciences.  The Alabama Marine Environmental Sciences
              Consortium (MESC) operates DISL on behalf of its 22 member institutions of
              higher education, three of which are minority institutions.  Over the past ten
              years, the DISL has been expanding its faulty, undergraduate and graduate
              education programs and research activities.  DISL has been an NSF-REU site
              since 1997 and was recently awarded a three-year renewal for the program.  The
              laboratory is also developing a minority internship program in marine sciences,
              the first of its kind in Alabama.  MESC and DISL are Affirmative Action/Equal
              Opportunity organizations, and their facilities are in compliance with the
              Americans With Disabilities Act.  DISL has a University Programs staff of ten
              academic faculty, all of whom are active researchers and educators.  In
              addition to hands on education, the faculty studies a variety of basic and
              applied problems in oceanography and marine biology, and they provide advice to
              industry, government, and the public.  Research areas include the effects of
              water flow on nutrient exchanges between organisms and ecosystems, the effects
              of eutrophication on water column nutrient dynamics and harmful algal blooms in
               near-coastal ecosystems, the chemical oceanography of organo-sulfur compounds
              and other trace organic compounds, paleoceanography and paleobiology, spatial
              and temporal variability of herbivory in seagrass communities, the role of
              predation on commercially important fish at the larval stage, and the ecology
              of gelatinous zooplankton.  These programs are frequently interdisciplinary and
              multi-investigator, involving collaborations between colleagues both within and
              outside the DISL.  The DISL faculty are poised to begin a broad,
              multidisciplinary research program to elucidate the ways in which coastal
              ecosystems respond to environmental changes at multiple scales.  Central to
              this research will be the ability to conduct detailed vertical and horizontal
              sampling of hydrographic and nutrient fields in estuarine and coastal
              ecosystems.  Herein the PIs acquire three pieces of instrumentation: (1) a
              DATAFLOW IV Surface Water Quality Mapping System (System) for high speed
              horizontal mapping of surface water characteristics, (2) a Sea-Bird SBE25 CTD
              with integrated mini-rosette for vertical profiling and water sampling, and (3)
              a Skalar, Inc. SanPlus or 0-1 Analytical Flow Solution IV five-channel nutrient
              auto-analyzer for analysis of inorganic nutrient samples.  The DISL has a
              strong record of support for its field and analytical instrumentation program
              in both research and education programs.  These instruments will provide either
              new (DATAFLOW and mini-rosette) or modernized (CTD) and auto-analyzer)
              capabilities to support both ongoing and planned education and research
              programs at the DISL.

