Title       : Rainfall Estimation Using Palarimetric Radar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2001      
File        : a9907930

Award Number: 9907930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander V. Ryzhkov Alexander.Ryzhkov@noaa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dusan S. Zrnic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Claude E. Duchon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under support from the U.S. Weather Research Program, the Principal
              Investigators will develop a new method to measure rainfall using polarimetric
              radar.  Recent evidence obtained from polarimetric weather radars suggests that
              when existing polarimetric methods fail to adequately estimate rainfall, a
              significant cause is the variability in drop size distribution (DSD).  Thus,
              understanding the impact of DSD on the performance of the polarimetric
              algorithms for rainfall estimation will be a major thrust of this research
              effort.  The Principal Investigators will exploit this knowledge to develop a
              novel approach for rainfall estimation.  The idea is to use polarimetric radar
              data to classify various rainfall regimes according to their DSD so that
              appropriate polarimetric relations can be continuously matched to each rain
              type.  Characterization of a rainfall regime will be derived from various
              polarimetric variables.  The corresponding DSD's will be measured by a
              state-of-the-art two-dimensional video-disdrometer.  The disdrometer will be
              placed in a pit within an array of closely spaced rain gauges to eliminate wind
              effects and to acquire independent estimates of rainfall.  Disdrometer data
              will be collected in all types of rainfall found in Oklahoma storms to develop
              the rain regime classification and to understand the differences among the
              various regimes.

Verification of the "matched" polarimetric rainfall
              estimates will be done by comparison with rain gauge data from a micronetwork
              (42 gages at 5 km spacing, operated by the Agricultural Research Service, USDA)
              in south-central Oklahoma, the Oklahoma Mesonet (one or two gauges in each
              Oklahoma county), and the NOAA Cooperative Network.  The latter two data sets
              will be employed primarily to assess range effects on the quality of radar
              rainfall estimation. At long distances non-uniform radar beam filling and
              vertical stratification of precipitation add to the uncertainty in rainfall
              estimates. 

The complement of network rain gauges, the Cimarron polarimetric
              radar just west of Oklahoma City, three operational WSR-88D radars in and
              around central Oklahoma, and a rain gauge comparison facility in Norman,
              provide a unique field laboratory to support the investigation.  In addition,
              the Principal Investigators have a long history of radar - rain gauge
              comparisons.
Improvement in radar rainfall estimation will have a positive
              impact on the quality of precipitation forecasts.  Improved estimates will
              assist in mitigation of natural disasters due to flooding and lead to better
              management of water resources by government and commercial organizations.

