Title       : Ecological Impact of Enhance Solar Ultraviolet Radiation on Phytoplankton at
               High Latitudes in the Arctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2001       
File        : a9907692

Award Number: 9907692
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311632             (Estimated)
Investigator: Osmund Holm-Hansen oholmhansen@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas H. Bartlett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9907692
Holm-Hansen

Recent data shows that ozone concentrations in the
              stratosphere over the Northern Hemisphere during the spring period (March-May)
              are decreasing each succeeding year, continuing the decline that has been
              documented during the past decade.  The magnitude of the depletion in
              atmospheric ozone is maximal at the higher latitudes in the Arctic, with
              progressively less depletion at lower latitudes.  Depletion of this protective
              layer of ozone results in enhancing UV-B radiation (280-320 nm), with the
              influence of these shorter UV wavelengths incident upon the earth increasing
              exponentially with progressive loss of ozone.  As the photons in the UV-B
              spectral region are highly energetic and their wavelengths overlap the
              absorption spectrum of many important cellular components (e.g., DNA), this
              enhanced UV-B radiation resulting from ozone depletion represents a significant
              threat to any living organism which is exposed to solar radiation.  In this
              proposal we are concerned with the impact of solar UVR on Arctic marine
              phytoplankton, which constitute the base of the entire food web in the marine
              ecosystem.

The project will be based at the Marine Biological Station of the
              University of Tromso, Norway, which is located at approximately 70 N and hence
              represents a high-latitude Arctic environment, but will also include ship-board
              studies in the Lofoten Islands and close to the ice edge in the northern
              Barents Sea.  All experimental work will use either natural phytoplankton
              assemblages or unialgal phytoplankton cultures of ecologically relevant species
              in the Arctic food web.  Both in situ incubations and temperature-controlled
              incubators with appropriate optical filters will be used to determine the
              impact of enhanced UV-B radiation (when column ozone values are low), 'normal'
              UV-B radiation, and UV-A radiation (320-400 nm) on structural damage to the
              genetic material in cells (DNA), on the loss of primary production, and on
              possible changes in species composition of the phytoplankton assemblages. 
              Ancillary data will include the relationship between the magnitude of
              UV-induced cellular damage and the influence and total dose of UVR experienced
              by cells.  Specific experiments will also determine whether or not the
              UV-induced cellular damage is reversible in time, and also the extent to which
              cells can mitigate the adverse effects of solar UVR by synthesis of
              UV-screening compounds.  These studies will be supported by simultaneous
              measurements of relevant environmental factors, including incident spectral UVR
              and visible solar radiation with depth in the water column, and stability of
              the upper water column.

The studies will be done in cooperation with
              personnel from the University of Tromso, who are also engaged in long-term
              monitoring of incident solar UVR in northern Norway.  Students from both the
              USA and Norway will be active participants in the field work and in analysis of
              the data.  The results from this cooperative project should provide a good data
              base to better our understanding of the possible impact of enhanced solar UVR
              on the floristic composition of the natural phytoplankton assemblages as well
              as on the rate of primary production.  Such data will be important inputs to
              future modeling efforts to estimate the impact of progressive depletion of
              atmospheric ozone over the Arctic on the food resources available to higher
              trophic levels.  As important fishery resources are located throughout the
              Arctic regions, such knowledge is also of importance in regard to economic and
              societal concerns.

