Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Culture, Power and the Expression of Public
               Sentiment: An Evaluation of Public Involvement in a Regional Case of Forest
               Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9907762

Award Number: 9907762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sandra L. Schneider                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven B. Andrews steven.andrews@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Formal public involvement is often seen as an effective means of informing
              decision-makers about public opinion and thus promoting policies that are
              responsive to the values and concerns  of stakeholders.  However, this process
              may be compromised by cultural differences and misunderstandings and by the use
              of power to dominate political discourse and suppress opposing views.  This
              dissertation research evaluates the effectiveness with which public involvement
              elicits public sentiment and explains how cultural and political dynamics serve
              as inhibitory mechanisms.  The research examines these issues in adjacent
              portions of northern Vermont and New Hampshire, a sub-region of the Northern
              Forest of New England and New York, where attempts to develop both regional and
              state-level land-use and economic policy over the past decade have relied
              heavily on public input for guidance.  Community decision-making theory is used
              to examine how certain issues are excluded from public debate through such
              techniques as the design of public process, the use of persuasive rhetoric and
              political lobbying, or direct intimidation and co-optation.  The research
              relies on a cognitive approach to culture analysis to describe how cultural
              variation among interest groups engenders misunderstanding and constrains the
              range of publicly acceptable solutions.  The research uses several types of
              qualitative methods, including semi-structured interviews, key-informant
              interviews, archival research, and participant observation.  This project will
              help fill a major gap in our theoretical understanding of public involvement by
              developing a model that explains how culture and power inhibit the conveyance
              of public sentiment to decision-makers.  On a pragmatic level in the Northern
              Forest, it will also provide a detailed evaluation of public process and a
              description of specific inhibitory mechanisms, as well as an analysis of
              cultural and political variation across a key portion of the region.


