Title       : Simulation Models of Dynamic Work Processes and Organizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a9907403

Award Number: 9907403
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347665             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond E. Levitt Ray.Levitt@Stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Virtual Design Team (VDT) computational organization simulation framework
              uses Jay Galbraith's (1973) " information-processin" (IP) view of
              knowledge-work to simulate project organizations performing relatively routine
              engineering tasks.  To model the impact of exceptions in routine engineering
              work, VDT simply adds work volume to predefined activities in a fixed
              organization structure.  This abstraction has proven remarkably successful for
              modeling product development tasks, but breaks down for less routine service
              tasks.  To address this shortcoming, multiple kinds of stochastic exceptions
              must dynamically modify both the work process and performing organization. 
              This extended IP framework will be able to model and simulate the inherent
              uncertainty of service work and the more dynamic organizational structures of
              service organizations.  Validation of the extended IP model involves a
              rigorous, stepwise approach of testing reasoning, representation and
              usefulness, through a set of virtual computational experiments employing
              progressively more complex models.  Finally, retrospective and prospective
              empirical validation experiments will be carried out in two domains: health
              care organizations and engineering maintenance organizations.  This research
              will greatly extend the range of applicability of computational organizational
              models, and will enhance our ability to design more effective organizations and
              information technologies for service work--currently nearly 80% of all US
              employment.



