Title       : Computational Methods of Nonlinear Control and Systems Identification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9907466

Award Number: 9907466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Munther A. Dahleh dahleh@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, we propose to undertake research in the areas of nonlinear
              control and system identification.  Our objectives is to provide computational
              methods for analysis and design of systems that incorporates both
              identification and control in a unified fashion.

In the area of nonlinear
              control, the emphasis will be placed on developing computational tools for
              classes of nonlinear systems that limit the complexity of the analysis and
              design problems.  We will build on our previous work that focused on finding
              appropriate control-Lyapunov-functions (Lfs) for the class of
              quasi-linear-parameter-varying systems to derive systematic tools for achieving
              more ambitious performance objectives.  We will also explore further the area
              of Neuro-dynamic programming to investigate the potential of computing
              controllers in real time, as well as deriving appropriate CLFs.  We also
              propose to develop analysis tools for piecewise linear systems and extend that
              to classes of Hybrid systems (mixed continuous dynamics with logic).

In the
              area of system identification, we propose to build on our previous work to
              develop a complete theory for identifying simple models of  possibly complex
              systems.  This theory should provide computable algorithms with associated
              non-conservative error bounds, experimental inputs, and estimates of sample
              complexity for accurate identification.  We propose to extend our previous work
              to handle a larger class of model parametrizations as well as certain classes
              of nonlinear systems.  This approach is will integrated with robust control
              approaches and provides a nice tradeoff between parametric and non-parametric
              uncertainty that is quite essential in quantifying the performance of a
              feedback system

