Title       : International Integrated Microdata Access System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a9907416

Award Number: 9907416
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3501130            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Ruggles   (Principal Investigator current)
              Miriam King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. McCaa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew Sobek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Levison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Todd Gardner  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1388,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will create and disseminate an integrated international census
              database composed of high-precision, high-density samples of individuals and
              households from seven countries. It will be the world's largest public-use
              demographic database, with multiple samples from each country enabling analyses
              across time and space. The project entails two complementary tasks: first, the
              collection and preservation of data that will support broad-based
              investigations in the social and behavioral sciences; second, the creation of
              an innovative system for worldwide web-based access to both metadata and
              microdata.

Large machine-readable census microdata samples exist for many
              countries around the world, but access to these data is highly limited and the
              documentation is often inadequate. Even in the few cases where microdata are
              available, comparison across countries or time periods is challenging owing to
              inconsistencies between datasets and inadequate documentation of comparability
              problems. Because of this, comparative international research based on pooled
              microdata is rarely attempted. This project will reduce barriers to
              international research by preserving the microdata samples and making them
              publicly available, converting them to a consistent format, providing
              comprehensive documentation, and by developing new web-based tools for
              disseminating microdata and documentation over the Internet. The project is
              modeled on the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS), a coherent
              series of individual-level U.S. census data drawn from 13 census years between
              1850 and 1990. By putting all the census samples in a compatible format and
              integrating their documentation, the IPUMS greatly simplifies the use of
              multiple census years. Just as important, new methods of electronic
              dissemination have democratized access to these resources
              (http://www.ipums.umn.edu).

