Title       : Social Interactive Literacy: Mechanism for Developing and Sustaining Resilience
               in At-Risk Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2002   
File        : a9907856

Award Number: 9907856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth E. LaVergne-Pinkett pinkett@louisiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aline M. Garrett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen H. Sparrow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana at Lafay
	      104 University Circle
	      Lafayette, LA  705032701    337/482-6203

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this two-year pilot study is to determine if
acquiring and
              mastering proficient language literacy will help young
children of poverty
              develop and sustain resilience. Resilience is generally
defined as positive
              adaptation in the midst of and following trauma; the
resilient child does not
              experience subsequent behavioral and emotional
problems.  The project is based
              on research that shows that some children
who live in adverse circumstances,
              such as poverty, and who have undergone
traumatic experiences have been
              identified as resilient despite their
susceptibility to the associated risks. 
              In addition, researchers have
identified specific cognitive and socioemotional
              characteristics and
behaviors that appear to be common among resilient
              children across
situations.  Therefore, the primary goal of this study is to
              determine if
there is a connection between language literacy proficiency and
              resilience
in young children of poverty.  Approximately one hundred children
              will
participate in the two year-year longitudinal study; they will be
              followed
as first graders during Year1 and as second graders during
              Year2.
Classroom teachers will incorporate into the regular curriculum
              a
concentrated, intense language literacy program through which the
              children
will receive enhanced literacy training.  The program will stress
              reading,
vocabulary, writing, and higher-order thinking.  To evaluate
              the
effectiveness of the program, the children will be assessed on
              cognitive
competence and academic performance, social functioning, and home
              and
family context.  Findings from the pilot study will be used to institute
              a
larger research project and to develop methods that school personnel
              can
use to help children become resilient.  Two major positions underly
              the
project:  (a) Resilience can be acquired, and (b) advanced
              literacy
proficiency in the dominate mainstream language contributes to
              resilience
in children of poverty.

