Title       : LExEn: Stochastic Photochemistry and Stochastic Photobiology in the Galactic
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2000      
File        : a9907582

Award Number: 9907582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Craig Wheeler wheel@astro.as.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Scalo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles S. Cockell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1075,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

P.I.: Wheeler, J. Craig				Proposal Number: AST-9907582
"LExEn:
              Stochastic Photochemistry and Photobiology in the Galactic Environment"

This
              project seeks to understand the importance and implications of a new type of
              extreme environmental influence that should affect the development of microbial
              life in most planetary and satellite systems:  frequent short-lived jolts of
              high-energy photons and particles that are an inevitable consequence of the
              Galactic environment.  These events include various phenomena associated with
              supernovae, novae, gamma ray bursts, and supernova remnant shocks.  The project
              will demonstrate, by comparing the estimated source fluxes with the solar
              background and minimum levels for biological activity, whether these events can
              drive non-equilibrium photochemistry in the atmospheres of planets and
              satellites.  They may also be a potent intermittent source of biological
              alteration for microorganisms on planets with or without ultraviolet shields
              like ozone.  Specific problems that are being addressed include:  (1) the
              probability that these various sources of high energy radiation exceed the
              background flux received from the Sun;  (2) hydrodynamics and radiative
              transfer in the astronomical sources, especially in the early shock breakout
              stage of supernovae;  (3) transformation of the emitted spectral energy
              distributions as they propagate through the model prebiotic, Archean, and
              post-ozone atmospheres;  (4) non-equilibrium photochemistry in outer Solar
              system bodies like Titan;  and (5) biological effect of both the calculated
              surface fluxes and the variation in stellar flux due to changes in atmospheric
              chemistry on microorganisms.

This project is part of the NSF Life in Extreme
              Environments (LExEn) program.
Funding is provided by the NSF Division of
              Astronomical Sciences Stellar
Astronomy & Astrophysics (SAA) program and the
              NSF Division of Molecular
& Cellular Biosciences (MCB).



