Title       : FSML: Improving Washhouse and Waste Management Facilities for Students and
               Visiting Scientists at the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a9907703

Award Number: 9907703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72947              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian C. Billick ibillick@rmbl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Taber D. Allison  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      PO 519
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              			
The Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory (RMBL) is an independent,
              nonprofit field station with no institutional affiliation, which provides
              facilities for researchers and students who wish to study high-altitude biology
              in a field setting.  Over the past ten years, the RMBL has conducted an orderly
              series of improvements to housing and research facilities that follow
              recommendations of the 1989 Master Plan (revised in 1995) and Internal (1996)
              and External (1997) Reviews.  Over the next few years the RMBL is embarking on
              an ambitious program of renovating facilities used primarily by students and 
              visiting scientists.  This project will support the building of a new washhouse
              and relocate five vaulted outhouses in compliance with Gunnison County Sewage
              Disposal regulations and the renovation of the existing washhouse into graduate
              student housing.

The outhouses will consist of sealed plastic vaults that
              will prevent leakage of human waste into groundwater.  The vaults can be
              readily pumped on a regular basis.  In turn, RMBL plans to close down several
              public flush toilets.  When complete, RMBL will be in compliance with county
              regulations and will protect its   'in-stream' water rights in the East River
              and Copper Creek by maintaining water quality of these streams.  The existing
              washhouse will be renovated to provide high-quality, non-cooking graduate
              student housing and study space.  All hardware for solar hot water heating in
              the existing washhouse will be used in the new washhouse helping to hold the
              cost of the new washhouse to a minimum. 

