Title       : U.S.-Bolivia Cooperative Research: Field-Based Determination of Tectonic Strain
               & Displacement Across the Altiplano of Bolivia & Implications for Modeling
               Andean Plateau Uplift
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1999  
File        : a9907204

Award Number: 9907204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44425              (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Davis Gdavis@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
Program Ref : 0000,5926,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9907204
Davis

This Americas Program award will support a US-Bolivia research
              project between Dr. George Davis, and Nadine McQuarrie (Ph.D.candidate),
              University of Arizona, and Ing. Marcelo Claure Zapata, Bolivian Geological
              Survey.  The goal of the project is to calculate the magnitude of tectonic
              shortening across much of the breadth of the Altiplano portion of the Andean
              Plateau in Bolivia.  A second objective is to evaluate whether or not the
              Altiplano/Eastern Cordillera region is undergoing active extensional
              deformation. The fundamental issue they propose to address is the correlation
              between tectonic shortening and crustal thickening in the Central Andes. 
              

The researchers plan the mapping and analysis of field relationships
              relevant to calculating tectonic shortening across the Altiplano portion of the
              Andean Plateau, and to evaluating if there is contemporary extensional
              collapse.  This will determine whether the extensional structures within the
              region are in the form of normal faults or detachment faults.  The geodynamical
              modeling activities will build on dew field-base data, which will provide more
              robust control for Andean Plateaus.  Results will also be used geodynamically
              to evaluate the interplay of gravity and rheology as related to collapse and
              spreading.  The new data about the second largest orogenic plateau in the world
              resulting from this research, will be an important addition  to existing
              concepts which up to now have focussed on the Tibetan plateau.   

The
              collaboration with the Bolivian Geological Survey is of benefit to the US
              researchers 
in accessing one of the greatest natural laboratories in the
              world, which could lead to new discoveries that will benefit the scientific
              community as a whole, both in the US and in Bolivia.    
***

