Title       : Advanced Technology Environmental Education Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0053245

Award Number: 0053245
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $915000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen J. Kabat Lensch   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kirk J. Laflin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hazardous materials Traini
	      ATEEC
	      Bettendorf, IA  527226804    563/441-4090

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Through this project, the Advanced Technology Environmental Education Center
              (ATEEC) is building upon its strong national position by providing expanded
              services and innovative leadership to a growing number of constituents
              including 4-year institutions, environmental practitioners, and the general
              public. The ATEEC project is structured around the following goals and
              objectives:

 Goal 1: Strengthen science, math and technical curriculum, and
              instructional materials supporting advanced technology environmental education.
              Objectives include producing, updating, and revising environmental technology
              resources, assessment instruments, a "best practices" manual, training and
              curriculum models, and environmental technology core knowledge and skill list;
              identifying secondary and community college faculty support needs; and
              conducting the annual Fellows Institute for secondary and community college
              teachers.

 Goal 2: Strengthen the nation's environmental technician programs
              through professional development opportunities. Objectives include
              participating in or conducting annual professional development instructor
              conferences, a national conference with a 
professional association of
              environmental technology practitioners, a national "Defining Environmental
              Technology Forum", and a national satellite/on-line teleconference; and
              developing a national model for business/industry/education faculty
              internships. 
 
 Goal 3: Strengthen education through support services for
              program improvement.
Objectives include acting as a clearinghouse and resource
              center to evaluate and disseminate "best practice" instructional materials,
              activities, and products; updating and revising the environmental technology
              defining chart and report; and expanding the use of the national electronic job
              database. This project is directly impacting hundreds of environmental
              educators and improving the education of thousands of students throughout the
              nation.



