Title       : Mayaajitaang: A Tribal College, State University , and Industrial Partnership
               for Building an Information Technology Workforce in Rural America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0053287

Award Number: 0053287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $641131             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Furtman fjgreg@lco-college.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Trebian  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jeff L. Ames  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victor Piotrowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Lac Courte Oreilles Ojibwa
	      13466 W Trepania Road
	      Hayward, WI  548439419    715/634-4790

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               
Lac Courte Oreilles Ojibwa Community College, (Hayward, WI) and the
              University of Wisconsin-Superior are forming a partnership to build an
              asynchronous learning environment in which a complete four-year degree in
              Information Technology is being offered by both institutions simultaneously as
              well as two-year programs in the community college. By collaborating in this
              partnership, and working with businesses and industrial partners, the unique
              needs of underserved populations are being addressed. The Information
              Technology program is a shared offering that provides online specializations
              ranging from certificates in basic computer and Intenet skills to a complete
              four-year degree. The courses in this program are being mirrored, credit for
              credit, by each institution so that whatever a student earns at one college
              transfers to the other college. Faculty and staff of both institutions are
              developing program content in a collaborative effort where new online courses
              are being developed and existing synchronous courses are being adapted and made
              available. A virtual private network is being implemented between the partners
              in order to allow the development of systems integration of support services.
              Business and industry are partnering with the higher education institutions to
              help create the skilled information technology workforce needed to meet their
              needs and strengthen the economies of the Native American and rural communities
              served by the colleges. Full accreditation for the program is being sought from
              the North Central Association of Schools and Colleges. Evaluation and
              assessment of the development of online content is an ongoing, dynamic process
              from conceptualization to implementation of curricula that is being documented
              and published as a model for the development of learning in an asynchronous
              environment.


