Title       : Strategic Alliance to Advance Technological Education in Rockford, Illinois
               Public Schools, Grades 7-12
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0053276

Award Number: 0053276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel L. Householder                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jule D. Scarborough scarboro@ceet.niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Don P. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick Derry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY

This project is a collaboration among Rockford's public
              middle and high 
schools, NIU's Colleges of Engineering and Engineering
              Technology and Liberal Arts and Sciences, Rock Valley Community College, and
              local businesses and industries. It builds on the success of a pilot study
              
undertaken in five Rockford high schools. The goal is to improve math,
              science, technology and English education for all students in grades 7-12 in
              the Rockford School system, but with a special emphasis on the needs of those
              who do not traditionally take higher level science, mathematics and technology
              classes, including minorities, females, and a range of average students. A
              multi-disciplined project staff will work with teams of teachers from all
              middle and high schools in the district. During the first year, the project
              will train teachers in interdisciplinary problem- and project-based learning;
              integrated curricula; new assessment procedures, including improved traditional
              strategies and procedures and non-traditional (authentic) ones; national and
              state standards; and a broader variety and repertoire of teaching techniques.
              During the second and third years, the project staff will act as mentors and
              coaches, providing in-classroom support for teachers as they fieldtest new
              methods, techniques and procedures in the classroom. Teachers will also be
              taught how to network constructively across disciplines and the operational
              design of the project will ensure that all teachers from all schools hear the
              same message, thereby eliminating confusion. This project will be the key
              implementation element in Rockford's education reform initiative and will form
              the basis for a fundamental and ongoing change in teaching philosophy and
              methods. It is designed to motivate and inspire students by helping them to
              acquire the necessary skills to solve real-world science, math and technology
              problems and to feel connected to their community. In addition to improving the
              teaching and learning environment one tangible product of this project willbe
              the design and production of multidisciplinary curriculum modules that can be
              used throughout the district and beyond.

