Title       : Integrating Design and Manufacturing Concepts to Strengthen Advanced
               Technological Education Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0053249

Award Number: 0053249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph C. Chen cschen@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Dugger  (Principal Investigator former)
              Judy M. Vance  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ron Sorensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond P. Stevens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Christopher H. Schilling  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Robert D. Salsberry  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              		
Recent changes in the global business environment dictate the need for
              engineering technicians to obtain new skills in design-for-manufacturability,
              computer-aided design, teamwork, and communication. In addition, there is a
              significant workforce shortage of engineering technicians across the U.S. and
              particularly within the areas of Iowa and South Dakota served by this project.
              This project focuses on improving the way that the above topics are taught in
              community college manufacturing education programs. It also focuses on
              increasing the pool of qualified applicants to these programs. Four, flexible
              course modules and instructor-training materials are being developed that may
              be infused into a wide range of existing curricula. The modules integrate
              design for manufacturability, teamwork skills and computer aided-design content
              to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of instruction. Summative
              evaluation tools are being used to assess the impacts of the modules on student
              skills.

Women who are completing an internship in a baccalaureate program in
              technical training are delivering a program designed to recruit female students
              into manufacturing-related programs at three Midwestern community colleges. In
              addition, these interns are supporting community college technical instruction
              to supplement release time for community college instructors who are involved
              in this project. 

An outcome of this project is larger numbers of better
              prepared workers that will lead to a more competitive U.S. manufacturing
              industry. The eventual impact on students is a heightened awareness of the
              interaction between design and manufacturing, and the skills to effectively
              operate in a team environment.


