Title       : Learning Through Simulated Information Technology Enterprises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0053264

Award Number: 0053264
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431946             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart A. Rosenfeld rosenfeld@rtsinc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent A. DiNoto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James V. Masi  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Regional Tech Strategies
	      1829 East Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  275159005    919/933-6699

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project involves a network of six community colleges, university experts,
              and industry leaders. During the project, they establish, pilot, assess, and
              document a contextual, collaborative process to better prepare technical
              workers for the information technologies service industry. Goals include
              alleviating the shortage of IT workers, improving technical and business skills
              and abilities of IT specialists, increasing entrepreneurial and intrapreneurial
              skills, and creating learning networks of faculty. The structure for contextual
              and systemic skills is "learning through a simulated information technology
              enterprise" (L-SITE), a realistic but fictitious enterprise that operates under
              varied conditions in each of the community colleges and represents the
              complexities and uncertainties of the real business world. The collaborative
              plans to design two different information technology service enterprises as
              templates for systemic learning for students in IT and other technical
              curricula. Using the two L-SITEs as "templates," student teams simulate
              business operations in a high performance context under the rapidly changing,
              global, and challenging transactional, technical, and market
circumstances
              facing IT and other industries. Thus, students learn by "experiencing" various
              challenges and problems they may face in the real workplace. Each L-SITE is to
              be incorporated into the curriculum in each college in two basic formats: a
              year two practicum for IT degree students and experiential learning modules to
              be integrated into other courses and programs. In addition to the design
              network, five field test colleges prepare for subsequent adoption, and four
              international colleges provide global connections and experiences for the U.S.
              students and faculty.


