Title       : Histologic Technician Education Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0053307

Award Number: 0053307
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $514281             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia A. Pascoe Vpascoe@mtsac.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth T. Bui  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth M. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louis W. Shainberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia B. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Waggener  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount San Antonio College
	      1100 North Grand
	      Walnut, CA  917891341    714/594-5611

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Mt. San Antonio College is developing a histologic technician program designed
              to educate and train students to efficiently prepare tissue samples for
              microscopic examination by a pathologist or research scientist. The project is
              developing this program as an alternate path for students enrolled in the
              Biology curriculum for university transfer or technical programs. Existing
              supporting curricula include Anatomy, Physiology and Microbiology from the
              Biology Department and Introductory and General Chemistry from the Chemistry
              Department 1-4 . Histology, Laboratory Basics for Histotechnicians, and
              Histotechniques 1-4 are being developed as new curricula through the Department
              of Biological Sciences. Histochemistry and Immunohistochemistryly curricula are
              being developed in collaboration with the Department of Chemistry. A program of
              this type does not currently exist in California and supports a variety of
              disciplines. 

Local employers express a critical need for this program and
              are participating in its development. Employers are donating equipment, forming
              partnerships, and recruiting students. Mt. San Antonio College is providing
              funds for the purchase of half of the equipment required for the program, funds
              for supplies, and faculty salaries. National and California Societies of
              Histotechnology, and directors from programs across the US have guided
              development of this program which is being evaluated by The National
              
Accrediting Agency for Clinical Laboratory Standards and The American Society
              of Clinical Pathologists (ASCP) Board of Registry.
