Title       : Integrating Academic and Technical Education for Advanced Technological Careers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0053294

Award Number: 0053294
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $799997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith Leff JLeff@edc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen K. Norris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacqueline S. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel Street
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/618-2227

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project expands the work begun in a previous NSF supported project to
              create a curriculum that integrates academic and technical education and that
              meets both national academic and industry skill standards. In an earlier
              project Education Development Center, Inc. (EDC), Baltimore City Community
              College (BCCC) and Southern High School in Baltimore partnered to create an
              integrated biology/biotechnology high school curriculum unit, and pilot tested
              it in biology and biotechnology classes. The unit weaves together readings,
              activities, discussions and analyses, emphasizing a conceptual understanding of
              scientific principles with laboratories that stress biotechnology skills, the
              ability to perform technical procedures, and an understanding of the scientific
              basis of experiments. The curriculum relates learning to careers and real-life
              work. The goal of that project was to broaden the learning of both academic and
              technical students. Academic students conduct laboratory experiments, develop
              technical skills and learn about real life uses of these in occupations,
              careers and work places. Technical students learn more about the concepts,
              theories and history underlying the technical skills they develop. This new
              project extends these goals by field testing this first unit (to obtain more
              empirical data about student outcomes). The project is also developing a second
              unit covering topics related to those of the first unit, and following the same
              format of the first unit. The two units are being pilot-tested together in
              several high schools (in biology and biotechnology courses) in the greater
              Baltimore area. Consultants from industry, 2-year colleges, and 4-year colleges
              are validating the units in terms of their suitability in preparing students
              for college level work, and providing skills required in the high-skilled
              workforce. Teacher guides, student books, videos of practitioner role models in
              workplaces, and scenarios for instruction and assessment, are being produced.
              High school teachers are being trained in the new curriculum and in related
              pedagogy.

