Title       : Contextual Laboratory Curriculum for Chemical Technology (C&T): Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0053241

Award Number: 0053241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251298             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol L. White white@aati.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Renee Madyun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth D. Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Hofstader  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Athens Area Tech Inst
	      800 U.S. Highway 29 North
	      Athens, GA  306011500    404/542-8050

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) The contributions that chemical laboratory technicians make in
              modern 
workplaces cannot be overstated. They have a unique ability to make
              sense of subtle differences in the appearance of materials and the behavior of
              techniques and instruments. The challenge for chemical technology educators is
              to provide students with meaningful experiences that prepare them for these
              responsibilities. In 1998, the NSF awarded a grant to our institute to develop
              a model for a contextually-driven, laboratory-based curriculum in chemical
              technology. Three modules are being fully developed: the chemistry of aqueous
              systems, the chemistry of terrestrial systems, and the chemistry of polymer
              systems. A fourth module, the synthesis of modern drug release systems, is
              being outlined as well.

The project team is preparing to launch its final
              stage of development and alpha testing based upon promising feedback from
              students and faculty. This renewal proposal captures this momentum by: (1)
              fully developing and testing module 4, the synthesis of modern drug release
              systems; (2) developing two advanced-level modules focused on petroleum
              refining and computer-based data analysis; (3) beta testing modules 1,2,and 3;
              and (4) engaging in strategic dissemination. The previously assembled team
              (materials developer, project manager and Principal Investigator are continuing
              and a new partner (leading the beta testing) has been added. Both alpha and
              beta testing of the various modules developed are continuing. Beta testing is
              being carried out in a Chemical Technology program at a trade technical
              college. This activity is providing feedback as to the effectiveness of the
              modules. As a result of this renewal, the contextually-based, laboratory-driven
              curriculum will be completed. Discussions with commercial publishers have
              begun, ensuring that the curriculum will be disseminated and revised on an
              ongoing basis.

