Title       : A Biotechnology Curriculum and Teacher Education Project for High Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2003  
File        : a0053296

Award Number: 0053296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $373366             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linnea A. Fletcher linneaf@austincc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary H. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peggy Maher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alice J. Sessions  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Austin Community College
	      5930 Middle Fiskville Road
	      Austin, TX  78752    512/223-7000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY

This project trains teachers and puts a biotechnology course
              in each of the high school campuses of Austin Independent School District,
              expanding into the suburban and rural school districts nearby. The first step
              is the establishment of an Advisory Committee composed of academic and industry
              representatives, and the establishment of a Curriculum Review Committee. This
              Committee reviews the Introduction to Biotechnology course taught at Austin
              Community College (ACC), and makes recommendations for its revision so it can
              be successfully adapted to the high schools. High school teachers are
              presenting a pilot biotechnology course in four Austin high schools. A Summer
              Institute expands the pool of qualified teachers. This Institute is a three
              week experience with three points of entry depending on the teacher's
              experience. Pre-service teachers from area universities, entering the first
              week with novice teachers, are matched with in-service teachers. This training
              prepares inservice teachers to teach biotechnology on their home campuses
              throughout Austin. The teachers are supported by the establishment of a
              Biotechnology Center, a "lending library" of equipment and reagents in the form
              of kits. These kits are maintained by biotechnology interns from ACC and
              delivered to the campuses at the teacher's request. Pre-service teachers from
              the Summer Institute travel with kits to their matched teachers' classrooms. As
              the network expands, school districts unable to establish Centers are being
              shown how to use materials-at-hand to teach project-based curricula. An
              important result of this project is a pipeline of students entering
              biotechnology programs and industry.

