Title       : Project COMPACT (Career-Oriented Materials for Physics and Contemorary
               Technology)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2001  
File        : a0053286

Award Number: 0053286
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Haney                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $489544             (Estimated)
Investigator: Doyle V. Davis ddavis@nhctc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yakov E. Cherner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NH Tech Col At Berlin
	      2020 Riverside Drive
	      Berlin, NH  035703717    603/752-1113

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

Project COMPACT is continuing to develop, test, and
              disseminate a new type of application-oriented, integrated curriculum software
              for SMET education.

The project materials employ a "learning
              situation-focused" approach rather than a conventional domain-centered approach
              to involve students of various backgrounds and abilities in learning physics,
              science and technology. The goal is to engage students in exploring learning
              situations associated with their career objectives. COMPACT'S open-ended
              software includes an Active Shell, Modeling Activities, Interactive Applets,
              Problem Solving Tutor, scriptable Instructor's Agent, Interactive Lessons and a
              tool to design them, Tools for Assessing student progress, and more. The
              Simulation module is based upon a "real-life situation." It enables students to
              actively participate in modeling and virtual experimentation and observe the
              physical processes from macroscopic to microscopic levels. The package includes
              tools that help teachers assemble a single computer based learning environment
              from heterogeneous educational resources and the WWW.

COMPACT's materials
              are designed to address a wide audience including: (1) two-year college
              students enrolled in science, technology and engineering programs, (2)
              non-science majors seeking scientific and technology literacy in anticipation
              of workplace demands, and (3) high school students taking physics - in
              particular those in Tech Prep, School to Career or vocational education
              programs. The software has a multilevel structure and flexible format to
              accommodate students with poor backgrounds in science and mathematics, those
              with some knowledge of algebra and geometry, as well as advanced students. The
              software may be used in classrooms equipped with stand-alone computers, a local
              network, or over the Internet for distance learning.


