Title       : Partnerships to Enhance Student Success in Information Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a0053285

Award Number: 0053285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $580000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin C. Archibald carchibald@valencia.cc.fl.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              JoeLynn Look  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dale A. Husbands  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy M. Grogan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Valencia Community Coll
	      P O BOX 3028
	      Orlando, FL  328023028    305/299-5000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Building upon successful employer-educator partnerships, Valencia Community
              College, in partnership with the University of Central Florida and Rollins
              College, is creating a comprehensive Information Technology Workforce
              Development System aimed at increasing the number of skilled computer
              programming technicians with maximized advanced education and career
              options.

Objectives include (1) demonstrating significant increases in the
              enrollment, persistence, retention, completion, and placement (into employment
              or the next level of education) of community college students pursuing an A.S.
              degree in Computer Programming and Analysis by enhancing relevant curriculum
              and instructional approaches; (2) maximizing and coordinating shared fiscal and
              human resources among higher education entities; (3) strengthening the ability
              of education to meet regional workforce demands; (4) enhancing the relationship
              among educators at the secondary, community college, and four-year
              institutional levels; and (5) designing and delivering new and revised
              curriculum and instructional strategies that incorporate industry-certified
              content and competencies and that address local and regional economic and
              workforce development needs.

Activities include (1) establishing an
              A.S.-to-B.S. articulation agreement model; (2) enhancing recruitment, academic
              support, retention, and developmental advisement strategies specifically
              directed at A.S. computer programming students; and (3) reviewing and updating
              the computer programming curriculum to better meet the needs of industry and
              students and to better prepare students for upper division study.

Expected
              outcomes are more rigorous academic content for courses and an increase in the
              number of students who are recruited into and who complete the A.S. degree in
              computer programming (which also means an increase in the number who are able
              to continue their education in four-year programs).

