Title       : Strengthening Aquatice Science Programs in Secondary and Postsecondary Schools
               Using Distance Education Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a0053308

Award Number: 0053308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44913              (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Simpson jsimpson@gadsdenst.cc.al.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Cline  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward T. Donlon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard J. Vining  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas Caddell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gadsden State Com College
	      George Wallace Drive
	      Gadsden, AL  35903    205/546-0484

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

Gadsden State Community College (GSCC), in partnership with
              Auburn 
University, is expanding its NSF-funded, one-year pilot program in
              order to improve aquatic science education at GSCC and in high schools located
              in rural East and West Alabama. The project: (1) allows existing educational
              resources to be used more efficiently; (2) increases the quality of aquatic
              science education in rural high schools; (3) increases the technical
              proficiency of secondary school teachers; (4) improves the technical quality
              and reputation of GSCC's Aquatic Sciences Program; and (5) increases
              recruitment, retention, and placement of students in technical careers in the
              aquatic sciences, especially the aquaculture industry. These goals are being
              achieved, in part, by installing recirculating systems in high schools. A core
              group of secondary teachers are participating in technical workshops.
              Self-sufficiency among teachers and their classes is being accelerated by the
              establishment of an electronic network with the focus on the improvement of
              aquatic science education and career preparation through distance education and
              locating intern positions for students within the private sector. Six high
              schools have a tilapia recirculating system and 20 secondary teachers have
              increased their technical knowledge and teaching capacity. GSCC has developed a
              2-year terminal associate degree program and a transfer associate degree
              program in aquaculture technology. 



