Title       : Environmental Technology Curriculum Enrichment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a0053288

Award Number: 0053288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory E. Ogden gregory.ogden@pima.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pima County Cmty College
	      District Central Office
	      Tucson, AZ  857091010    602/884-6666

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project aims to enhance communication between the community college,
              university, high schools, industry, and local government in Tucson, Arizona
              through collaborative multi-level internships, curriculum development and
              summer high school math and science teacher conferences. Curriculum development
              includes creation of a "Design for the Environment" general education course
              for freshman university students and entering technician students. This course
              is also being offered in local high schools for community college or university
              credit through co-enrollment programs. It is available on the WEB. A second new
              course is being developed entitled a "Capstone Technician" course in which
              community college students work on team laboratory projects, are mentored by
              local industry, and perform classroom activities that stress ethics and safety.
              Industrial internships are being offered to teams of engineering and technician
              students in local industries such as Tucson Electric Power and Raytheon, where
              they work on "real world" projects. High school teachers shadow and participate
              in these internships during a three-week institute to learn about current
              environmental issues. In addition, the high school teachers are developing new
              science and math modules that can be incorporated into existing math and
              science courses. These fresh ideas vitalize the teachers and interest students
              in environmental science and engineering. Furthermore, the student intern teams
              are visiting the high school classrooms to follow up with the teachers and to
              perform hands on demonstrations with high school students. The new high school
              materials are being disseminated locally at a three-day high school teacher
              conference. The community college and university course materials are being
              disseminated via CD-ROM and video at national meetings and via the WEB. Program
              evaluation is occurring internally by the evaluation group at the University of
              Arizona, and externally by NSF sponsored groups such as Project MTS at Western
              Michigan University.




