Title       : Teaching Molecular Biology and Bioinformatics in Community Colleges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a0053291

Award Number: 0053291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Bruening gebruening@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret R. Wilcox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith A. Kjelstrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martina McGloughlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

This project is improving the instructional capabilities of
              community colleges in genomic technologies. The products of this project,
              through the efforts of and collaborations with community college instructors,
              are easily accessible and readily updated instructional materials as well as
              community college instructors who are prepared to use them. Previous efforts
              were extremely successful in helping to educate community college instructors
              on the basic technologies that impact biotechnology-related research and in
              helping them to integrate appropriate courses and laboratories into their
              curricula. This project is facilitating expansion of the work begun under the
              current program that established a regional coalition among community colleges
              and UC Davis focused on the development of educational activities in molecular
              biology, genomics, and related scientific disciplines. The program is
              developing core curriculum material for community college faculty in the areas
              of modern biotechnology, genomics, functional genomics, and bioinformatics. The
              program offers week-long summer institutes in Molecular Biology and Molecular
              Diagnostics in which the principles of molecular biology and molecular
              diagnostics and their application in biotechnology are introduced. A new
              institute titled Functional Genomics and bioinformatics is being initiated.
              Bioinformatics is a very timely and appropriate topic for community colleges as
              it builds on the present and expanding skills in molecular biology, which our
              previous efforts have helped to foster, and on the computer science emphasis
              already in place at most community colleges. It is clear that there will be
              many career opportunities for graduates with bioinformatics training in the new
              millenium. Texts, manuals, laboratory kits, and other instructional materials
              are being made available for community college and high school instructors.
              Where possible, material is downloadable from the program web site to allow
              easy acess and rapid dissemination.
              
http://universityextension.ucdavis.edu/molbio/biotech,htin
