Title       : Consortium for Optics and Imaging Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0053262

Award Number: 0053262
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $574870             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Novak rnovak@monroecc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger L. Easton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven D. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Monroe Community College
	      1000 E Henrietta Road
	      Rochester, NY  146235780    716/424-5200

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              There is an urgent need to increase the number of optical technicians in U.S.
              industry to maintain a vital competitive advantage in international markets.
              This project is developing new educational resources that will both emphasize
              the appeal of this career path to students and support continuing education.
              These tools are based upon exploration of real data to develop the necessary
              technical skills. This is being accomplished by a new synergistic effort that
              builds upon existing resources and the demonstrated expertise of the team. New
              educational tools are being developed for testing in the two-year college
              curriculum in optics technology and the communications department at Monroe
              Community College in Rochester, NY. These new tools include instructional
              materials co-developed by the academic partners and based upon previous ATE
              grant work developed by the Center for Image Processing in Education. The
              materials are also being developed for use in pre-college settings in
              collaboration with high school teachers. Faculty of the colleges are conducting
              workshops for K-12 teachers that demonstrate the use of imaging technologies
              for science and technology education. Particular emphasis is being placed on
              those schools that have a large minority population and those who deal with
              students who have difficulty in learning in a typical secondary school setting.
              A lending library of imaging tools is being established for K-12 education for
              those institutions that do not have the necessary resources.

In order to
              meet the pressing need for continuing education for established optical/imaging
              technicians, portions of the programs are being adapted for use in the
              industrial environments under the guidance of members of the Advanced Precision
              Optics Manufacturing Association (APOMA) and the Society for Imaging Science
              and Technology (IS&T). These industrial members are also participating in
              recruitment and dissemination efforts of this project.


