Title       : Raman, Brillouin, Infrared and Modulation Spectroscopy of Collective and
               Localized Excitations in Tetrahedrally Coordinated Semiconductors and Their
               Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0102699

Award Number: 0102699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anant K. Ramdas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sergio Rodriguez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is devoted to the investigation of collective and localized
              excitations in tetrahedrally coordinated semiconductors and their
              heterostructures by means of a variety of optical techniques. The research will
              focus on the collective and localized excitations in isotopically controlled
              semiconductors composed composed of light atoms (diamond, SiC, BN and BP).
              Attention will be given to electronic states of donor-bound electrons and
              acceptor-bound holes in isotopically controlled diamond, Si, silicon carbide
              polytypes, as well as II-VI and III-V compound semiconductors. In addition,
              localized vibrations and gap modes of isoelectronic and compensated impurities
              will be explored and delineated in the chalcopyrites genealogically derived
              from the II-VI and III-V semiconductors. Collective excitations subjected to
              the constraints of the reduced dimensionality of nanostructures fabricated with
              molecular beam epitaxy will be investigated. Raman, Brillouin, Infrared ,
              photoluminescence and modulated reflectivity/transmission spectroscopic
              techniques supplemented by piezo- and magneto-spectroscopy will be employed to
              address the above problems.  Students will participate in this research. They
              will receive training in one of the forefront areas of current semiconductors
              physics and will thereby be prepared to enter the scientific/technical
              workforce of the 21st Century. 

This research deals with the application of
              several experimental optical techniques to problems posed by advanced
              semiconductor materials. These materials play a great role in current
              technology but a basic understanding of their behaviors is still lacking. This
              research will provide information that will be useful for the synthesis and use
              of ultrahard materials, such as diamond, silicon carbide, boron nitride and
              others that have found applications as superhard thin film coatings.  The
              behavior of these materials  can be changed  by the deliberate, controlled
              introduction of specific impurities or by manipulating their isotopic
              composition. The changed behaviors hold the promise of improved performance of
              the materials in applications of high temperature/high power electronic
              devices. This project offers many opportunities for the participation by
              students. Participants in the program will be  exposed to the excitement and
              intellectual challenges of an area that is important in contemporary basic
              science and significant for potential applications.  The expertise thus
              developed will prepare them for a future in academia and government as well as
              a career in research and development in the high tech optoelectronic
              industry.

