Title       : NER: NanoScintillation Systems for Aqueous-Based Liquid Scintillation Counting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a0102134

Award Number: 0102134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Mumper rjmump2@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Jay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019.  Biomedical and
              chemical researchers routinely employ liquid scintillation counting as a means
              of quantifying the amount of radioactivity emitted by beta-particle emitting
              isotopes (e.g., 3H and 14C) in samples generated during experiments. 
              Frequently, these samples are aqueous in nature and must be mixed with an
              organic solvent containing dissolved fluor molecules (scintillators) to form an
              emulsion-based "cocktail".   Although efficient, the disposal of the large
              quantities of "mixed" (radioactive and organic) waste generated by liquid
              scintillation counting presents an economical and environmental challenge.  To
              solve this problem, the PI proposes to develop an aqueous-based scintillation
              system by applying nanotechnology.

The overall goal of the 12-month project
              is to develop an aqueous-based NanoScintillation system that may serve as an
              alternative to organic solvent-based liquid scintillation cocktails.  Two
              specific aims proposed are: 1) to demonstrate that a primary fluor molecule can
              be entrapped in an engineered aqueous-based NanoScintillation System meeting
              the following criteria: system consists of >98% water, no organic solvents, and
              permanently suspended particles <100 nm, and 2) to demonstrate that the
              engineered NanoScintillation System has detection efficiencies for 3H and 14C
              that are >50% of those of commercial organic solvent-based liquid scintillation
              cocktails. Two types of stable oil-in-water microemulsions as nanotemplates for
              the curing of solid nanoparticles containing fluor molecules will be
              engineered.  Particle size, stability, and suspendability of the engineered
              nanoparticles will be measured as a criteria for an optimal NanoScintillation
              System.  The detection efficiency of optimal systems for 3H and 14C will be
              determined and compared to those of commercially available organic-solvent
              based cocktail systems.

