Title       : NIRT: Nanoscale Metalic Photonic Crystals; Fabrication, Physical Properties, and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0102964

Award Number: 0102964
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000001            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexei L. Efros efros@physics.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jing Shi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven M. Blair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew DeLong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zeev Valy Vardeny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1674,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering" (NSF 00-119). The goals of  the project are the fabrication,
              study of physical properties, theory and applications of nanoscale metallic
              photonic crystals (NMPC). These are structures in which metals are periodically
              embedded into dielectrics with nanometer size periods. NMPC may carry
              substantial electrical current but at the same time have transmission bands in
              the visible/infrared ranges. Some NMPC are also magnetic with important
              collective spin properties, while others may be superconductors at low
              temperature with non-linear transport properties. It is planned to fabricate
              two- and three-dimensional (2D and 3D) NMPC structures, and study their linear
              and nonlinear optical properties, as well as their transport properties. The
              surface of low-defect molecular single crystals from the acenes family (such as
              anthracene, pentacene, etc.) will be patterned into 2D structures, where
              carrier injection from evaporated metal electrodes will control the resulting
              device conductivity, metal-insulator transition, plasma frequency and
              superconductivity properties at low temperature. Theoretical work will guide
              the experimental research studies. The project is an interdisciplinary
              collaborative effort among researchers in Physics, Electrical Engineering and
              Materials Science with collaborators from Honeywell Inc.
%%% 
The project
              addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science,
              physics, and electrical engineering with high technological relevance. An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area. The wide range of fabrication, experimental and theoretical
              physics methods and applications employed throughout the project will enhance
              the educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. 
*** 

