Title       : NER: Photomanipulation of Hydrophobicity Using a 2-D Nanostructured Surface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0102680

Award Number: 0102680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95312              (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio A. Garcia tony.garcia@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Hayes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neal W. Woodbury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Devens Gust  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT 
CTS-0102680
A. Garcia/Arizona State University

This is a NER
              Grant.  Surface phenomena become prominent when fluidic systems and devices are
              miniaturized since the surface area to volume ration increases. Biological
              systems capitalize on nanoscale surface phenomena by assembling unique elements
              such as membranes and vesicles to shuttle materials into and out of cells or to
              process wastes in organs such as the kidney.  Much research is currently
              underway to find alternatives to moving parts in order to move ultra-small
              volumes of liquid (i.e. micorfluidics) since mechanical pumps and valves are
              currently difficult to manufacture at the nanoscale and require very careful
              choice of materials. 

This NER research project is an exploration of the
              nanoscale engineering of the surface of capillaries to control movement of
              ultra-small volumes of liquid.  It explores the hypothesis that molecular
              mixtures including photochromic molecules can be attached to the surface to
              form various types of nanoscale monolayer films in which the solvation and free
              volume of the active element (i.e. the photochormic molecule) are controlled. 
              This in turn will allow the design of  light controlled micorfluidic pumping,
              switching, and valving systems with biotechnological applications.  This
              project also supports the establishment of collaboration with the NSF-CREST
              Computational Center for Molecular Structure and Interactions at Jackson State
              University in order to visualize and interpret our experimental results as well
              as to guide further experimentation.

