Title       : Geometric aspects of interior-point algorithms of optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a0102628

Award Number: 0102628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Faybusovich leonid.faybusovich.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS 0102628
Principal Investigator:  Leonid FayBusovich, Department
              of Mathematics,
                         University of Notre
              Dame

Abstract.

PI analyzes geometric and algebraic structures arising in
              connection 
with optimization problems. The major goal is to further expand
              the 
domain of applications of interior-point algorithms. A method based on
              
the theory of random matrices is proposed to calculate characteristic
              
functions of cones generated by Chebyshev systems and thus 
self-concordant
              barriers for these cones. This drastically expands the 
domain of
              applicability of interior-point algorithms. In particular, 
possible
              applications to spline approximations are outlined. A general 
approach to the
              construction of self-concordant barriers for a broad 
class of
              infinite-dimensional domains is proposed. The technique of 
JB-algebras is
              suggested to carry over the recent impressive 
applications of the theory of
              Euclidean Jordan algebras to symmetric 
programming to the
              infinite-dimensional situation.  Possible control 
applications are
              outlined.

The theory of interior-point algorithms provides a general
              framework 
for the analysis of a broad class of extremely efficient
              optimization 
algorithms. These algorithms are used to solve problems aiming
              at 
finding the best possible solutions under various constraints (e.g. 
time
              constraints , available resources e.t.c ). The realization of 
the project
              will enable us to drastically expand a class of problems 
that can be solved
              with the help of powerful modern computers.
