Title       : NIRT: Dynamics of Structure and Charge at the Molecular Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0102950

Award Number: 0102950
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Fuhrer mfuhrer@physics.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence R. Sita  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen D. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Lobb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Igor V. Lyubinetsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1674,1767,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) will focus on the effects
              of the discreteness of atomic structure and charge on the electronic properties
              of nanoscale devices.  New tools will be developed to examine the structure and
              structure fluctuations of nanoscale devices while simultaneously measuring
              electronic transport properties.  Specifically, nanoscale metal wires will be
              fabricated in situ in an ultra-high vacuum combined scanning-tunneling
              microscope/atomic-force microscope.  The atomic-scale structural fluctuations
              of these wires will be studied during electromigration while simultaneously
              acquiring electronic transport information.  Small gap junctions will be also
              be fabricated, and used to study simultaneously the atomic structure and
              electronic transport properties of carbon nanotubes and novel molecular
              devices.  Concurrently, the sensitivity of nanoscale devices to fluctuating
              electrostatic environments will also be studied.  New charge sensors such as
              carbon nanotube-based single-electron-transistors and semiconducting carbon
              nanotube field-effect transistors will be investigated.  Efforts to manipulate
              the charge sensitivity of these devices through chemical modification will be
              explored.  Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in the
              development and use of cutting-edge research tools and will receive excellent
              training in interdisciplinary research at the frontiers of
              nanotechnology.
%%%
This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) is
              attacking two fundamental and intertwined problems, which will increase in
              importance, as electronic device dimensions become smaller.  First, the
              discreteness of atomic matter becomes significant in determining structural
              stability of devices.  Will fundamental properties such as the bonds between
              molecules remain stable during device operation.  Second, the discreteness of
              charge causes significant sensitivity of the device to fluctuations in the
              electrostatic environment.  How will local electric fields or static charge
              affect the devices.  The quantum nature of electronic transport in nanoscale
              systems requires that the structure of molecular-scale devices - as well as
              their interconnects - be controlled at the atomic level.  Techniques will be
              developed to simultaneously image the atomic structure of molecules, nanotubes,
              nanoscale wires, and interconnects while measuring electronic transport
              properties.  Changes in the local electrostatic environment at the level of
              motion of single charges will have pronounced effects on the electronic
              transport through nanodevices.  The proposed research will focus on the charge
              sensitivity of nanostructures ranging from superconducting single-electron
              transistors coupled to nanowires to semiconducting carbon nanotubes. 
              Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in the development and use
              of cutting-edge research tools and will receive excellent training in
              interdisciplinary research at the frontiers of nanotechnology.

