Title       : Synthesis and Study of Covalently Bonded Self-Assembled Polymer Gel
               Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0102468

Award Number: 0102468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhibing Hu zbhu@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The search for novel macromolecular structures is at the core of innovation in
              macromolecular science and engineering and is the long-term goal of our
              research.  Polymer gels are a unique class of macromolecular networks that
              contain a large fraction of solvent such as water within their structure.  Most
              current research on structures of polymer gels has focused on either bulk gels
              or microgels.  The objective of this work is to create nanostructured bulk
              polymer gels and correlate such structures to their physical properties.  The
              central idea is to first synthesize monodispersed polymer gel nanoparticles,
              then self-assemble them into 3D networks, and eventually covalently bond them. 
              The covalent bonding contributes to the structural stability, while
              self-assembly provides the with crystal structures that diffract light,
              resulting in colors.  The self-assembled structure of the PI's systems are
              further enriched by their two-level structural hierarchy: the primary network
              consists of crosslinked polymer chains inside each nanoparticle, while the
              secondary network is a crosslinked system of the nanoparticles.  As a
              feasibility study, the PI's synthesized such a material that contains 97 wt%
              water, displays a striking iridescence but is soft and flexible.  The PI's
              approach consists of four components.  First, several representative polymer
              gel nanoparticles such as N-isopropylacrylamide and hydroxypropyl cellulose
              will be synthesized and characterized by light scattering methods as model
              building blocks.  Second, the nanoparticles will be self-assembled into various
              structures.  Third, various reaction schemes will be used to covalently bond
              these assemblies.  Fourth, the physical properties of the networks, including
              covalent bonding, mesh size, two-level structural hierarchy, periodic
              structures, and elasticity, will be investigated using Fourier transform
              infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, chromatography, UV-visible spectroscopy, and
              light scattering methods.
%%%
This work, if successful, will provide a
              framework to generate stable periodic 3D structures with varying feature sizes
              in macromolecular materials.  It allows us to obtain useful functionality not
              only from the constituent building blocks but also from the long-range ordering
              that characterizes these structures.  Creating such nanostructured material may
              also be of importance in technological applications including controlled drug
              delivery, biomaterials, sensors, devices, chromatography, bio-adhesives, and
              displays.  Both undergraduate and graduate students will participate in this
              research.  They will gain valuable skills in interdisciplinary research and
              development in macromolecular science and nanotechnology.

