Title       : Frames for Signal Processing, Wireless Communication and Transmission Losses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a0102686

Award Number: 0102686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150919             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter G. Casazza pete@casazza.math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Manuel Leon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0102686
Casazza

This project will concentrate on several new applications of
              frame theory 
concerning the transmission of information.  First, for
              communication 
networks such as the Internet, packets of data are often lost
              in transmission 
and are retransmitted according to a protocol invisible to
              the user.  In 
many applications, the subsequent delay is unacceptable and
              best possible 
reconstruction from what is initially received is necessary. 
              Second, it has 
been shown that wireless communication systems which employ
              multiple 
antennas can have very high channel capacities.  Until now,
              constructive 
approaches to achieving this capacity have relied on the
              assumption that 
the receiver knows the complex-valued Rayleigh fading
              coefficients.  This 
assumption is often unrealistic in practice and recently
              new classes of 
unitary space-time signals have been proposed where neither
              the sender 
nor the receiver knows the fading coefficients.  The investigators
              will 
facilitate the implementation of both of these programs along with a
              host 
of related problems in signal/image processing.  This will require:  (1)
              The 
construction of totally new families of uniform tight frames with
              specific 
optimization properties;  (2) The development of algorithms for
              their 
implementation;  (3) The development of new (and computationally
              
efficient) methods for inverting the Gabor frame operator to allow a much
              
broader class of functions to be used for signal/image processing.

Is it
              possible to develop a cell phone which will not fade under almost any
              
circumstance?  Is it possible to have your computer receive an almost
              
perfect message immediately after it is sent?  Is it possible to develop a
              
hearing aid which not only allows the wearer to hear what he/she wants, 
but
              also allows a person to filter out sounds they do not want to hear? Is it
              
possible to have a breast x-ray which is so clear that cancer diagnoses are
              
99% accurate?  The answer is that all of these (and a host of other
              
important questions) are ``theoretically possible''.  What is needed for the
              
implementation of these important applications is the development of a
              
branch of mathematics called ``uniform tight frames''. Working with a 
dozen
              research groups around the country, the investigators are developing 
the
              mathematics needed for these applications as well as developing the 
means to
              implement these results in the specific cases listed above and a 
large number
              of other areas of application.

