Title       : NER: Toward Efficient Design Tools for Molecular Machines: Theoretical
               Investigations of Nanosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2002  
File        : a0102848

Award Number: 0102848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93552              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl W. Sohlberg sohlbergk@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1676      NANOSCALE:  EXPLORATORY RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0102848
Sohlberg
This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019. 
              Nanotechnology promises engineered devices constructed from just one or a few
              molecules. Applications are envisioned in medicine, molecular scale
              electronics, and information gathering for defense, space science, and other
              extreme environments. Molecular turbines pumping streams of gas one molecule at
              a time, minuscule valves delivering drugs with unprecedented site and dose
              specificity, pinhead scale computer disks storing libraries of information, and
              extremely sensitive artificial olfaction for contraband detection, are all
              theoretically possible, but first these devices must be designed. The ultimate
              goal of the program is to develop design engineering tools - "recipes" for
              nano-devices by design, while simultaneously training tomorrow's engineers and
              scientists in their development and application. In the case of macroscopic
              machines, the starting point for the development of engineering models is well
              known: the Newtonian laws of mechanics and the Maxwellian laws of electricity
              and magnetism. For molecular systems the starting point is quantum mechanics.
              Nano-systems exist at the transition/interface between molecular systems, which
              are dominated by quantum phenomena, and macroscopic systems where matter is
              essentially continuous and classical physics provides the best description.
              Modeling this hinterland between the classical and the quantum means
              incorporating features of both classical and quantum mechanics. Here a program
              of study is proposed combining semiclassical methods to accurately incorporate
              classical-quantum correspondence into the description of molecular device
              mechanics and dynamics, with semiempirical quantum mechanics for efficient
              structure calculations on these systems. Undergraduate and postdoctoral
              research assistants will carry out complementary components. Undergraduates
              will build skills with commercial software for electronic structure
              calculations while modeling molecular recognition and self-assembly. A
              postdoctoral research assistant will be involved in the fusion of these methods
              with the methods of semiclassical mechanics for nano-systems.

