Title       : Electronic Properties of Transition Metal Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a0102415

Award Number: 0102415
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmen C. Almasan calmasan@physics.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will fund research focused on studies of the
              in-plane and out-of-plane normal-state electrical conduction of high quality
              single crystals of selected copper-oxide superconductors and layered
              manganites.  The emphasis of the experimental project on the cuprates will be
              on the transformation of their normal-state conduction across the phase diagram
              which includes insulating, under-doped, and over-doped regimes.  The electrical
              transport and magnetization data obtained will be analyzed for information
              about conduction mechanisms.  Layered manganites have a rich phase diagram
              which includes several phase transitions.  These thermodynamic phase
              transitions have a strong effect on the charge transport.  The emphasis of the
              manganite research will be on the effect of thermodynamic phase transitions on
              the electrical conduction.  The  research is expected to significantly enhance
              our fundamental understanding of the electrical behaviors of cuprates and
              manganites.  More broadly, the results from this basic investigation may
              provide insight into appropriate doping schemes to facilitate applications of
              cuprates and manganites for electronic sensors and devices such as magnetic
              field sensors or even computer logic devices.  This highly interdisciplinary
              project will contribute to the education and training of doctoral and
              undergraduate students, as well as postdoctoral researchers at the institutions
              which are part of the collaboration.  The diversity of expertise gained by the
              participants in this research program is a substantial advantage in today's
              knowledge based, technology driven economy, being beneficial to a future career
              in industry, government, or academia.
%%%
This individual investigator award
              will fund an experimental research project to study the unusual electrical
              properties of high temperature superconductors and layered manganites.  The
              high temperature superconductors, even in the normal state, conduct electricity
              in ways that are very different from typical electrical conductors such as
              copper and silicon.  Also, the conduction of electricity in manganites is
              strongly affected by thermodynamic phase transitions.  The proposed research is
              expected to significantly enhance our fundamental understanding of the
              electrical behaviors of cuprates and manganites.  Clarifying these novel
              electrical behaviors may contribute to eventual applications of these materials
              for electronic sensors and devices such as magnetic field sensors or even
              computer logic devices.  This project offers excellent research and education
              opportunities for graduate students within an interdisciplinary program.  It
              involves minority-group graduate students who pursue thesis research and
              receive excellent training beneficial to a future career in industry,
              government, or academia.   
***

