Title       : Renormalization and Phase Transitions of Excitons in 2D Nanostructures:
               Photonics at the University of Pittsburgh
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0102457

Award Number: 0102457
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315010             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Snoke snoke@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the nonlinear optical properties of excitons in GaAs and
              InGaAs coupled quantum wells. When an electric field is applied normal to the
              wells, the electrons and holes in excitons in these structures become spatially
              separated, leading to several nonlinear effects.  One specific project goal is
              to create excitonic circuits by which excitons are manipulated by an electric
              field just like free carriers. This involves modeling the effects of
              inhomogeneous electric field and stress and developing ways to increase the
              mobility of excitons in these structures. This task involves a collaboration
              with sample fabricators. A second goal is to work toward an efficient,
              room-temperature optical transistor based on this type of quantum well
              structure. In this scheme one light beam switches another light beam on and
              off. This involves understanding the many-body renormalization effects of the
              excitons in these structures, a goal that will be pursued in collaboration with
              several theorists. This project also includes a substantial commitment to
              undergraduate science education.  An undergraduate Certificate in Photonics
              program was begun at the University of Pittsburgh under a previous NSF grant. 
              The present project includes efforts to expand that program by creating
              opportunities for several undergraduates to do research in photonics.


When
              light is absorbed in a semiconductor, the photon particles can be changed into
              a new type of energy particle known as an exciton. An exciton carries optical
              energy like a photon but moves through the semiconductor crystal like an
              electron.  By fabricating special layered structures known as double quantum
              wells, we can cause these exciton particles to move in response to stress and
              electric field. 
In this project we study the properties of excitons in double
              quantum wells, with the aim of creating circuits for these optical particles
              similar to electronic circuits. The wavelength of the excitons in 
these
              structures can also be very sensitive to the intensity of light that hits them.
               We hope to use this effect to develop an optical transistor, in which one
              light beam switches another light beam on and off, just as an electronic
              transistor switches an electrical signal on and off. These effects are part of
              the field of "photonics," in which devices are made which use photons just as
              electronics uses electrons.  This field is a growing sector of our economy, as
              the increased need for fast communications pushes technology to optical rather
              than electronic signals. This project involves not only research in photonics,
              but also a substantial commitment to photonics education. An undergraduate
              Certificate in Photonics program was begun at the University of Pittsburgh
              under a previous NSF grant. The present project includes efforts to expand that
              program. In particular, this project creates the opportunity for several
              undergraduates to do research in photonics.


