Title       : Inland Mesolithic Settlement in Southern Scandinavia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0102152

Award Number: 0102152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117128             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Douglas Price tdprice@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project involves two years of excavation at an extraordinary, waterlogged
              late Mesolithic
site in the interior of Denmark. The focus of these
              investigations is the study of inland settlement of hunter-gatherers and its
              role in the transition to farming around 4000 B.C. A good deal has been learned
              in recent years about coastal settlement and subsistence in this region On the
              other hand very little work has been done on inland settlements and their place
              in late Mesolithic adaptations. 

Several lines of evidence suggest that such
              sites may have been the initial locus for the adoption of farming. Excavations
              will be conducted at a site where organic preservation is exceptional and
              substantial quantities of plant and animal material are available for the
              characterization of subsistence change. In addition artifacts of stone, bone,
              wood, and other materials should be present in large numbers providing a more
              complete view of the technology of these inland groups The excavations should
              provide information on the subsistence focus, season and duration of inland
              settlement, as well as connections with the coast. 

The presence and age of
              Early Neolithic materials at the inland site may allow an assessment of the
              role and priority of farming activities in this region. The research will
              evaluate the role of climate and resource deterioration in the transition from
              hunting and gathering to farming in this region.
Excavation analysis and
              conservation of materials from waterlogged Stone
Age sites is expensive but
              the information gained from such well preserved contexts is well worth the cost
              Permission has been granted for this work to proceed. All materials recovered
              in the excavation will be the property of the Kalundborg og Omegns Museum,
              Kalundborg, Denmark.

