Title       : Radical Routes to New Copolymeric Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0102759

Award Number: 0102759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren T. Ford wtford@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Two new types polymers will be synthesized and characterized in the laboratory
              of the principal investigator, and some of their properties will be determined
              in greater depth in the laboratories of collaborators.  Thousands of polymer
              colloids (also known as latexes) will be synthesized in parallel by emulsion
              copolymerization of hydrophilic and hydrophobic monomers in search of
              copolymers that exhibit new morphologies.  Visual tests will be used to
              determine which latexes form opalescent films, and which will separate into
              phases like those of polymer blends.  Copolymers formed by emulsion
              polymerization, which has been used for the manufacture synthetic rubber latex
              and coatings for more than fifty years, may provide a low cost alternative to
              block copolymers that are used now to stabilize polymer blends.  The chemical
              and physical bases for the transformation of colloidal crystals of a
              styrene-hydroxyethyl methacrylate latex to porous polymer nets will
              investigated.  The polymer nets will be explored as separation media for
              polymers and colloids, as solid supports for catalysts, and as templates for
              preparation of photonic bandgap materials.  Optical properties of the materials
              will be studied in collaboration with Profs. Ackerson and Tong in the Oklahoma
              State University (OSU) Department of Physics.  Model polymampholytes will be
              synthesized to enable testing of current theory of their structures and
              properties in aqueous solutions.  Polyampholytes are synthetic synthetic
              analogues of proteins that contain (+) and (-) charged units in a single
              polymer chain.   They will be prepared by living radical polymerization of
              uncharged monomers followed by functional group transformations to create the
              charged units.  The compositions, structures, and molecular weights of the
              polymers will be determined at OSU.  The model polyampholytes will be provided
              to Prof. Colby of Pennsylvania State University for measurements of viscosity
              of aqueous solutions, electrical charge on the polymer chains, and dielectric
              response, and those results will be compared with new theories of
              polyampholytes by Prof. Rubinstein of the University of North
              Carolina.
%%%
This research is in the general areas of nanoscience,
              bio-related polymers, and combinational chemistry.  Students earning graduate
              degrees from this research will gain experience at polymer synthesis and
              characterization in the laboratory of the principal investigator, and in
              properties of polymer solutions at Penn State or optical properties of
              colloidal materials in physics at OSU.  In addition to meeting degree
              requirements in chemistry, the graduate students (and the postdoctoral scholar)
              will participate in the interdisciplinary workshops and short courses of the
              Oklahoma Network for Nanostructured materials (NanoNet), a newly formed group
              of faculty in chemistry, physics, chemical engineering, and electrical
              engineering at OSU, the University of Oklahoma, and the University of Tulsa.
              The broad scientific base will prepare them for industrial research and
              development or university teaching.

