Title       : Workshop on Preservation of Stability Under Discretization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a0102878

Award Number: 0102878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine Mavriplis                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Estep estep@math.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Simon J. Tavener  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Stability is a term used to describe a wide variety of issues revolving around
              the physical observability of a solution of a differential equation.  Stability
              lies at the very heart of the ability to make predictions about physical
              situations from mathematics and are particularly relevant when numerical
              approximation is involved, since discretization causes perturbation of both the
              model and the data.  Numerical stability issues are typically complex because
              addressing such questions often requires a wide range of mathematical
              techniques, involving not only standard methods of numerical analysis, but
              ideas from dynamical systems, geometry, functional analysis, and the theory of
              differential equations.  This raises barriers both to young researchers trying
              to learn about numerical stability and to communication between researchers
              working in different areas yet facing similar stability problems.  The goal of
              the Workshop on the Preservation of Stability under Discretization is twofold: 
              (1) to increase the accessibility of numerical stability issues for young
              researchers and (2) provide an opportunity for the exchange of information and
              ideas between specialists in different application areas.  The Workshop will
              host a series of lectures by leading experts, each of whom will each address a
              separate aspect of stability under discretization.  The lectures will be aimed
              towards an audience of advanced graduate students and non-specialists and will
              be collected into a permanent archive. In addition, the invited speakers will
              host a series of discussion and analysis sessions for students and young
              researchers.

Stability is the term used to describe the situation in which a
              physical quantity is affected by small disturbances taking place at remote
              distances and times.  The "butterfly" effect in chaos is one well-known
              stability issue, but stability issues arise in nearly every kind of physical
              situation from the flow of fluids and gases to computing rocket trajectories to
              other planets.  Stability is particular relevant to numerical modeling of
              physical situations on computers because the modeling itself induces widespread
              error/disturbances.  Accounting for the effects of these discretization errors
              is difficult because it typically requires mathematical ideas from many areas,
              raising barriers both to learning about how deal with stability and to
              communication between different areas of specialization.  The goal of the
              Workshop on the Preservation of Stability under Discretization is twofold:  (1)
              to increase the accessibility of numerical stability issues for young
              researchers and (2) provide an opportunity for the exchange of information and
              ideas between specialists in different application areas. The Workshop will
              host a series of lectures by leading experts, each of whom will each address a
              separate aspect of stability under discretization.  The lectures will be aimed
              towards an audience of advanced graduate students and non-specialists and will
              be collected into a permanent archive. In addition, the invited speakers will
              host a series of discussion and analysis sessions for students and young
              researchers.


