Title       : NER: Nanoengineered Pipettes for Patch Clamp Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a0102889

Award Number: 0102889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90642              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard N. Zare zare@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0102889
Richard Zare, Stanford University

The fundamental
              processes of biology occur on the nanoscale. Proteins are on the order of few
              nanometers; the organelles essential to cellular function are tens or hundreds
              of nanometers. Direct investigation of these structures has been limited by the
              difficulty of making tools of compatible size.  A novel tool is proposed that
              may enable the manipulation and investigation of individual nanoscale
              biological objects with control and flexibility impossible with existing tools.
              A nanoengineering process that produces pipettes especially has been designed
              for the robust manipulation of small biological objects, such as vesicles.
              Unlike the conventional pipettes routinely used in electrophysiology, the
              proposed pipettes have a concave seating surface at their tips. This seating
              surface provides a large contact area between the pipette and the object being
              held, resulting in excellent stability and control. In addition, the size of
              the seating surface can be tailored to hold objects of varying sizes, from tens
              of microns to hundreds of nanometers. The lower size limit is compatible with a
              wide range of subcellular organelles.

A further extension of our pipettes is
              as delivery devices. It is proposed to combine electrophysiological and
              chemical composition analyses by coupling patch clamp and capillary
              electrophoresis with laser induced fluorescence. This novel coupling of
              analysis techniques will enable the further elucidation of vesicle-to-vesicle
              differences by combining information about morphology, electrophysiology, and
              chemical composition. The significance of biological heterogeneity is only
              beginning to be explored. The tools we propose may afford new insights on this
              intriguing biological problem. 

