Title       : Determination of Activation Energies and Modeling of Low Temperature Creep of
               Alpha, Alpha-Beta and Beta Titanium Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0102320

Award Number: 0102320
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283489             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sreeramamurthy Ankem ankem@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0102320
Ankem

This project is aimed at new understanding into low
              temperature creep of two-phase titanium alloys that find applications in
              various technologies including energy, aerospace, marine, chemical industries,
              consumer goods and bio-medical implants. Recent observations on the creep
              behavior of alpha titanium at ambient temperature by twinning led to the need
              for a more complete and fundamental modeling for predicting the integrity of
              these structures. The main goals of this study are: (1) to determine the
              activation energies for creep mechanisms in alpha, alpha-beta and beta titanium
              alloys in the low temperature range of 298- 458K, (2) to model the creep
              behavior of these alloys including Finite Element Modeling (FEM), (3) to
              compare FEM predicted creep curves and strain distributions with experimental
              values, and (4) to recommend optimal chemistry and microstructures of Ti alloys
              for improved low temperature creep resistance. To reach these goals, two
              different alloy classes (Ti-Mn and Ti-V) are selected for deformation tests at
              low temperatures combined with SEM and TEM for electron lithography, surface
              deformation studies and microstructure characterization such as dislocation
              densities and crystal structure analyses. Activation energies are determined
              and the creep processes are modeled from the creep tests data. The creep
              constants of the alpha and beta phases are used to model the creep behavior of
              two-phase alpha-beta Ti alloys by FEM using ANSYS computer program. The FEM
              modeling of creep of alpha-beta alloys gives a predictive capability in terms
              of the alpha and beta phases present and their morphologies. The results of the
              study are directly applicable for other similar systems such as zirconium and
              magnesium alloys that find application in energy and transportation sectors. In
              addition, the results related to the FEM modeling are applicable to any
              two-phase or composite materials. 
%%%
The research develops new
              understanding of the low temperature creep mechanisms and the results are
              applicable for designing new titanium alloys and in optimizing the
              microstructures of existing alloys for improved creep performance. The research
              will also help in predicting component performance.
***
 

Titanium alloys
              have attractive engineering properties including high strength to weight ratio,
              high fracture toughness, good high temperature strength, excellent corrosion
              resistance and bio- compatibility. Due to these properties, they find
              applications in various areas including energy, aerospace, marine, chemical
              industries, consumer goods and bio-medical implants. In some of these
              applications at low temperatures such as ambient temperature, loads are applied
              on the components for extended periods of time where creep becomes an important
              property. In this regard, it was recently shown that titanium alloys can creep
              at 95% yield stress at ambient temperature, but the activation energies for
              creep which can explain why and how creep occurs are not known. In addition,
              there are no simple models available to predict the creep behavior of two-phase
              materials from the knowledge of the creep behavior of individual phases, their
              morphology and volume fractions. The main objectives of this investigation are:
              (1) Determine the activation energies of creep mechanisms in alpha, alpha-beta
              and beta titanium alloys in the low temperature range of 298- 458K, (2) Model
              the creep behavior of a, a-b and b Ti alloys including Finite Element Modeling
              of a-b Ti alloys, (3) Compare FEM predicted creep curves and strain
              distributions with experimental values, and (4) Recommend optimal chemistry and
              microstructures of Ti alloys for improved low temperature creep resistance. For
              these studies, three Ti-Mn alloys and three Ti-V alloys will be used as the
              model systems. Tensile tests will be conducted in the temperature range 298
              -458 K and creep tests will be conducted in the temperature range 298 - 458 K
              and in the stress level ranging from 85 -100% YS. SEM and TEM will be employed
              for electron lithography, surface deformation studies and microstructure
              characterization such as dislocation densities and crystal structure analyses.
              From the creep tests data, activation energies will be determined and the creep
              processes will be modelled. The creep constants of the a and b phases will be
              used to model the creep behaviour of two-phase a-b Ti alloys by Finite Element
              Modelling using ANSYS computer program. It is expected that the proposal work
              can be completed in three years. A successful completion of this work will be
              of great technological importance, as it will have a significant effect in
              designing new titanium alloys and in optimizing the microstructures of existing
              alloys for improved creep performance. For example, determination of activation
              energies gives a clue as to which species, i.e. elements, present in the
              material are responsible for low temperature creep and, accordingly, new alloys
              can be designed for improved performance. The FEM modeling of creep of
              alpha-beta alloys gives a predictive capability in terms of the alpha and beta
              phases present and their morphologies. This will also help in designing and in
              predicting component performance. Even though this investigation uses titanium
              alloys as the model system, the outcomes of the studies related to activation
              energies are directly applicable for any other similar systems such as
              Zirconium alloys. Furthermore, in general, the results related to the FEM
              modeling would be applicable to any two-phase or composite materials. This work
              will be carried out by the PI, Prof. S. Ankem and two graduate students. The PI
              has extensive experience in physical and mechanical behavior of Ti alloys and
              FEM Modeling. The graduate students will be trained in the state of the art
              experimental techniques such as electron lithography for drawing fiducial
              lines, SEM and TEM techniques and application of computers in predicting
              material behavior.

