Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a0102079

Award Number: 0102079
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christina L. Burch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : C,Burch
	      253 Hawthorne Ave
	      Princeton, NJ  08540    609/430-9507

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
              FY2001.  The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
              protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
              not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
              opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
              microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
              established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
              research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
              fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
              research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
              of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
              locations. 

The research and training plan is entitled "Can selection to
              minimize the effects of translational and/or mutational errors explain codon
              usage patterns in microbes despite their diversity?"  The investigation of
              error minimization mediated by biased codon usage will be extended from
              bacteria to their bacteriophage parasites, using both comparative genome
              analyses of natural isolates and laboratory evolution experiments.  Primarily,
              the research pursues the preliminary observations that 1) patterns of codon
              usage bias in bacteria appear to reflect selection for error minimization, and
              2) phage genome type (e.g. dsDNA vs. ssDNA) appears to influence the degree of
              error minimization, but not the degree to which phage codon usage reflects host
              codon usage.

