Title       : Ultrasensitive Calorimetry Enabled by Suspended Semiconductor Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0102886

Award Number: 0102886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Roukes roukes@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Worlock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith Schwab  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In mesoscopic systems at low temperatures, heat transport and thermal
              equilibration occur in a very different manner from macroscopic systems at room
              temperature.  This is due to the small heat capacities involved, and very long
              thermal relaxation times to reach equilibrium with a heat reservoir, the
              environment.  At the ultimate limit, thermal transport involves exchange of a
              single energy channel between a system and the environment.  During the
              preceding phase of this project, investigators observed, for the first time,
              this predicted quantization of thermal conductance.  This places an important,
              hard upper bound on the thermal conductance available through future molecular
              electronic devices.  The current project continues the investigation of heat
              capacities of nanomachined mesoscopic systems:  Suspended semiconductor
              nanostructures that are thermally-isolated and have integral transducers that
              permit the localized introduction of heat and local temperature measurements. 
              Heat capacity measurements on minute samples with unprecedented sensitivity
              should be possible. This should provide data relevant to the engineering of
              miniaturized thermal detectors, and will provide crucial information relating
              to limits of power dissipation in molecular-scale and ultrasmall electronic
              devices.  With this level of sensitivity, calorimetry experiments that
              elucidate processes involving individual atoms and molecules should also become
              possible for the first time.  The effort will introduce undergraduates,
              graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers to advanced techniques in
              nanofabrication and in techniques and principles of ultrasensitive
              measurements.
%%%
Future electronics will likely be based upon molecular
              scale devices.  Active electronic devices, at any scale, require power to
              operate and this must ultimately be dissipated to their surroundings.  However
              at the molecular scale the processes that govern power dissipation become very
              weak; hence it can be problematic.  This domain had remained largely unexplored
              until 1999, when, in a previous NSF-funded research program, investigators
              observed the quantization of thermal conductance -- a fundamental limit to the
              rate at which power can be conducted from a small system to its surroundings. 
              In their current proposal, the authors propose to continue with research in
              this realm, turning now to the heat capacity of very small systems, i.e. their
              ability to "store" energy. Their approach involves suspended semiconductor
              nanostructures, fabricated by new surface nanomachining processes they have
              developed.  These enable the construction of complex exploratory devices at the
              nanometer-scale, with internal components allowing quantitative and precise
              measurements on their properties to be carried out.  In the proposed research
              program these will be utilized to obtain a more complete understanding of heat
              transport and the heat capacity of nanometer-scale structures.  They should
              also prove to be extremely useful for the engineering of miniaturized thermal
              detectors, and will provide crucial information relating to limits of power
              dissipation in molecular-scale and ultrasmall electronic devices.  With this
              level of sensitivity, experiments that elucidate processes involving heat flow
              between individual atoms and molecules should also become possible for the
              first time.  The effort will introduce undergraduates, graduate students, and
              postdoctoral researchers to advanced techniques in nanofabrication and in
              techniques and principles of ultrasensitive measurements.

