Title       : Magnetic Resonance Studies of Strongly-Correlated Electron Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0102293

Award Number: 0102293
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas E. MacLaughlin douglas.maclaughlin@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and muon spin rotation (muSR) techniques will
              be used to study electronic structure, magnetism, and superconductivity in
              strongly correlated electron metals and alloys. The sensitivity of NMR and muSR
              to magnetism on the atomic scale makes these techniques ideal tools to probe
              local effects of strong electron correlation.  Particular attention will be
              paid to the crucial role of structural disorder in the non-Fermi-liquid (NFL)
              behavior of many heavy-fermion systems.  NMR and muSR spectra and spin-lattice
              relaxation rates will probe inhomogeneous paramagnetism and glassy
              low-frequency spin fluctuations in UCu5-xPdx and other NFL systems. 27Al NMR
              and muSR spectra relaxation rates in Ce1-xLaxAl system will be examined for
              evidence whether, as recently claimed, these alloys exhibit an anisotropic
              Kondo effect.  A thorough examination of superconductivity and magnetism will
              be carried out in the newly-discovered class of CenTIn3n+2 heavy-fermion
              materials, which exhibit a wide variety of anomalous magnetic and
              superconducting behavior.  Other projects include muSR studies of cuprate and
              maganite transition metal oxides, and quantum critical behavior in MnSi under
              pressure.  Graduate students in this program will be bell prepared for
              research/teaching careers in both basic and applied areas.

Understanding
              effects of correlations between electrons on magnetism and conduction in solids
              remains an important unsolved problem in condensed matter physics, with
              practical consequences for technology in several areas of materials science. 
              This research uses magnetic resonance techniques as probes of
              correlated-electron behavior at the atomic level.  In magnetic resonance, the
              magnetism of 'spin probes' (e. g. nuclei as nuclear magnetic resonance) is used
              to 'spy' on the local magnetic environment of the probes, which observe but do
              not seriously perturb their surroundings.  This work will lead to better
              understanding of the behavior of the so-called heavy-electron metals, in which
              electrons behave as if they were hundreds or even thousands of times more
              massive than free electrons.  It will be carried out in collaboration with
              researchers at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and with research trips
              abroad (Leiden University, ETH Zurich, TU Munich, TRIUMF, Vancouver, and Paul
              Scherrer Institute, Switzerland).  Graduate students in this program will there
              for gain valuable insight into research at the national and international
              level, and will be well prepared for research/teaching careers in both basic
              and applied condensed matter physics and materials research.


