Title       : Structured Deformations and the Microgeometry of Continua
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a0102477

Award Number: 0102477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69002              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Owen do04@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0102477

PI: 			Owen, David
Institution:
              		Carnegie Mellon University 
Program: 		Applied Mathematics
Program Manager:
              	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: Structured Deformations and the Microgeometry of
              Continua

Structured deformations provide a multiscale geometry and
              kinematics for describing the effects at the macrolevel of both smooth and
              non-smooth deformations occurring at submacroscopic levels.  The proposed
              research focuses on (i) applying this recently developed multiscale geometry to
              refine and improve important continuum descriptions of single crystals
              undergoing slipping on more than one crystallographic system, (ii) identifying
              via a relaxation technique from the calculus of variations a geometrical
              variable that measures the volume swept out by submacroscopic vacancies and
              understanding the connection between this variable and different types of
              dislocation movements, and (iii) obtaining relations that complete the system
              of balance laws and constitutive relations that arise when a continuous body
              undergoes structured deformations and motions.  This research bears on the
              fields of materials science and engineering and on the mathematical study of
              geometry at multiple length and time scales.  

The geometrical changes in a
              deforming paper clip or other metallic body that appear continuous and smooth
              to the naked eye often appear to be jerky and abrupt when viewed in a
              microscope.  Similarly, the smooth stretching of a plastic sandwich bag or
              other thin plastic film appears differently at macroscopic and submacroscopic
              scales.  The most successful theories for studying macroscopic changes in a
              body - paper clip, sandwich bag, or otherwise -- brought about by applied
              forces or heat sources are called field theories.  The success of field
              theories rests first on our physical understanding of how a particular
              substance, e.g., the particular metal comprising the paper clip or the
              particular plastic constituting the sandwich bag, influences the detailed form
              of the field theories and, second, on our mathematical understanding of the
              equations that comprise the field theory.  The research undertaken in this
              project is part of an ongoing program to enrich these field theories by
              permitting them to describe and predict the behavior of a body that changes
              shape differently at macroscopic and submacroscopic length scales.  The desired
              outcome of this research is refined, improved field theories that permit more
              accurate simulations of the behavior of technologically important
              materials.

Date: June 25, 2001

