Title       : NMITA (Phase II): Integrating Interactive Identification Keys, Distribution
               Maps, and Stratigraphic Columns with the Neogene Marine Biota of Tropical
               America WWW Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0102544

Award Number: 0102544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104161             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann F. Budd ann-budd@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles T. Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1165,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Integrating Interactive Identification Keys, Distribution Maps, and
              Stratigraphic Columns with the Neogene Marine Biota of Tropical America WWW
              Database

The project will continue development of the Neogene Marine Biota
              of Tropical America (NMITA) database, an online biotic database
              <http://nmita.geology.uiowa.edu> containing high-quality images and synoptic
              information on taxa collected as part of several associated multidisciplinary
              fossil-collecting projects in the Caribbean, Central America, and South
              America. They include the Panama Paleontology Project (coordinated by Jackson
              and Coates of the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute) and the Neogene
              Paleontology of the Northern Dominican Republic Project (coordinated by Jung of
              the Natural History Museum in Basel, Switzerland). NMITA provides basic
              information on authorship, synonyms, and type specimens of individual taxa
              identified in the collections, as well as diagnostic morphologic characters and
              stratigraphic and geographic occurrences. The website offers online
              identification keys and illustrated glossaries of morphologic terms, as well as
              interactive maps and stratigraphic columns for examining occurrences and
              interpreting distribution patterns.

During the original first phase of the
              project, information was contributed by nine specialists at different
              institutions in the U.S., U.K., Switzerland, and Panama. A total of ~1300 taxa
              (~3800 images) belonging to two kingdoms and five animal phyla were included.
              The taxa consisted of: ~225 corals, ~330 bryozoans, ~350 mollusks, ~100
              foraminifera, ~100 ostracodes, and ~230 fish; all except mollusks are at the
              species level.
During the second phase of the project (supported by the
              present grant), data for ~1300 molluscan taxa and Oligo-Miocene corals will be
              entered, ongoing data entry for foraminifera and ostracodes will be completed,
              and remaining static pages for corals and bryozoans will be converted to a new
              Oracle system. Additional identification keys and morphology/ecology-based
              search routines will be implemented, and new dynamic maps and columns showing
              occurrences for individual taxa will be developed. Pilot projects will be
              performed sharing data with the NCEAS Paleobiology database, specimen
              databases, and STATPOD.  Proper documentation will be developed for the NMITA
              database project, and made available online so that others could manage the
              database or develop a similar database elsewhere.

When complete, NMITA will
              provide an image-based inventory of the marine biodiversity of tropical America
              over the past 25 million years. It will serve as a paleontological databank,
              accounting for taxa in quantitative
analyses of diversity through geologic
              time. It will summarize ongoing systematic research on the fossil marine biota
              of tropical America and be instrumental in earmarking diverse clades in need of
              future systematic study.  NMITA is unique among paleontological databases in
              its specimen basis and its emphasis on photographs and illustrations, and it
              serves as a model for future dissemination of taxonomic data in
              paleontology.


