Title       : Dynamic Observations of Solar Magnetic and Velocity Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0102184

Award Number: 0102184
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul A. Evenson                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395595             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip H. Scherrer pscherrer@solar.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will work to understand the physical nature of large-scale
              phenomena on the Sun. The main effort is to make long-term observations of
              large-scale magnetic fields, interpret interrelated phenomena seen on the solar
              surface, and develop realistic models of the processes acting in the solar
              interior, corona, and solar wind. Dynamic changes of solar magnetic fields
              affect the corona, interplanetary space, and finally the terrestrial
              environment on a vast range of time scales. Short and intermediate time scale
              magnetic variations drive geomagnetic activity, while longer term changes in
              the overall level of solar activity seem to be related to irradiance
              variations, and therefore to climate change. The investigators will continue
              several specific lines of investigation presently supported by an expiring NSF
              grant. The main research topics are mechanisms of solar activity on cycle and
              shorter time scales, magnetic structure and evolution of the solar corona and
              heliosphere, and prediction of geoeffective solar inputs to the terrestrial
              environment. These studies are based on analysis of solar magnetic field
              observations made at the Wilcox Solar Observatory (WSO) and other observatories
              such as SOHO/MDI, NSO, etc. Coronal fields are estimated by numerical model
              calculations. The investigators also will continue partial support of
              SolarMail, and SolarNews. These services are provided to support the general
              solar physics community. They can be accessed via the web at
              http://spd.aas.org/.

