Title       : Imputation Methodology for Complex Survey Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0102223

Award Number: 0102223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97897              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun Shao shao@stat.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research focuses on imputation and variance estimation after
              imputation for survey data with nonresponse.  Marginal imputation (such as
              random hot deck imputation, nearest neighbor imputation, and random regression
              imputation) will be studied for the purpose of estimating population totals and
              quantiles.  The investigator will also study joint imputation (for estimating
              parameters such as the coefficients of correlation or the cell probabilities in
              a contingency table) and imputation under nonignorable response.  For each
              imputation method, variance estimation that takes nonresponse and imputation
              into account will be studied, using a direct derivation approach or a
              replication method such as the jackknife, the balanced half samples, and the
              bootstrap.

Many statistics and government agencies collect data through
              surveys.  Most surveys have nonresponse. Item nonresponse occurs when some
              sampled units cooperate in the survey but fail to provide answers to some
              questions. Imputation techniques, which insert values for nonrespondents, are
              commonly used compensation procedures for item nonresponse.  In some cases,
              when auxiliary information is properly used, imputation increases statistical
              accuracy.  An essential requirement for an imputation method is that one can
              obtain unbiased (or approximately unbiased) survey estimators by treating the
              imputed values as observed data and using the standard estimation formulas
              designed for the case of no nonresponse.  This requires developments on
              imputation methodology and statistical analysis procedures to take nonresponse
              and imputation into account.  Since most of the proposed research topics are
              motivated by problems in survey agencies such as the Census Bureau, the Bureau
              of Labor Statistics, Westat, and Statistics Canada, results obtained from the
              proposed research will have significant impacts on the imputation and variance
              estimation methodology for these survey agencies.

