Title       : Collaborative Research: Mathematical Studies of Short-Ranged Spin Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0102541

Award Number: 0102541
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Stein dls@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0102541 

Mathematical Sciences: Collaborative
              Research:  Mathematical Studies of Short-Ranged Spin Glasses 

Abstract
              DMS-0102541 
Stein 


The work under this grant addresses the mathematical
              foundations of the theory of disordered magnets known as spin glasses. 
              Although there exist proposed solutions of idealized (and unrealistic) spin
              glass models, the principal investigators' interests center on answering
              fundamental statistical mechanical questions that bear on the behavior of real
              laboratory spin glasses.  These questions, many of which remain controversial
              despite two decades of intensive study, include the nature of ordering in the
              equilibrium spin glass phase, understanding anomalous behavior, such as slow
              relaxation and aging arising from nonequilibrium dynamics, and proving the
              presence or absence of a phase transition in finite dimensions.  The methods
              used and concepts introduced should be relevant not only for spin glasses but
              also for other disordered systems, many of which remain poorly understood. 
              Moreover, the generality of the principal investigators' approach to dynamics
              should yield progress in certain aspects of nonequilibrium dynamics in both
              homogeneous and disordered systems.

Our deep physical and mathematical
              understanding of ordered systems in the solid and liquid state --- for example,
              crystals, ferromagnets, superconductors, liquid crystals, and many others ---
              has been both of fundamental scientific importance and has spurred profound
              technological change throughout the second half of the last century.  However,
              there exist many systems, both familiar and unfamiliar, in which randomness or
              disorder plays a key role, and in which our mathematical and physical
              understanding remains comparatively primitive.  One familiar example is
              ordinary window glass, where the atoms or molecules are "stuck" in random
              locations (as opposed to a regular crystalline array as would be found, for
              example, in ice).  Spin glasses are disordered magnetic systems which are
              thought to be prototypes for this kind of macroscopic "frozen-in" disorder.
              Disordered systems in general present both fundamental scientific challenges
              and at the same time hold great promise for applications.  The latter includes
              not only the possibility of new materials and devices but also the creation of
              new algorithms and applications to the biological and other sciences.  Progress
              in understanding these systems is therefore greatly desirable.  Spin glasses
              may be more amenable to mathematical analysis than other materials in this
              class.  Nevertheless, little fundamental progress has been made even here.  The
              principal investigators' work is aimed at resolving basic mathematical and
              physical issues concerning these materials and at providing a general
              theoretical approach for a wide variety of disordered systems.


