Title       : Enabling Tomorrow's Research Scientists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0102812

Award Number: 0102812
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2916225            (Estimated)
Investigator: Corinne Anderson Corinne.Anderson@tougaloo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Artee Young  (Principal Investigator former)
              Richard McGinnis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tougaloo College
	      500 West County Line Road
	      Tougaloo, MS  39174    601/977-7700

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Tougaloo College seeks to increase the number of majors in science, math, and
              
computer science who ar successful in their courses, who complete
              undergraduate
studies with honors, and who attend graduate school in the
              sciences and technology.
 The college has an excellent track record for
              placing students in medical and health
 professional schools, and has also
              recently been cited as among the top five 
undergraduate sources of
              African-American doctorates.

The program has three strategies. The first is
              to improve student success in
introductory courses in biology, chemistry and
              mathematics. To our tutorial drop-in
center we are adding three people (two
              supported by this grant) to provide weekly
supplemental instruction sessions
              for the first two years of of instruction in 
these disciplines. In addition
              test practice sessions will be held to familiarize 
students with standardized
              test questions from examinations such as the 
Graduate Record Examination and
              the Medical College Admissions Test.

We will also build the enrollment in
              our physics, pre-engineering, and computer 
science programs. We will sponsor
              a six-week summer program to introduce 
students to both fields, along with
              reading and English skills. We will offer a 
number of scholarships to
              talented students in computer science or physics 
who maintain a 3.3 science
              GPA.

Finally we plan to stimulate interest in science and in graduate school
              by 
supporting research as an integral part of of the life of both faculty and
              student 
scientists. Contrary to its past tradition, the college will provide
              time for older 
faculty and new faculty to set up a viable on-campus research
              program, through 
either released time or sabbatical leaves. This program will
              continue to be 
supported by the College after the grant, as faculty acquire
              outside funding.

These initiatives will provide a rich, stimulating
              environment for students which
 will provide a unique window on the reasons
              why people become scientists.



1


