Title       : NER: Carbon Nanotube Devices and Integrated Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2001       
File        : a0102955

Award Number: 0102955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chongwu Zhou chongwuz@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 2878      SPECIAL PROJECTS - CCR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1676,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
PROPOSAL NO.:   0102955
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  Zhou, Chongwu
INSTITUTION
              NAME:  University of Southern California
TITLE:  NER: Carbon Nanotube Devices
              and Integrated Systems


This is a proposal to design, build and evaluate
              various novel nanotube devices and
integrated systems. Specifically I propose
              to make n type field effect transistors (FET),
nanotube p-n junctions, and an
              integrated single-molecule CMOS inverter. This research
is exploratory in
              nature; however, if successful, will advance our understanding of
              the
fundamental properties of nanotubes and produce practical nanoscale
              devices for the real
world.
There has been a great deal of research into
              carbon nanotubes in the past few years. P
type field effect transistors have
              been demonstrated consisting of semiconductive
nanotubes with a silicon
              substrate backgate separated from the tube by a layer of SiO2.
Despite the
              utmost interest in developing n type FETs to enable nanoscale CMOS
circuits,
              the research effort has been hampered by lack of an effective doping method
              for
nanotubes. I propose to demonstrate a simple, effective and reliable
              method to
electrostatically dope nanotubes into n type, thus paving the way
              for n type FETs, p-n
junctions and integrated systems. This new method will
              employ TiO2 instead of SiO2 as
the gate dielectric. With a dielectric constant
              of 30 for TiO2, as compared to 3.8 for SiO2,
the gate utilizing TiO2 will be
              seven times more effective than previously reported, and
our preliminary
              analysis confirms that with a reasonable gate bias (~ 10 V), a nanotube
can be
              electrostatically doped into n type, thereby producing an n type
              FETs.
Furthermore, carbon nanotube p-n junctions will be demonstrated with a
              split-gate
technique, by depositing TiO2 onto a semiconductive nanotube
              contacted with source and
drain electrodes, and patterning two gate electrodes
              atop the TiO2, each covering half of
the tube. By controlling these two gate
              biases independently, one can tune the left half
tube into p type and the
              right half into n type, thus creating a p-n junction in between,
which
              provides an ideal system for studying the depletion and screening in
              one
dimension.
Finally, a simple integrated system will be demonstrated by
              attaching an electrode to the
center of a semiconductive nanotube in addition
              to the source and drain electrodes. This
center electrode divides the nanotube
              into two segments and serves as the output of the
circuit. The silicon
              substrate backgate with TiO2 dielectric layer will serve as the circuit
input
              and be used to tune one tube segment to function as an n type FET and the
              other
segment as a p type FET, thereby forming the worlds first single
              molecule inverter.









