Title       : A Botanical Survey of Madagasar's Endangered Littoral Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0102727

Award Number: 0102727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon D. McPherson gordon.mcpherson@mobot.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Porter P. Lowry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George E. Schatz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mo Botanical Garden
	      2345 Tower Grove Ave
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    314/577-5100

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A Botanical Survey of Madagascar's Endangered Littoral Forests

This project
              involves a detailed botanical survey of selected littoral forest areas along
              Madagascar's east coast in order to compile a comprehensive checklist of the
              plant species that occur in this highly threatened ecosystem.  Littoral forests
              on sand were once widespread and continuous along the coastline, but are now
              reduced to small, isolated patches that cover less than 1% of this island
              nation and continue to be degraded by intensive human exploitation.  Despite
              their small size, however, these forests probably contain well over 1,000
              native plant species, or about 10% of the total Malagasy flora, and many of
              them are restricted to this very specialized and localized ecosystem, occurring
              nowhere else on Earth.

A team of U.S. and Malagasy botanists will
              systematically visit six representative littoral forest sites distributed along
              the ca. 1,500 km coastline, covering nearly 12 degrees of latitude.  The flora
              of the study sites will be fully documented though the collection of dried
              herbarium specimens (ca. 1,400 per site); digital color images will be taken of
              30-40% of the species, and information will be gathered on local uses and
              threats to the forest areas.  The herbarium material will be identified and
              compared with historical collections made during the last 150+ years and stored
              in major institutions in St. Louis, Madagascar, and Paris, France (which has
              the largest collection of Malagasy plants).  Critical specimen data (e.g.,
              species name, geographic location, date of collection, etc.) will be compiled
              and made available on the Internet as a Survey of the Vascular Flora of the
              Humid Evergreen Littoral Forests of Madagascar, with a summary list and
              statistics for each site, and an integrated mapping capability for individual
              species, often accompanied by digitized images.

The results of this study
              will greatly improve our knowledge of Madagascar's highly threatened littoral
              forests.  Many species new to science will likely be discovered during the
              project, and hundreds more will be documented for the first time in decades,
              including many now threatened with extinction and therefore of critical
              conservation importance.  Using data from the study we will evaluate whether
              species composition changes from north to south along the coastline. 
              Preliminary data suggest that most species are restricted to only a portion of
              the littoral forest ecosystem, with gradual changes in species composition
              along a latitudinal gradient.  If this hypothesis is proven to be correct, we
              will identify specific areas where the establishment of protected areas (parks
              or reserves) would collectively ensure the continued survival of the unique
              plants that comprise Madagascar's littoral forests.

