Title       : Scalable Parallel Algorithms for Large-Scale Discrete Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0102687

Award Number: 0102687
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200363             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore K. Ralphs tkr2@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 4080,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop scalable algorithms for solving discrete optimization
              problems (DOPs) in distributed-memory computing environments. DOPs arise in
              many important applications such as planning, scheduling, logistics,
              telecommunications, bioengineering, and robotics. Most of these problems are
              NP-complete, but in practice, intelligent search algorithms such as Branch,
              Cut, and Price (BCP) have been successful at tackling them. This research will
              develop parallel algorithms based on BCP that not only can use large numbers of
              processors efficiently, but also can handle very large problem instances. A key
              part of these algorithms is the data structure used for maintaining the
              information for each node in the search tree. This can be implemented with a
              memory-efficient differencing scheme relating the parent and child nodes.
              However, these data structures do not allow the use of current techniques for
              implementing scalable branch and bound search algorithms. This project will
              overcome that difficulty.

The project will build on previous work in which
              the PI developed an object-oriented, generic framework called SYMPHONY (Single-
              or Multi-Process Optimization over Networks). Because of its modular design,
              SYMPHONY is extremely flexible and can be used to solve a wide variety of DOPs.
              Source code and documentation for SYMPHONY is currently distributed for free to
              the research community. This project will develop data structures and load
              balancing methods to decentralize SYMPHONY's current centralized control and
              data storage model. These improvements will be added to the web-based
              distribution to improve the impact of this project.


