Title       : Hidden Microbial Diversity Of The Sea: Testing A Novel Approach To Cultivating
               Presently Uncultivable Microbes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2000  
File        : a0102248

Award Number: 0102248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65732              (Estimated)
Investigator: Slava S. Epstein s.epstein@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to gain access to the bulk of microbial
              biodiversity by developing approaches to cultivate presently uncultivable
              microorganisms. Uncultivable microorganisms make up 99% of all species from
              most environments sampled, and the riddle of uncultivable microorganisms has
              been recently recognized as the main challenge for basic and applied research
              in microbiology by the American Society for Microbiology.

We propose an
              approach that is radically different from those traditionally employed for
              culturing microorganisms from environmental samples. We propose to culture the
              microorganisms in their natural habitat. We have designed a growth chamber that
              is separated from the environment by membranes that prevent cell migration and
              thus maintain purity of the inner space and yet enable full chemical contact
              between the inner space and the outside environment. Microorganisms incubated
              in the natural environment as we propose will be exposed to the complete suit
              of the outside environmental conditions and components. Our simulation of the
              natural environment may result in cultivation of a wider range of organisms,
              including those that have previously been considered as "uncultivable".

Once
              we achieve microbial growth in the field-incubated growth chamber, we will use
              an array of molecular techniques to identify and verify the previously
              uncultivable component among the grown colonies. Even if our approach allows us
              to grow just a few novel isolates, this project, by the virtue of proving our
              concept, may become an important milestone toward solving one of the major
              problems of microbial ecology.

