Title       : NER: Molecular Controlled Electronic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a0102912

Award Number: 0102912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62010              (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Waldeck dave@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David N. Beratan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019.   The proposed
              research explores a new approach for increasing the density of logical
              operations in electronic circuits by using the polarization response of organic
              molecules.  A key element of this approach is to use a Molecular Controlled
              SEmiconductor Resistor (MOCSER) to transduce the outcome of the logical
              operation into a current.  Positive attributes of this scheme are  less 
              molecular decomposition, less severe statistical fluctuations and an ability to
              interface with today's microelectronics.  The MOCSER is a specially designed
              and gateless metal-oxide semiconductor field effect transistor. In place of the
              metal gate on the transistor, organic molecules will be chemically bonded to
              the device's gate oxide.  By polarizing these organic molecules the current
              flow between the source and drain electrodes of the transistor can be 
              modulated.  The work will begin by demonstrating the MOCSER's response to a 
              voltage-controlled, molecular polarization.  With the success of this initial
              phase of work the proposed effort will include two parts: nanolithography and
              demonstrating olecular templating.  To demonstrate the feasibility of a
              'solid-state' device  a new generation of the MOCSER, in which the gate oxide
              region is connected to metal pads through a molecule, will be fabricated  and
              tested.  The nanolithography  will be performed at the Cornell Nanofabrication
              Facility, in collaboration with the expertise  from  the Weizmann group .  In
              parallel, we will use the templating of complementary DNA  strands, one which
              is tethered to the gate region of the MOCSER and the other to the AFM tip, to
              characterize the self-assembly of molecules and voltage-controlled polarization
              response through noncovalent contacts.  Successful completion of this work
              should set the stage for using molecular polarization to perform logic
              functions and transducing the molecular polarization into current in a
              solid-state electronic device.


