Title       : Artificial Atoms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0102153

Award Number: 0102153
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc A. Kastner mkastner@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Experiments are proposed to explore the physics of electrons confined to a small
              region of space and coupled to nearby metallic leads.  The particular system to
              be studied is the single-electron transistor (SET).  Experiments carried out in
              the past few years have revealed the effects of strong coupling between the
              confined electron droplet and the leads in an SET.  In particular, they have
              demonstrated that the Anderson Hamiltonian, together with scaling and
              renormalization theories, provides a quantitative description of the
              equilibrium (zero-bias) conductance as a function of temperature and gate
              voltage. Specifically, the ground state of the coupled system is a Kondo
              singlet.  The publication of these results has stimulated a number of
              theoretical predictions, and one goal of the proposed research is to test these
              predictions. The differential conductance as a function of bias will be
              studied.  In addition, the effects of multiple levels on the Kondo effect will
              be examined.  In a magnetic field the peak in differential conductance
              associated with the Kondo singlet splits in two.  Predictions have been made of
              the splitting of these peaks and the evolution of their line shape with
              magnetic field will be tested.  A new measurement facility has been constructed
              which will allow the measurement of the Kondo effect to be extended to lower
              temperature.  The system is equipped with a 16T magnet and rotation stage, so
              that the field can be in the plane or perpendicular to the plane of the droplet
              of electrons.  This will allow the measurement of the temperature dependence of
              the Kondo peak in differential conductance precisely.  A completely different
              phenomenon, recently discovered in SETs, is Fano interference.  For small SETs
              the single-electron line shapes are asymmetric with the characteristic shape
              predicted by the Fano theory.  The latter requires a continuous transmission
              channel that interferes with a resonant one.  Experiments are planned to
              clarify the nature of this interference.  In particular, while the resonant
              channel appears to arise from single electron addition, the origin of the
              continuous channel is a mystery.  Measurement of the temperature and magnetic
              field dependence of the line shapes may clarify the microscopic physics.  This
              research will be done with students who will thereby receive training in a
              cutting edge area of  nanoscience and technology. 
%%%
The most dramatic
              phenomenon of the last half of the twentieth century is the technological
              revolution, driven by the decrease in cost and increase in efficiency of
              semiconductor technology.  We often describe this by "Moore's Law", the
              exponential increase in the number of transistors on a silicon chip.  The
              latter number has been increasing by a factor two every eighteen months for
              over forty years.  This explosion was made possible by discoveries in
              fundamental semiconductor physics.  However, in order to sustain it, scientists
              and engineers needed new technologies for making smaller and smaller
              structures, so that it is now possible to make semiconductor structures that
              are only nanometers in size.  Whereas electrons in conventional transistors
              behave like classical particles, electrons confined to small dimensions can
              only be described by quantum mechanics.  Thus, discoveries in physics led to
              new technology, which now make it possible for us to study new physics.  This
              research will explore the physics of electrons confined to nanometer
              dimensions.  The structure focused on is called a single electron transistor
              (SET).  A transistor is a switch that turns on when electrons are added to it
              and turns off when they are removed.  The conventional transistor of today, in
              a cellular telephone or personal computer, for example, requires about 1000
              electrons to turn on.  The SET turns on and off again every time a single
              electron transistor is added to it.  The goal of this research is to understand
              how the electron is distributed between the trap and the electrodes of the
              transistor and how this distribution depends on the properties of the SET, the
              temperature and an applied magnetic field.  The physics is expected to be
              similar for a wide variety of nano-electronic structures and so will be of
              broad application to nanoscience and nanotechnology. Graduate and undergraduate
              students will participate in this research.  They will receive training in one
              of the forefront areas of nanoscience and nanotechnology that will prepare them
              for employment in academe, industry and government institutions.   
***

