Title       : Growth and Properties of III-VI Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0102427

Award Number: 0102427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $559667             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie A. Olmstead olmstead@phys.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fumio S. Ohuchi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on heteroepitaxial growth of III-VI based semiconductors
              and on interrelated structural, electronic, and optical properties of this
              class of materials. The research seeks to elucidate mechanisms of III-VI thin
              film growth, and to develop III-VI growth technology and materials
              characterization to the stage where these materials may be utilized for
              optoelectronic applications. Interface compounds based on III-VI materials will
              be used to control heteroepitaxy of both III-VI and more standard electronic
              materials, including their use to promote both laminar and islanded
              nanostructure formation. Problems associated with bulk III-VI materials, poor
              mechanical and thermal properties, are being addressed through use of thin
              films on substrates such as Si, GaAs and CaF2 . Development of this new
              generation of materials requires new, basic knowledge about the interacting
              constraints that control their electronic, optical and structural properties.
              This project strives to elucidate the role of these constraints through studies
              of heterointerface formation between common electronic materials and III-VI
              based materials. Primary goals are: to establish an experimental and
              theoretical framework based on nanoscale heteroepitaxial growth processes to
              optimize structural, electronic and optical properties of III-VI
              heterostructures; to exploit III-VI interface compounds to control
              semiconductor nanostructure formation; to evaluate structural, electronic, and
              optical properties of III-VI-based heterostructures for feasibility in novel
              optoelectronic applications. The approach is to concentrate in two areas: (i )
              nucleation, growth and properties of GaxSey, AlxSey , and their alloys on
              Si(111), Si(100), GaAs(100), and CaF2 (111), and (ii) use of the resultant thin
              films as substrates for a) laminar and islanded growth of GaAs and ZnSe and b)
              GaxSey - Alx Sey superlattices. Growth kinetics, morphologies and quantum dot
              properties will be studied with nanoscale resolution using in situ scanning
              probe microscopy, UHV-transfer photoelectron spectroscopy and near-edge x-ray
              absorption, and ex situ high resolution transmission electron microscopy and
              energy loss spectroscopy. Area-averaged properties will be probed using
              photoelectron spectroscopy and diffraction, electron diffraction, ion
              scattering spectroscopy, and optical spectroscopies (photothermal,
              reflection-transmission, photoluminescence, and Raman scattering).
%%%
The
              project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science
              having high potential technological relevance. The research will contribute
              basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to new aspects of
              electronic/photonic devices. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from
              the research is expected to contribute to improving the perform-ance and
              stability of advanced devices and circuits by providing a fundamental
              understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved materials, and
              materials combinations.  An important feature of the program is the integration
              of research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally
              and technologically significant area.
***

