Title       : Structure-Property Relationships in Colossal Magnetoresistance Thin Film
               Materials through Nanofabrication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a0102621

Award Number: 0102621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302696             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuri Suzuki   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks greater understanding of the spin, charge and lattice
              coupling in a class of ferromagnetic cubic perovskite materials known as
              "colossal" magnetoresistance (CMR) materials through nanofabrication and
              characterization. The project also emphasizes the development of integrated
              research and educational opportunities at both the undergraduate and graduate
              levels. The magnetoresistive response of ferromagnetic cubic perovskite
              materials such as (La,Sr)MnO3 is extremely sensitive to lattice strain and thus
              to structural distortion. Correlating structural distortions with magnetic and
              electronic properties is particularly important in shedding light on the origin
              of the anomalously large magnetoresistance effect observed. This project
              specifically addresses (i) the relationship between local magnetic structure
              and the strain state through geometrical confinement and (ii) the
              magnetotransport in submicron size device heterostructures. The strain state of
              CMR materials can be tailored by geometrical confinement through
              nanofabrication and the resulting nanostructures will be characterized
              magnetically and electronically. This approach provides information not only on
              the interplay between structure and magnetics behind the anomalously large
              magnetoresistance in these materials but also on the fundamental quantum limit
              of their incorporation into magnetic recording applications as magnetic media
              become denser.
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical
              area of materials science having high potential technological relevance. The
              research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
              level to new aspects of magnetic devices. The basic knowledge and understanding
              gained from the research is expected to contribute to improving the
              perform-ance and stability of advanced devices by providing a fundamental
              understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved materials, and
              materials combinations.  An important feature of the program is the integration
              of research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally
              and technologically significant area.
***

