Title       : NER: Decoherence and Quantum Computing in Nanoengineered Semiconductor Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a0102500

Award Number: 0102500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Privman privman@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dima Mozyrsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019. The PI propose to
              develop solid-state many-body modeling techniques for evaluation of
              decoherence, relaxation, and interaction properties of nuclear and
              impurity-bound electron spins in nanoengineered semiconductor materials. 
              Modern layered semiconductor heterostructures and quantum wells, involving
              strained alloys, band-structure and g-factor engineering, have been utilized in
              recent designs for realizations of quantum information processing (quantum
              computing).  Quantum bits (qubits) are the nuclear or bound-electron spins of
              precisely positioned, isotopically selected impurity atoms.  

Recently, it
              has been demonstrated that such structures can be actually made by advanced MBE
              and lithography techniques. Consideration of polarized spins in semiconductor
              materials has become also of central interest owing to new experimental
              developments including optically pumped NMR detection of polarization and
              coupling of spin-polarized electronic behavior to nuclear polarization. 
              Several experimental efforts are on the way to measure single spins and realize
              initial few-qubit semiconductor spin-based quantum computation. 

There has
              been only limited advancement in theoretical modeling and estimation of spin
              interactions, control, relaxation, and decoherence.  The consideration of
              decoherence, in particular, is a new dimension in solid-state semiconductor
              research, not considered in earlier studies. The field is widely open with the
              open questions being not only how, but what to calculate, and with many
              conceptual issues remaining to be clarified, in relation to coherent quantum
              dynamics. 

PIs emphasis will be on developing and applying theoretical
              techniques to study all the aspects of quantum dynamics in such systems, from
              control to decoherence, by field-theoretical many-body solid-state techniques. 
              It is hoped that success of this exploratory project will lead to new
              breakthroughs in an explosively growing field of semiconductor research and
              technology development.



