Title       : Chemistry at the Spatial Limit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0102887

Award Number: 0102887
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilson Ho wilsonho@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this research is to obtain detailed descriptions of single atoms and
              molecules.  These experiments provide the basis for understanding chemical and
              physical processes at surfaces and properties of nanostructured condensed
              matter and molecular materials. Low temperature scanning tunneling microscopes
              (STM) are used to image, manipulate, chemically modify, and spectroscopically
              identify individual atoms and molecules. The development of the single molecule
              vibrational probe by inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy (STM-IETS)
              provides a new analytical technique with unprecedented spatial resolution.  It
              is now possible to investigate chemistry at the spatial limit with the STM; the
              results provide a view of chemistry not possible by studying an ensemble of
              molecules.  In particular, the fundamental motions in molecules (vibration,
              rotation, translation), the coupling of tunneling electrons to nuclear motions
              (charge and energy transfers), and electrical conductivity (as related to
              molecular electronics) can be studied with single molecule sensitivity.  The
              tunnel junction forms a novel nanoreactor in which the tip and the substrate
              can be used together to carry out unimolecular dissociation and bimolecular
              reactions.  The research covers selected chemical systems from the lightest
              element (hydrogen atoms) to diatomic (carbon monoxide) and larger organic
              molecules (thios) on metal surfaces. These studies will lead to the development
              of a method to detect single electron spins in individual atoms and molecules
              by the STM.  A thin film of magnetic metal (iron, gadolinium) is evaporated on
              the STM tip to provide a source of spin polarized electrons.  The study of
              single and small aggregates of Manganese, Cobalt, Nickel, and Iron atoms,
              nitric oxide and nitric oxide dimers, 1,1-diphenyl-2-picryl-hydrazyl (DPPH),
              and other molecules with unpaired spins provides a new way to understand
              magnetism at the atomic scale and illuminates the role of the electron spins in
              chemistry. Overall, these experiments are intended to illuminate general
              experimental procedures and scientific understandings.  The research on solid
              surfaces is fundamental in nature and provides a foundation for a broader
              understanding of chemistry in the gas phase, solution, and other condensed
              media.
%%%
An integral part of the proposed research involves the scientific
              training and development of undergraduate and graduate students.  Since the
              STMs (microscope, electronics, and software) are homemade, the students have a
              unique opportunity to be involved in the design and construction of new
              generations of STMs. In addition, UC Irvine has established centers to reach
              out to local K-12 schools which have large populations of underrepresented
              groups.  The P.I. will teach a special topics course on "Nanoscience" which
              will attract an interdisciplinary group of students from physics, chemistry,
              biology, and engineering. While the emphasis of the proposed research is to
              obtain a fundamental understanding, the implications for futuristic
              technologies are apparent, and students trained in these areas will be highly
              competitive in the job market.  This project is being co-funded by the
              Chemistry Division/Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and the Division of
              Materials Research/Solid State Chemistry Program.

