Title       : Cycles, Differential Characters and Global Problems in Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0102525

Award Number: 0102525
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329748             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Blaine Lawson blaine@math.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract for DMS - 0102525 (Blaine Lawson)

This project is concerned with
              global problems in geometry and in
particular with the study of cycles
              residues  and differential characters.
It focuses on the relationship between
              certain important families of cycles
in a space and  the geometry of the space
              itself.  Of particular interest
are algebraic cycles and the cycles associated
              to singularities of mappings
or the higher order contact of geometric
              structures.  These objects -- of
importance in themselves -- have been shown
              to have ties to other areas of
mathematics.  A major aim here is the discovery
              and development of such
ties. The proposal has several interrelated parts. The
              first concerns groups
of algebraic cycles and cocycles on a projective
              variety.  A theory of
homology-type based on cycles has been developed by the
              proposer and
others.  It will be used to study concrete questions about
              algebraic
spaces.  In a variant of the theory involving real algebraic
              cycles,
surprizing connections to equivariant homotopy theory have been found.
               
The implications for real algebraic geometry will be explored, and
              the
quaternionic analogues will be studied. A second part of the proposal
              concerns differential 
characters, objects which mediate between cycles and
              smooth data, and lead to important
geometric invariants. Recent discoveries
              have been made concerning them --
for example, the existence of a fundamental
              duality theorem.  Further
development of the theory is proposed.  Geometric
              results will be sought by
bringing the calculus of variations to bear in this
              domain.  A third area of the proposal 
concerns the study of singularities and
              characteristic forms. The subject includes 
a generalization of Chern-Weil
              theory which gives canonical homologies between singularities 
of bundle maps
              and characteristic forms.  Many applications concerning the global
geometry of
              singularities,  and its relation to characteristic classes and
differential
              characters, will be investigated.  A forth area is concerned with special
              
cycles in geometry:  Special Lagrangian cycles in Calabi-Yau manifolds, and
              associative 
and Cayley cycles in G(2) and Spin(7) spaces. These latter
              subjects relate to gauge
field theory and gravity in Physics as well as many
              areas of geometry and
algebra.

                               
A concept
              of central importance in geometry is that of a ``cycle''.
In algebraic
              geometry a cycle corresponds to the simultaneous solution of a
system of
              polynomial equations. In differential geometry   cycles arise in
many ways: as
              the large scale solutions of certain differential equations,
and as the level
              sets and singularity sets of differentiable mappings.
Curves and surfaces in
              space are simple examples.  This proposal is
concerned with the study of
              certain important classes of cycles which arise
in geometry.  Part of the
              study aims at relating them to fundamental
large-scale geometry of the
              surrounding  space. In the algebraic case this
has led to the establishment of
              surprizing and important relationships
between spaces of algebraic cycles and
              fundamental constructions in
algebraic topology that have led to new insights
              in both fields.  This work
will be continued with the intent of obtaining
              further concrete
applications. A second part of the proposal concerns
              differential characters,
objects which mediate between cycles and smooth data.
              They lead to
important geometric invariants and have appeared in discussions
              of the
``Mirror Symmetry Conjecture'' from modern physics. The proposer has
              made
some recent discoveries about characters, including a basic
              Duality
Theorem. Further development of the theory and its applications
              is
proposed.   Another area of investigation  is concerned with
              relations
between cycles and geometry which arise from connections. 
              Connections are
fundamental in mathematics, where they constitute
              differentiation laws, and
in physics, where they represent the fundamental
              forces of nature at the
classical level.  The investigator has developed a
              theory of singular connections which
encompasses much previously unrelated
              phenomena and has applications to
many areas of geometry.  The proposal will
              continue this work with
emphasis on applications. Yet another area of the
              proposal is concerned
with very special cycles in geometry which relate to
              gauge field theory and
gravity in Physics as well as many areas of geometry
              and algebra. 
This project will also be concerned with graduate student
              development.
Students will be part of the research team.  There will also be
              an
undergraduate educational effort aimed at fostering
              mathematical
independence and developing interactive environments.

