Title       : Statistical Methods in the Frequency Domain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0102511

Award Number: 0102511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269999             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Stoffer stoffer@stat.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hernando Ombao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract DMS-0102511  Stoffer & Ombao


In this proposal, we concentrate on
              topics relating, in general, to statistical methods in the frequency domain.
              First, we propose to extend the spectral envelope methodology for stationary
              time series to the notion of evolutionary spectral envelope for nonstationary
              series.  In another project, we will direct our attention to analyzing
              nonstationary multiple time series and their principal components using
              transforms based on smooth localized complex exponentials (SLEX). In a third
              project, we will consider spectral analysis of time series collected in
              experimental designs with covariates.  The spectral envelope was first proposed
              as a method to analyze stationary categorical-valued time series in the
              frequency domain. The motivation for that research was the analysis of DNA
              sequences.  A common problem in analyzing long DNA sequence data is in
              identifying coding sequences that are dispersed throughout the sequence and
              separated by regions of noncoding. It is well known that DNA sequences are
              heterogeneous, and even within short subsequences of DNA, one encounters local
              behavior.  In this project, we are interested in extending the spectral
              envelope methodology to capture the local behavior of such sequences. To
              address this problem of local behavior in categorical-valued time series, we
              will explore using the spectral envelope in conjunction with a dyadic
              tree-based adaptive segmentation (TBAS) method for analyzing locally stationary
              processes. Our hope is that this methodology will help emphasize any harmonic
              feature that exists in a categorical sequence of virtually any length in a
              quick and automated fashion. Projects such as the human genome project have
              produced large amounts of data. We believe our methods will prove to be useful
              as a data mining technique for help in the analysis of the vast quantities of
              data being produced by various genome projects. 

While the first project
              focuses on Fourier based methods, the second project concentrates on other
              techniques that will give spatial (or time) and frequency localization. Our
              goal, as always, is to develop computationally efficient algorithms for the
              analysis of large data sets. In our initial investigations, we will focus on
              the SLEX transform for analyzing categorical-valued nonstationary time series,
              but our goal is eventually to apply the technique to multiple time series (and
              their principal components) in general. The SLEX transform has special
              properties that make it ideal for analysis of nonstationary time series.  The
              SLEX transform is based on the SLEX basis functions which are localized in both
              the time and frequency domains. The SLEX transform yields a decomposition in
              both time and frequency and allows a choice among many orthogonal transforms.
              Orthogonality leads to computationally efficient procedures for automatic
              segmentation of nonstationary time series and will hopefully facilitate in our
              investigation of the theoretical elements of our proposed methodology. An
              orthogonal representation allows one to store the coefficients and later
              process them by methods such as nonlinear thresholding. Our feeling is that if
              the data can be reduced to a relatively small number of meaningful coefficients
              then these coefficients might be useful in some type of secondary statistical
              analysis.  In our collaborations with other scientists and physicians, we
              frequently encounter settings where time series, and covariates, are recorded
              for several subjects in an experimental design. There is an absence of a core
              of statistical procedures for analyzing such data, and we typically run across
              techniques that are cooked up in an ad hoc manner by researchers who have
              little technical skill or knowledge for analyzing correlated data and
              estimating (spectral) functions.  Our goal in this project is to develop a
              general, user friendly, statistical methodology that will incorporate the
              relevant information obtained from time series data sets recorded from several
              units from many groups, and where covariates may also be measured.  Our initial
              approach will be to exploit the relationship between spectral density
              estimation and generalized linear models. 


