Title       : SMET Research and Training Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2001      
File        : a0102722

Award Number: 0102722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49618              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vernon Clark vclark@udc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean Grant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Freddie M. Dixon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of DC
	      4200 Connecticut Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200081174    202/282-7300

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of the District of Columbia plans to establish a Science,
              
Mathematics, Engineering and Technology (SMET) Research and Training
              Center
to develop and implement strategies to teach and retain students in
              SMET 
courses. Specific objectives for organizing the Center are to: 1. Modify
              the
content of entry level (gate-keeper) science, mathematics and engineering
              courses
for undergraduate students to enable them to improve their performance
              and 
retention rates in these programs, to improve performances on graduate
              and 
professional school standardized tests,and increase their competitiveness
              for
employment opportunities; 2. Develop procedures that will be used to
              improve
science, mathematics, engineering, and technology capabilities of
              faculty and
students by identifying and planning activities such as seminars,
              symposia,
and workshops to expose them to current trends in the various
              disciplines; and 
3. Obtain information on the current status of teaching and
              research facilities 
in the Biological and Environmental Sciences, Chemistry
              and Physics, Mathematics
, and Engineering programs in order that a strategy
              can be developed to improve
laboratory infrastructure which includes obtaining
              equipment and adequate space 
that will enhance faculty and undergraduate
              student research. The SMET Center is 
designed to improve the academic
              performance and increase student retention. 
Entry level (gate-keeper)
              science, mathematics and engineering courses in the
SMET curricula will be
              revised to add a research component to the laboratory
courses in order to
              emphasize reasoning skills and stimulate logical thinking. 
This activity is
              designed to develop a long-term dynamic curricula that can adapt 
to changing
              technologies. One hundred freshman students will be randomly selected
to
              participate in the center. Fifty students will have declared majors in one of
              the
SMET disciplines and 50 will be undeclared majors. The participants will
              be followed
through graduation to determine the impact of the SMET Center
              activities on course
attendance and completion rates, passing rates, research
              activities, grade point 
averages, graduation rates, enrollment in graduate
              and professional schools and
employment. The Center administrators will
              consist of the principal investigator
, two co-principal investigators and an
              administrative assistant. The administrators
will plan and implement Center
              activities with the advice and support of the advisory 
committee. The
              principal investigator will have the primary responsibility of 
supervising
              all aspects of the program with the co-principal investigators assuming 
the
              day-to-day operations of the Center, such as, organizing, conducting and,
              
implementing the activities. An advisory committee consisting of scientists
              and
administrators (7), as well as, two consultants will complete the
              administrative
core. All faculty in the SMET disciplines will be invited to
              participate in the center.
They will participate in enrichment activities
              (research, workshops etc.), 
implemented by the Center. These activities are
              expected to produce energetic
faculty, committed to teaching and research.
              They will utilize improved teaching
techniques and computer technology to make
              courses interesting and stimulating. 
The status and availability of research
              and teaching facilities in the SMET disciplines
at UDC will be assessed by
              consultants. The consultants (2), selected from UDC faculty,
will inventory
              current equipment and available space in the University for teaching
and
              research. Additionally, the consultants will provide information concerning
              
available research facilities in government, industry, and research-intensive
              
universities in Washington.




		

 
 	








