Title       : Stochastic Models of Asset Valuation in Markets with Frictions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a0102909

Award Number: 0102909
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thaleia Zariphopoulou zariphop@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 0102909
PI:  Thaleia Zariphopoulou


In most market models, the
              classical assumption of a perfect market 
is not satisfied. The PI  proposes
              to continue her research program 
to develop methods to study  valuation
              problems in incomplete 
markets, concetrated in the following class of
              applications: 
i) optimal asset allocation under market frictions the goal
              being  
to derive and analyze the optimal risky demand and to represent the
              
value function in terms of  distorted measures, ii) valuation of
              
derivatives written on nontraded assets with the goal to use 
utility-based
              pricing methodology to specify the hedging strategies 
and to expole their
              role in risk aggregation, iii) dynamic hedging 
of volatility risks  the goal
              being to specify the arbitrage-free 
components of the implied volatility
              process and to study their 
implications to the dynamic management of
              volatility risks, and
iv) asset valuation under irreversible decisions with
              the goals 
being to evaluate early exercise instruments under constraints
              
related to irreversible decisions and to analyze the impact of
              
irreversibilities to prices and optimal demand. The technical 
tools come
              from stochastic analysis, stochastic control and 
nonlinear partial
              differential equations.

In most market settings, the classical assumption of
              market 
completeness is not satisfied and, therefore, the traditional
              
approach of perfect replication cannot be applied. It becomes 
hence
              necessary to review the pricing and risk management concepts.  
The first 
              step is the development of a unified framework to 
analyze the inherent market
              risks, and identify the components that 
can be hedged away and the ones that
              cannot. The second step is the 
establishment of a coherent method to price
              the unhedgeable risks 
in order to achieve effective risk management. The PI
              proposes to 
continue her work in market models with frictions along the
              
aforementioned two general directions. The proposed methodologies
              rely
heavily on the classical economic principles of utility theory
              which
reflect the investors' preferences towards the risks that cannot
              be
eliminated. Among others, the PI proposes to study models of
              asset
allocation, derivative pricing and risk management under various
              market
frictions including stochastic volatility, nontraded assets
              and
irreversible management policies.


