Title       : Teams Enhancing Access for Minorities in Science (TEAMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0102828

Award Number: 0102828
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2929784            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Mania rmania@gwmail.kysu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenoye Eke  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Kentucky State University
	      400 East Main Street
	      Frankfort, KY  40601    502/597-6520

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Nationwide statistics show marked under-representation of minority students
              attending 
graduate schools or pursuing careers in the areas of Science,
              Engineering, and Mathematics
(SEM). HBCU's are in the most ideal situation to
              provide solutions to this problem. 
Universities like Kentucky State
              University must make every effort to recruit, retain,
and graduate minoritySEM
              students and subsequently enable them to attend graduate 
school.
              Unfortunately, enrollmentin SEM disciplines is declining rather than growing.
              
Therefore, Kentucky State University is submitting a proposal to the NSF
              HBCU-UP 
initiative designed to increase enrollment of minoritystudents in SEM
              areas and 
enhance their preparedness for graduate school success. Teams
              Enhancing Access for 
Minorities in Science (TEAMS) is a comprehensive program
              designed to prepare young 
minority students for entry into careers in
              Science, Engineering, and Mathematics 
(SEM) fields. The first phase of the
              program is a summer Undergraduate Bridge
Program for rising high school
              seniors and graduates. Once students matriculate at 
Kentucky State
              University, they will proceed as TEAMS through several phases of 
their
              undergraduate academic program culminating with an intensive Graduate
              Bridge
Program in preparation for graduate school. 

The overall goal of
              TEAMS is to increase the number of qualified minority students 
entering
              graduate schools in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics and to provide
them
              with academic experiences and research opportunities which will increase
              
their participation in graduate schools and their degree of successful
              completion
 of graduate endeavors. 

The benefits of the TEAMS Program will
              include: 
- Providing a conduit that will facilitate the entry of high
              potential minority high 
school students into Kentucky State University
              through an Undergraduate Bridge
Program that will support andprepare high
              school students to reach above average 
achievement in undergraduate studies
              in SEM courses. 
-Providing students with a curriculum that will challenge
              them in a manner that is
 appropriate for developing the content and skills in
              subject areas pertinent to 
graduatestudies in SEM. 
-Establishing Excel
              Study/Research Teams that will prepare students in content,
 problem-solving
              skills, and cooperative and investigative approaches to learning.
              
-Establishing a Graduate Bridge Program that will promote readiness for and
              an 
awareness of the expectations of graduate studies by providing students
              with first
hand experiences in various aspects of research. 
-Providing
              faculty development activities, such as workshops, seminars, institutes,
and
              conferences on innovative teaching strategies, including inquiry-based teaching
              
and learning, collaborative learning, and interdisciplinary approaches. 


