Title       : Strengthening Undergraduate Preparation in Science, Mathematics, Engineering,
               and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0102798

Award Number: 0102798
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2475558            (Estimated)
Investigator: Josephine D. Davis davisj@mail.fvsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarwan Dhir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fort Valley State College
	      1005 State University Drive
	      Fort Valley, GA  310304313    478/825-6397

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Fort Valley State University (FVSU) has sustained the commitment to its mission
              
and strategic plan of providing quality educational experiences for under
              
represented minority group individuals (who constitute 93% of enrolled
              students), 
equipping them for productive and effective citizenry in an
              increasingly
competitive society. A recent benchmarking, study conducted by
              the University 
System of Georgia, hailed FVSU as one of the top four
              institutions in the State with 
a competitive retention rate of 70% or better.
              Additionally, 88% or more of FVSU's 
biological sciencesgraduates are placed
              in medical or graduate school. We proposes
to build upon this successful
              tradition of minority group retention and graduation 
from general
              baccalaureate degree programsby increasing more broadly the number 
of
              minority group graduates who pursue advanced studies in Science,
              Mathematics,
Engineering, and Technology (SMET). 

Funding is requested to
              achieve the primary goals of increasing the number of minority 
students
              graduating with a major in Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology
              
(SMET) by 30%, and achieving a 10% increase over a five- year period in the
              number of 
SMET graduates pursuing master and doctoral degrees. There are
              three strategic 
initiatives being proposed to achieve these goals namely: i)
              enhancing the recruitment, 
and retention, of SMET major, ii) enhancing the
              infrastructure for providing technology if
used and research-based SMET
              courses of instruction, and iii) providing career 
awareness opportunities in
              SMET field of study. These goals will be achieved via 
achievement of five
              interrelated objectives: 1) Enriching the academic preparation of
students in
              SMET disciplines by focusing on developing course reform and enhancement,
2)
              Broadening and strengthening the research program for faculty development, 
3)
              Strengthening the partnerships with academic institutions and industrial labs
              to
enhance quality research experiences for students, 4 ) Infusing technology
              into teaching,
research, and professional development, and 5) Enhancing
              critical transition activities 
to improve access and retention of
              undergraduate students. 

These objectives will be accomplished in different
              phases: revising gateway courses and 
improving the performance of students in
              SMET gate-keeping bottleneck courses via
 including research/lab exercises and
              providing students tutorial assistance. Faculty 
enrichment activities will
              improve their research skills, collaborative research will 
provide wide
              exposure to students to opportunities to become familiar with SMET 
programs.
              Providing `hands-on experience'' to students using the state-of-the
              art
facilities and other enrichment activities will improve their skills, and
              motivate them
to pursue graduate studies. Student participation will be
              promoted by financial 
assistance as work study/stipend, and by summer
              internships at major research 
institutions. Bridging initiative to address
              high school/ undergraduate-graduate-
job market transitions in SMET fields
              will also be established. 

It is expected that this project will: 1)
              substantially increase the number of 
minority graduates in SMET disciplines
              and increase the proportion of those graduates
 who pursue advanced degrees in
              these disciplines through bridging and career awareness 
programs; 2)
              strengthen faculty expertise and capability to mentor students as
              
researchers, and overall commitment to continued professional development as
              SMET
 scholars - a 10% increase in faculty research projects, publications,
              linkages, and 
grantsmanship will be attained; 3) promote gains in learning
              through the provision 
of a revised SMET curriculum which builds on increased
              faculty interactions with the 
incorporation of inquiry-based pedagogy; and 4)
              promote the greatest potential for student
 enrollment and success in SMET
              disciplines by enhancing the physical infrastructure (e.g.,
 teaching/
              research facilities) of the university. 
Dr. Sarwan Dhir, Assistant Professor,
              having strong project management experience will
direct the program under the
              supervision of Dr. Josephine Davis, Vice President Academic 
Affairs. A
              Leadership Team of the Chairs of the SMET departments and an Advisory Committee
              
of internal and external distinguished scientists will conduct an annual
              review of the program 
outcomes as well as formative evaluation as the program
              is developed. The results of this 
project will be disseminated widely in the
              professional community through presentations 
at regional and
              national/scientific meetings and publications in scientific journals. 
The
              general public will have access to the successful efforts of this project
              through FVSU 
web site. The commitment of Fort Valley State University is
              evidenced from the supporting 
letter from Dr. Oscar L. Prater, President,
              FVSU, and overall supervision of Vice President
for Academic Affairs and
              participation of Dean's, on the Advisory Committee, release 
time for faculty,
              matching cost of the equipment, and allocation of physical facilities 
for the
              teaching and research laboratories and use of other facilities and resources.
              
This project will advance the mission of the University through its provision
              of high 
quality degree programs that increase the participation of minority
              group graduates
in higher education. 

