Title       : UMEB: Environmental Biology in Changing Southern California Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2001    
File        : a0102614

Award Number: 0102614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Eugene Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven N. Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Hoese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1135      UNGRAD MENTORING IN ENVIR BIOL
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1135,1228,9169,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              California State University, Fullerton (CSUF) will initiate a program of
              Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology (UMEB) to provide a
              multifaceted series of educational experiences for undergraduates, focused on
              learning through discovery in environmental biology.  The program will strive
              to attract primarily students from underrepresented minority groups to
              environmental biology early in their academic careers.  Over the 4-year project
              period, as many as 18 students will undertake a diversity of approaches to
              environmental issues in three distinctly different ecosystems affected by human
              encroachment in Southern California (desert, foothill, and coastal wetlands). 
              The program's goal is to prepare the UMEB Scholars to develop a realistic
              career plan and strategies for entering graduate school in environmental
              biology and/or entering the workforce in environmental industry or governmental
              agencies.  The program will (1) provide opportunities for students to become
              engaged in hands-on research experience in a broad array of areas within
              environmental biology, (2) promote the development of mentoring skills by
              faculty members, (3) foster a collaborative enterprise between student and
              mentor in engaging in the science of environmental biology, and (4) thus
              attempt to increase the number of students from underrepresented groups
              engaging in environmental biology and going on to advanced study and careers in
              the field.

The UMEB Scholars will be selected during the spring of their
              freshman year and will participate in an intensive field-based course and
              complete a supervised research project during that summer.  The 4-week course
              will bring together students, faculty members, and other professional
              environmental biologists for in-depth study of the effects of human activities
              in the three targeted ecosystems.  Following this, each student will be matched
              with a faculty mentor based on interests, mentoring needs, and available
              research opportunities, and will become an integral member of the mentor's
              research group.  At the end of each summer, the UMEB Scholars will present
              their research findings at a student poster session.  As part of their Biology
              major, the UMEB students will complete classes designed for their needs,
              including courses in experimental design and research ethics.  The cornerstone
              of the CSUF UMEB Program will be the completion of a two-year independent
              research project done in collaboration with a faculty mentor, culminating in a
              senior thesis.  Students will present reports on their research progress in a
              Proseminar designed to strengthen the community of environmental biologists at
              CSUF and to provide information about research, internship, graduate school,
              and career opportunities.  The entire program will prepare the UMEB Scholars
              for careers or graduate programs in environmental biology.
