Title       : UMEB: Fostering Student Confidence and Capability in Environmental Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0102495

Award Number: 0102495
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $407923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos D. Robles   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Torres  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    323/343-4970

NSF Program : 1135      UNGRAD MENTORING IN ENVIR BIOL
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1135,1228,9169,9178,9263,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0102495
Robles
This project would establish a structured undergraduate
              mentoring program in environmental biology at a  minority serving university -
              California State University, Los Angeles (CSLA).  It would strengthen
              collaboration among faculty, their supporting research institution, and a
              network of off-campus partners devoted to environmental science education.  A
              unifying science theme, "acquisition and use of spatial information in field
              studies,"  provides a focus for curricular and research activities.  Student
              programs may include special courses in Geographic Information Systems, field
              instrumentation, computer modeling, molecular genetic population
              differentiation, as well as more traditional environmental science offerings. 
              Students would gain research experience in interdisciplinary teams of mentors,
              graduate students, and collaborating scientists.  Students will rotate and
              adopt one of three teams: (1) Molecular Genetics of Populations (2)
              Perturbations of the Terrestrial Carbon Cycle, and (3) Models of Marine Benthic
              Populations.    Program activities are staged over two to three years in
              phases: (I) Orientation - introduction to the environmental science community
              and encouragement in basic scholarship, (II) In-Depth Training - emphasis on
              advanced research skills, and (III) Culmination - presentation of scientific
              findings and preparation for graduate school.  Additional activities include
              internships with agency partners, intensive "field immersion experiences," and
              mentoring by accomplished role models.  An ethics component will feature
              seminars and discussions with local and national ethicists.  

This mentoring
              program is based on the fact that students' motivation is crucial to their
              success; therefore, all activities seek to build student confidence and
              capability.  Motivation will be heightened by imparting awareness of
              scientists' social responsibilities and by fostering an appreciation for the
              contribution students from underrepresented groups can make.  By promoting on
              and off campus educational partnerships, the project will positively affect the
              future of environmental science education at CSLA, and benefit students beyond
              the cohort of exemplary UMEB undergraduate fellows. 

