Title       : A Study of the Magnetic Properties of Some Strongly Correlated Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2001     
File        : a0102235

Award Number: 0102235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210475             (Estimated)
Investigator: Saul B. Oseroff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The recent discovery of high-Tc  weak ferromagnetism, WF, in lightly doped
              hexaborides, A1-xLaxB6 (A = Ca, Sr, or Ba), has stimulated theoretical and
              experimental efforts to understand the this phenomenon.  While several models
              have been proposed, an explanation is still elusive.  In order to gain a better
              understanding of the origin of the WF, measurements by Electron Paramagnetic
              Resonance, EPR, uniaxial stress, microwave-absorption, and magnetization, M, in
              controlled samples will be conducted between 2 K - 1100 K. Also, systems known
              as multiferroics, MF, will be studied.  They are simultaneously ferroelectric,
              FE, and ferromagnetic, FM. It has been suggested that BiMnO3 is MF. The
              experimental data on BiMnO3 is incomplete.  Its magnetic, electrical and
              structural properties will be measured by EPR, M, specific heat, Raman, X-rays,
              and electric polarization.  This work should help understand the nature of the
              interactions present and stimulate future work in these compounds.  Several
              undergraduates and master's students will be involved in this program.  They
              will be trained in cutting-edge research techniques, which provided the
              students excellent preparation for Ph.D. programs or for careers in industry.
              
%%%
The recent discovery of ferromagnetism in doped CaB6 is one of the great
              surprises in the modern study of magnetism for which there is still no
              explanation. Selected experiments will be carried out to provide new insight
              into the physics of these systems, which could lead to the correct theoretical
              model.   Also,  studies of compounds that are simultaneously ferroelectric, FE,
              and ferromagnetic, FM, will be carried out. Despite little work having been
              performed in these systems, a number of important new applications can be
              imagined.  Examples are multiple state memory elements, electric field
              controlled FM resonance devices, and variable transducers.   Several
              undergraduates and master's students will be involved in this program.  They
              will be trained in cutting-edge research techniques.  These provide excellent
              preparation for Ph.D. programs or for careers in industry.  High school
              students and teachers will also participate in this program.  This will
              continue the successful outreach program conducted by the PI's group in order
              to improve the quality of science education in K-12.
***
