Title       : NSE/NIRT: Single Molecule Functional Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0102459

Award Number: 0102459
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1450000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Virgil Percec percec@mail.sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen I. Winey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Heiney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randall D. Kamien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William F. DeGrado  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,1674,9162,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is in response to the Nanoscience and Engineering (NSE)
              solicitation(NSF-00-119) and involves a nanoscience Interdisciplinary Research
              Team (NIRT) at the University of Pennsylvania with broad-ranging national and
              international collaborations.  It is being co-supported by the Polymers Program
              of the Division of Materials Research (DMR), the Special Programs of the
              Division of Chemistry (CHE), and the Interfacial, Transport and Thermodynamic
              Processes Program of the Division of Chemical & Transport Systems
              (CTS).
%%%
The ability to transition nanoscience and engineering (NSE)
              research to nanotechnology will depend on the development of efficient new
              synthetic methods to produce monodisperse nanoscale objects.  To this end, the
              primary goal of this Nanoscale Interdisciplinary research team (NIRT) is to
              enable a rational approach to the design and synthesis of libraries of complex
              functional monodisperse objects of well-defined shapes, dimensions up to the
              wavelength of light, surface, and internal compartmentalized architecture.  To
              accomplish this goal, the NIRT combines synthetic methodologies from Materials
              and the Life Sciences.  The NIRT has assembled expertise in organic,
              macromolecular, supramolecular, and peptide synthesis, along with theory and
              modeling, and structural analysis by x-rays, TEM, and SFM.  The team effort is
              amplified by exploiting established links with partners in industry and in
              Europe.  Success will reveal the principles required for the construction of
              libraries of monodisperse self-assembling dendritic building blocks, to enable
              the hierarchical design of monodisperse single molecule functional
              nanostructures (SMN) with shape, chirality, internal and external structure,
              and function controlled at the level of precision currently available only in
              biological systems.  The NIRT will investigate the structure and properties of
              these nanoscale objects at the level of the single molecule and in 2-D and 3-D
              assemblies.  Novel applications of SMNs are elaborated that have potential to
              yield nanoscale devices for electronic, optical, chemical and medical
              technologies.

