Title       : Program for Excellence in Science, Mathematics, and Computer Technology
               (PESMaCT)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0102620

Award Number: 0102620
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2430659            (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry L. Hardy Hhardy@suno.edu.  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adnan E. Omar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joe Omojola  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl P. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Murty S. Kambhampati  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern U New Orleans
	      6400 Press Drive
	      New Orleans, LA  701261009    504/282-4401

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is submitted to the National Science Foundation in response to the
              Historically 
Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP).
              The purpose of this 
interdisciplinary proposal is to request funds to develop
              and implement Southern University at 
New Orleans's (SUNO) ``Program of
              Excellence in Science and Computer Technology 
(PESMaCT)''. The PESMaCT web
              address is www.suno.edu/cs/pesmact/. 

Studies have confirmed that the
              shortage of manpower in the science and technical 
workforce is particularly
              acute within the underrepresented minority population. 
Minorities make up
              only 14.5% of the present enrollment in graduate science and 
engineering
              programs, and 6% of the science and technical work force. 1 Compared
to the
              28% minority representation in the population as a whole, there is an
 ntapped
              minority resource for building the nation's scientific and technical
              
workforce. The origin of this problem can be traced to inadequacies in
              science 
education in K-12 schools. It has also been documented that lack of
              achievement
in science is due to shortcomings in present instructional methods
              which lack 
emphasis on gate-keeper and lab-centered courses, hands-on
              training, and
ineffective or non-collaborative efforts to utilize local
              universities resources 
and facilities. 

SUNO is proposing a solution to
              this problem through PESMaCT. The goals of this
project are to: (1) increase
              the "pipeline" flow of minorities from high schools and
junior colleges to
              science, mathematics, and computer technology (SMaCT) fields, 
(2) improve
              retention of minorities in SMaCT, and (3) improve the quality of
              graduating
SMaCT majors. The overall objectives are to: (1) integrate
              technology into all 
gate-keeper courses, (2) double the current retention
              rate of 30%, (3) graduate 300 
quality SMaCT majors within a 5 year period,
              and 4) get 15% to be accepted to graduate
or professional schools. 

These
              goals and objectives can be achieved by: (1) engaging in aggressive
              recruitment, 
(2) implementing a strategic retention plan, (3) enhancing
              undergraduate curricula, 
(4) utilizing undergraduate research as a valuable
              teaching tool, and (5) establishing a 
collaborative and synergistic relation
              with Louis Stokes Louisiana Alliance for
              Minority
Participation(LS-LAMP).

The important catalysts for our plan
              are:(1) collaboration among departments in the 
College of Science at SUNO and
              (2) collaboration between SUNO and the New Orleans
Public Schools (NOPS) which
              supply 74% our student population. 2 Unlike other
institutions in the city of
              New Orleans, SUNO is an open-admission institution
serving about 4,000
              students with majors in liberal arts, sciences, business and 
education. Also,
              the University has graduate programs in social work, criminal 
justice,
              computer information systems, and education. NOPS district serves about
84,000
              urban students with 85% being African Americans. 3 Compared to the rest
of the
              state with 59.2 % poverty level, 88% of NOPS students come from families
with
              incomes below the federal poverty level. 4

 PESMaCT is designed to improve
              the educational experience of minority students
in science, mathematics, and
              computer technology from high school through college. 
Implementation of
              PESMaCT in high schools will motivate students to pursue degrees
 in careers
              of SMaCT fields. As a result, this will lead to an increase in the number of
              
minority graduates and serve as a crucial pipeline in increasing the number
              of 
underrepresented minorities receiving graduate degrees and working in
              SMaCT fields. 
Beyond the funding period, PESMaCT will be sustained by support
              from the University,
local industries/companies and funds acquired from other
              grants. PESMact will support 
the University strategic plan to: (1) increase
              opportunities for students' success, (2) ensure 
quality and accountability,
              and (3) enhance services to the community and state. Most 
importantly, the
              project outlined in this proposal will help PESMaCT to achieve the 
NSF
              HBCU-UP goal to enhance the quality of undergraduate science, mathematics,
              
engineering and technology (SMET) at Historically Black Colleges and
              Universities as a
means to broaden participation in the SMET workforce. In
              addition, PESMaCT will 
positively impact the largest urban public school
              system in the State of Louisiana. 

