Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a0102109

Award Number: 0102109
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik R. Zinser zinser@mbcrr.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : E,Zinser
	      55 Harrison St. Apt. 2
	      Brookline, MA  02446    617/731-4074

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
              FY2001.  The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
              protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
              not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
              opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
              microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
              established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
              research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
              fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
              research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
              of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
              locations. 

The research and training plan is entitled "Developing gene
              expression tools to identify the physiological states of natural populations of
              a marine cyanobacterium."   The important physiological activities of
              microorganisms that facilitate their survival and define their roles within an
              ecosystem are largely unknown.  This research focuses on adapting new gene
              expression technologies (DNA microarrays, in situ RT-PCR, and proteomics) to
              identify the environmentally-significant physiological activities of the
              highly-abundant, globally-significant marine cyanobacterium, Prochlorococcus
              spp.

