Title       : Physical Properties of Electron-Doped Copper Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2001     
File        : a0102350

Award Number: 0102350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Greene rgreene@squid.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will fund a project to study the
              superconducting and normal state properties of electron-doped copper oxides, a
              class of high-temperature superconductors, with the aim of eventually
              understanding the mechanism of high temperature superconductivity. The
              electron-doped high-Tc superconductors have some unique properties compared to
              the more prevalent, and more studied, hole-doped cuprates. A synergistic
              feedback between the materials preparation of single crystals and thin films,
              and physical properties is expected to lead to both higher quality materials
              and new insights into the nature of the normal and superconducting states. The
              measurements planned include: low temperature thermal and electrical transport,
              low temperature specific heat, single particle tunneling, Raman scattering and
              optical reflectivity, photoemission, and penetration depth. All measurements
              will be done at zero magnetic field to probe the superconducting state and at
              fields above the critical field to probe the low temperature normal state. This
              project provides excellent training for graduate students and post doctoral
              research associates in a multidisciplinary area of research. It will expose
              them to research tools and ideas that will be useful for careers in industry
              and academia.

The origin of high- temperature superconductivity in copper
              oxides is one of the major unsolved problems in physics. An understanding of
              high-Tc superconductors is likely to impact not only fundamental condensed
              matter physics, but also potential applications of these materials as improved
              electronics devices and current carrying wires. This individual investigator
              award will fund a project that has as its goal to understand electron-doped
              high-Tc superconductors. These materials form a subset of all the high-Tc
              copper oxides, but they have very unusual properties that need to be
              understood. The experiments proposed in this project will provide excellent
              training for graduate students in a multidisciplinary area of research. It will
              expose students to research tools and ideas that will be of great use in
              industry.

