Title       : Quivers, Invariant Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0102193

Award Number: 0102193
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95494              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harm Derksen hderksen@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator works on Invariant Theory and representations of quivers. He
              studies some fundamental problems in the theory of quiver representations.  In
              earlier joint work with Jerzy Weyman, he found a nice description and even an
              algorithm for the decomposition of a general representation into indecomposable
              representations (this is the canonical decomposition as introduced by Kac). 
              Also Weyman and the investigator proved that semi-invariants introduced by
              Schofield always generate the ring of semi-invariants. The above results have a
              remarkable application to Littlewood-Richardson coeffients.  In particular one
              can prove results of Klyachko, and Knutson-Tao about the set of nonzero
              Littlewood-Richardson coefficients using quiver representations.  Using results
              about quiver representations many more new results about Littlewood-Richardson
              coefficients can be proven.  The investigator is continuing his research on
              quiver representations to deepen our understanding of generic representations
              of wild quivers, and to apply these results to the combinatorics of
              Littlewood-Richardson coefficients. The investigator just finished writing a
              book together with Gregor Kemper on Computational Invariant Theory.  He is now
              studying various problems in Invariant Theory, in particular algorithms for
              finding rational invariants and for determining whether two elements in a given
              representation of an algebraic group lie in the same orbit.  This orbit problem
              is the original motivation of Invariant Theory.

This research is in the area
              of Mathematics referred to as Invariant Theory, a branch of Representation
              Theory, in the general area of Algebra.  Invariant Theory has a long tradition
              back to the nineteenth century.  It studies quantities which stay invariant
              under certain symmetries (in arbitrary dimension). A simple example is a person
              on earth.  The quantity "distance to the rotation axes" stays invariant under
              rotation of the earth.  Of course symmetries play an important role in nature. 
              Related to this is the problem to recognize if two objects can be transformed
              into each other by certain symmetries. Think of a robot eye which has to
              recognize whether two objects are the same after rotation.  The investigator
              studies various problems in invariant theory and in particular (a mathematical
              formulated version of) the object recognition problem. "Quiver" representation
              theory can be thought of as a generalization of linear algebra.  This theory
              shows a deep and interesting structure.  For example, a graphical
              representation gives fractal-like pictures.  There are several applications to
              other branches of mathematics.

