Title       : RUI: Studies of Neotropical Myxomycetes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2002  
File        : a0102895

Award Number: 0102895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160109             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Stephenson sstephenson@mail.fscwv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fairmont State College
	      Locust Avenue
	      Fairmont, WV  26554    304/367-4000

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 5922,5926,9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              STUDIES OF NEOTROPICAL PLASMODIAL SLIME MOLDS

The plasmodial slime molds are
              fungus-like organisms usually present and often abundant in terrestrial
              ecosystems.  Most of what is known about the assemblages of slime molds
              associated with particular types of terrestrial ecosystems has been derived
              from studies in temperate forests; relatively little information is available
              on assemblages associated with tropical forests.  This research project seeks
              to characterize the assemblages of species associated with microhabitats and
              vegetation types not yet investigated in the Neotropics.  Particular emphasis
              will be directed towards the assemblages of species associated with various
              microhabitats in the canopy of tropical moist forests and microhabitats
              potentially available to slime molds in tropical dry forests and other types of
              vegetation characteristic of more arid areas of the Neotropics.  

The
              research will be carried out in three primary study areas:  the Luquillo
              Experimental Forest in Puerto Rico, the Guanacaste Conservation Area in Costa
              Rica, and a portion of the state of Tlaxcala in eastern central Mexico. 
              Specimens associated with specific microhabitats within each of these study
              areas will be collected in the field and obtained from moist chamber cultures
              prepared with samples of organic material from microhabitats being
              investigated.  Most of the microhabitats to be investigated are accessible from
              the ground.  However, gaining access to the canopy of a tropical forest is
              exceedingly difficult.  Consequently, studies associated with various canopy
              microhabitats will be carried out in areas being subjected to active logging
              (i.e., samples will be collected from individual trees as soon as possible
              after a tree has fallen to the ground).

The data accumulated as a result of
              the research project funded by an earlier NSF grant provided evidence for a
              number of ecological patterns not previously reported for slime molds.  The
              most important of these are that (1) species richness and [especially] relative
              abundance increase with decreasing (and not increasing, as might have been
              anticipated)with moisture conditions and (2) in tropical forests, distinct
              assemblages of slime moldsare associated with microhabitats that have no
              counterparts in temperate forests. The assemblages of slime molds associated
              these "new" microhabitats are characterized by the presence of significant
              numbers of species either new to science or previously considered to be
              exceedingly rare.  It is anticipated that the research to be carried out during
              this project, which will include all of the major Neotropical vegetation types
              not previously investigated, will yield the data necessary to develop a fairly
              complete understanding of slime mold distribution patterns, ecology, and
              diversity in this region of the world. The project will include several
              undergraduates as active participants, and collaborations developed with
              scientists in Mexico, Puerto Rico, Costa Rica, England, Spain, Russia, and
              Germany will be continued.

