Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2001     
File        : a0102094

Award Number: 0102094
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas K. Abbot abbot@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : D,Abbot
	      1103 Highland Drive
	      Louisville, GA  30434    520/881-6693

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
              FY2001.  The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
              protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
              not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
              opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
              microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
              established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
              research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
              fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
              research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
              of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
              locations. 

The research and training plan is entitled "Evolutionary
              patterns and processes in symbiotic fungi associated with fungus-growing ants."
               Many microbes form close associations ("symbioses") with plants and animals. 
              Symbiosis involves a dramatic change for microbial species, permitting us to 
              understand how differences in life styles and environments shape microbial
              biodiversity and evolution. Fungus-growing ants in the Neotropical tribe Attini
              (Formicidae) comprise a group of about 200 described species which are all
              dependent on the cultivation of fungus for food.  Some ants repeatedly
              domesticated fungi from free-living stock, while other associations are ancient
              and highly specialized. This study explores how symbiotic associations have
              shaped the evolutionary processes and patterns in the fungal symbionts of
              attine ants.  It further seeks to determine if symbiosis with ants involves a
              switch from sexual reproduction to reproductions without sex.  The proposed
              work will provide valuable insights into how intimate associations with ants
              have shaped the patterns and processes of evolution in symbiotic fungi.

