Title       : Adsorption of Charged Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0102267

Award Number: 0102267
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Rubinstein mr@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
0102267
Rubinstein
This award supports theoretical and computational
              research on charged polymer adsorption at surfaces and interfaces.  Research
              will focus on hydrophilic and hydrophobic polyelectrolytes.   The PI will
              develop an analytical model of adsorption of hydrophilic polyelectrolytes in
              the presence of short-range and long-range interactions between polymers and
              surfaces.  De Gennes' self-similar carpet model of short-range adsorption of
              uncharged polymers will be combined with a model of long-range adsorption of
              polyelectrolytes to oppositely charged surfaces. Another model will be
              developed to study hydrophobic polyelectrolyte adsorption in the presence of
              both short-range and long-range interactions.  The properties of hydrophobic
              polyelectrolytes in solution will be studied in more detail to enable the
              extension of adsorption models to hydrophobic polyelectrolytes. The interplay
              of short-range attraction and long-range (electrostatic) repulsion leads to a
              necklace conformation of hydrophobic polyelectrolytes. Computer simulations and
              scattering experiments have recently confirmed the main features of the
              necklace model of hydrophobic polyelectrolytes. The remaining open questions
              important for the application of the model to the adsorption of hydrophobic
              polyelectrolytes will be investigated using a combination of analytical
              calculations and computer simulations. The resulting model of hydrophobic
              polyelectrolyte solutions will be combined with the adsorption model of
              hydrophilic polyelectrolytes into an adsorption model of hydrophobic
              polyelectrolytes.
The kinetic theory of polyelectrolyte adsorption at charged
              surfaces will be developed using de Gennes' two-step approach in the framework
              of Rouze-Zimm model for unentangled adsorbed layers and of tube models for
              entangled layers.  A wide range of educational activities spanning K-12
              outreach to the education of postdoctoral research associates are supported by
              this grant. This award also provides partial support of the preparation of a
              polymer physics textbook.
%%%
This award supports theoretical and
              computational research that contributes toward the development of a complete
              molecular picture of the adsorption of charged polymers on charged surfaces. 
              Adsorption of charged polymers is one of the least understood areas of polymer
              physics. The technological importance of charged polymers as rheology
              modifiers, dispersing aids, stabilizers, and binders is due to their unique
              properties both in solutions and near surfaces. An application in the area of
              nanoscale science and engineering is multilayer formation via layer-by-layer
              deposition of oppositely charged polyelectrolytes, leading to novel methods of
              nanodevice fabrication.  A better understanding of charged polymers will also
              impact molecular biophysics because many biopolymers, such as DNA and proteins,
              are charged, and electrostatics plays a significant role in their properties
              and function. The award will also support a wide range of educational
              activities including K-12 outreach and education in polymer physics and
              chemistry at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels. Some of the
              research will be included in the Polymer Physical Chemistry course sequence at
              UNC and in a textbook that is in preparation.
***

