Title       : Additive Functionals of Markov Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a0102238

Award Number: 0102238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75566              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xia Chen xchen@math.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0102238
Chen
The study of additive functionals is an important part of
              probability theory, as it serves as a tool of describing the stochastic
              processes in terms of properties like ergodicity and recurrence. This project
              is to investigate various limit laws for additive functionals associated to
              Markov processes. The recent study shows that the asymptotic magnitudes of
              additive functionals of a Harris recurrent Markov process are measured by the
              partial Green functions. The progress suggests further questions and
              establishments in broader situations. The project lists four areas in which the
              limit laws of related additive functionals will be studied under this research.
              As the first step toward the general theory, the investigator will look for
              relations between weak and strong laws for additive functionals. Specifically,
              the investigator will study the limit theorems for additive functionals of
              diffusion processes and for the local times embedded in various norm spaces,
              and the strong laws for occupation times arising from interacting particle
              systems. 
The significance of this study is also due to its connections to
              some important problems. The limit laws for additive functionals have been
              extensively applied to computer simulation and control theory. In general,
              additive functionals describe random accumulations --- in particular, the
              capital accumulations of investors in market environment. The study of additive
              functionals arising from particle system will lead to better understanding of
              population growth and migration of various species, and of the spreading
              process of certain diseases. Such models can be viewed as random system
              evolving in time and this project is about the long term behaviors of these
              systems. This research could achieve: 1) progress in the general theory of the
              limit laws for additive functionals; 2) developments of technologies and tools
              for study of additive functionals; 3) solutions to the problems raised from
              some practically interesting models.

