Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a0102085

Award Number: 0102085
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary S. Connolly   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : M,Connolly
	      10636 Longnecker St.
	      Whitehouse, OH  43571    419/877-5239

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
              FY2001.  The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
              protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
              not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
              opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
              microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
              established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
              research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
              fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
              research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
              of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
              locations. 

The research and training plan is entitled "Effects of bacterial
              signal mimic compounds produced by pea plants on the nitrogen-fixing symbiont
              Rhizobium leguminosarum."  Cell-to-cell signaling within a bacterial
              population, "quorum sensing," plays a major role in bacterial growth, survival,
              and host-microbe interactions.  The sponsoring scientists have shown that peas
              secrete "signal mimics," compounds which interact specifically with bacterial
              quorum-sensing receptors.  This  is a comprehensive study of
              quorum-sensing-regulated gene expression in Rhizobium leguminosarum, by
              determining the effects of pea signal mimics on gene expression, behavior,
              diversity, and viability in the rhizosphere.  

