Title       : Applications of Descriptive Set Theory to Ideals of Closed Sets and
               Indecomposable Continua
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0102254

Award Number: 0102254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Slawomir Solecki ssolecki@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Solecki studies possible applications of descriptive set theory to
              indecomposable continua and to ideals of closed sets. The first part of the
              project is concerned with studying the composant equivalence relation on
              indecomposable continua using techniques and notions developed in the study of
              Borel equivalence relations. Solecki builds on his prior work on indecomposable
              continua. He primarily investigates the question whether on a comeager subset
              of an indecomposable continuum the composant equivalence relation is Borel
              isomorphic to one of two special Borel equivalence relations via an isomorphism
              preserving meager sets. The affirmative answer to this question would solve an
              old problem of Kuratowski and even partial results for special indecomposable
              continua would sharpen several theorems from the literature. In the second part
              of the project, Solecki studies ideals of closed subsets of a Polish space.  He
              investigates a certain very concrete representation of simply definable ideals
              of compact sets. This is connected with several open problems in this area of
              mathematics. Additionally, he continues his study of the ideal of Haar null
              subsets of a Polish group. Particular aims here are to develop the theory for
              all non-abelian Polish groups (the theory works fine for the class of Polish
              groups with invariant metrics) and to fully understand the connection between
              Haar null sets in infinite products of locally compact groups and amenability
              of the factor groups.

One of the themes of Solecki's project is the
              investigation of indecomposable continua. These are fascinating geometrical
              objects whose intricate topological properties attracted interest of
              mathematicians since the beginning of the (last) century. However, only quite
              recently it was realized how ubiquitous such continua are and how important a
              role they play in various contexts in dynamical systems and topology. There is
              an old conjecture, due to Kuratowski, which is still unresolved and whose
              confirmation would completely reveal the finer structure of indecomposable
              continua. Solecki works on particularly important instances of this hypothesis
              and other problems related to it.  Another theme of Solecki's project is the
              study of certain notions of smallness. These are important in various branches
              of mathematics to measure the size of sets under consideration. The starting
              point here is his observation that a vast class of such families of small sets
              admit surprising and very concrete type of representations. The possibility of
              representing a family of small sets in this fashion has deep implications for
              the structure of such families and, if realized, answers some old questions
              regarding this structure. Solecki studies the extent to which such
              representations can be established, interconnections between these type of
              representations and properties of notions of smallness, and other problems
              related to notions of smallness.  

