Title       : Integrated Research and Education in High-Performance Parallel Optimization
               Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0102830

Award Number: 0102830
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200806             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nihar R. Mahapatra mahapatr@cse.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 4080,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for 0102830 Mahapatra
"Integrated Research and Education in
              High-Performance Parallel Optimization Algorithms"

This project will perform
              integrated research and education activities in the multidisciplinary area of
              parallel optimization. Given the enormous potential role of parallel computing
              in solving large-scale optimization problems with great societal implications,
              it is imperative that future scientists and engineers learn its fundamentals.
              The education component of this project will contribute towards bridging the
              current gap in knowledge of those professionals. The research activities center
              around efficient parallelization of an important optimization method called
              branch-and- bound (B&B), widely used for solving real-world combinatorial
              optimization problems (COPs). B&B's applications run the gamut of Science,
              Engineering, Mathematics, and Operations Research, with significant new uses
              being discovered every year. Research in B&B is performed by two groups of
              researchers: workers in parallel processing who use sophisticated
              parallelization techniques in conjunction with simple B&B algorithms, and hence
              are able to solve COPs of limited size; and workers in operations research who
              develop and use sophisticated application-specific B&B algorithms with little
              or no parallelism, to solve larger COPs. The overall objective of the proposed
              research is to improve solution time and quality for some important
              optimization problems by an order of magnitude, or to solve previously
              intractable problems, by applying scalable, high-performance parallelization
              techniques to application-specific B&B methods.

Technically, the specific
              goals of the proposed project are as follows. 
(1) Adaptive Load Balancing: To
              develop load balancing schemes that adapt to application and target-system
              characteristics to maximize processor utilization. 
(2) Efficient
              Limited-Memory Search: To develop efficient search schemes that enable large
              problems to be solved within the available memory of practical
              parallel/distributed systems. 
(3) Specialized B&B Methods: To develop
              specialized B&B methods for some important COPs like mixed-integer programming
              and the traveling salesman problem, and use these to demonstrate solution time
              and quality improvements for real-world instances of those problems. 
(4)
              Parallel Optimization Course and Web Resource: To develop a model course on
              parallel optimization for upper-level undergraduate and beginning graduate
              students, as well as a comprehensive, searchable web resource on parallel
              optimization useful for education. 
(5) Parallel B&B Software Environment: To
              incorporate the parallelization techniques developed in this project in a
              software system for use as an educational and research tool for fast, efficient
              solution of optimization problems using parallel B&B. 


