Title       : Variable Selection in High-Dimensional Modeling and Its Oracle Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0102505

Award Number: 0102505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96769              (Estimated)
Investigator: Runze Li rli@stat.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              High-dimensional data, such as, biotech and genetic data, financial data,
              satellite imagery and hyper-spectral imagery,  are commonplace in our daily
              life.  Indeed, high-dimensional data analysis has become an important research
              topic in statistics.  Variable selection is fundamental to high-dimensional
              statistical modeling.  Many approaches currently in use are stepwise selection
              procedures, which are expensive in computation and  ignore stochastic errors in
              the stage of selection process. This research involves a variety of
              data-analytic techniques for developing a unified effective variable selection
              procedure in high-dimensional statistical modeling. The goal of this project is
              to significantly enhance the availability of tools for analyzing complicated
              high-dimensional data.

In this project, penalized least squares and a
              penalized likelihood approach are proposed to select significant variables for
              various models used in high-dimensional data analysis. The proposed approach is
              distinguished from others since it deletes insignificant covariates by
              estimating their coefficients to be zero.  In the other words,  it
              simultaneously selects significant variables and estimates their regression
              coefficients, and thereby enables one to construct confidence intervals for the
              estimated parameters.  An algorithm is proposed for finding solutions to
              optimization problems involved in the penalized least squares and penalized
              likelihood. The rates of convergence and the sampling properties of the
              resulting estimators are investigated and presented.

