Title       : High Piezoelectric Coefficient Ferroelectric Films for MEMS Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0102808

Award Number: 0102808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151021             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Trolier-McKinstry STMcKinstry@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Srinivas Tadigadapa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Piezoelectric thin films are attractive elements in several MEMS applications
              due to 
the large generated force, high electromechanical coupling
              coefficients, and 
substantial charge output that can be generated.  This
              proposal focuses on two 
approaches to increasing the performance in
              piezoelectric MEMS devices: (i) enhancing 
the effective piezoelectric
              response in thin ferroelectric films utilizing in-plane 
poled structures and
              (ii) developing miniaturized flextensional transducers to amplify 
the
              piezoelectric effect.  From the scientific standpoint, the program will
              determine 
how the piezoelectric properties of in-plane polarized lead
              zirconate titanate films 
compare to through-the-thickness polarized
              transducers, as well as any differences in 
the way piezoelectric and
              dielectric properties age and fatigue relative to 
conventionally poled films.
               A processing scheme to enable production of flextionsional 
MEMS transducers
              will also be developed. In addition, a MEMS switch for RF applications 
with
              large displacement (~2 microns) and high-speed (<1microsecond) will be
              
demonstrated using the d33 coefficient and a flextensional actuation
              mechanism.  The 
educational aspects of this program will concentrate on
              training graduate as well as 
undergraduate researchers. 
              
%%%
Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) are miniaturized devices produced
              with the same 
techniques developed for integrated circuits, and typically
              range from several microns 
to several millimeters in size.  Such devices are
              now widely used in ink jet printers 
and automobile air bag deployment
              accelerometers.  Many fields, including miniaturized 
biomedical
              instrumentation for bedside diagnosis, commercial electronics such as cell
              
phones, and small sensors to detect phenomena as diverse as toxic gases or
              the imminent 
failure of a piece of industrial equipment would benefit from
              MEMS devices with higher 
sensitivities or with the capability of doing more
              work.  This program is designed to 
increase the functionality of MEMS systems
              by exploring the integration of high 
performance ferroelectric thin films
              with motion amplification. This program will also 
train and educate
              scientists in an interdisciplinary research environment in a
              
technologically-significant area of national importance. 


