Title       : Analysis and Geometry of Markov Chains Diffusion Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0102126

Award Number: 0102126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300049             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurent Saloff-Coste lsc@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This project is devoted to the study of two topics: (i) limit theorems in
              probability and statistics, and (ii) lower tail and small ball probabilities of
              Gaussian processes. Limit theorems play a fundamental role in the development
              of probability and statistics. The principal investigator continues his study
              in this direction in general, focusing on self-normalized limit theorems in
              particular. The investigator intends to systematically study moderate
              deviations for self-normalized sums of independent random variables, for
              Hotelling's t-statistic and for studentized U-statistic. The objective is to
              establish a Cramer type moderate deviation theorem under a finite third moment
              condition. Since the self-normalized moderate deviations require few moment
              conditions, they not only extend classical limit theorems but also provide much
              wider applicability to other fields, particularly to statistics. The study
              should also help us better understand the behavior of large classes of
              statistical functionals since the t-statistic and U-statistic are their
              building blocks. Another area where limit theorems prove useful is the study of
              the real zeros of random algebraic and trigonometric polynomials. Such
              polynomials with random coefficients arise in many disciplines and their
              behavior is of interest to statisticians, engineers, economists, and
              mathematicians. The primary focus of the second topic is on estimating lower
              tail and small ball probabilities for Gaussian processes. These types of
              probabilities often arise in estimating the chances of rare events occurring in
              areas where such events are of fundamental importance such as weather
              prediction, natural disaster prediction and economic indices. One of the
              objectives is to develop new methods of estimating small ball and lower tail
              probabilities. The focus is specifically on small ball probabilities of the
              Brownian sheet in high dimensions and lower tail probabilities for stationary
              Gaussian processes. The investigator also intends to study basic sample
              properties for a newly introduced family of Gaussian processes which have the
              same scaling and time inversion properties as the Brownian motion but are
              infinitely differentiable. It is believed that this new family of Gaussian
              processes would prove useful in many other fields as mathematical models.
              
	This project is devoted to the study of two topics: (i) limit theorems in
              probability and statistics, and (ii) lower tail and small ball probabilities of
              Gaussian processes. Limit theorems play a fundamental role in the development
              of probability and statistics. It is hoped that the first part of this research
              may lead to the development of a self-normalized limit theory in probability
              and statistics, while the second part of the research could provide significant
              new knowledge about Gaussian random processes as well as about our random
              environments. 
