Title       : Muonium in Wurtzite Structured Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2002  
File        : a0102862

Award Number: 0102862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227604             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger L. Lichti xbrll@ttacs.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The defect states formed by muonium (Mu) in wurtzite structured semiconductors
              are investigated using a series of related techniques known as muon-spin
              rotation, resonance, and relaxation,  or mSR.   Muonium is effectively a very
              light isotope of hydrogen in which a positive muon replaces the proton. 
              Results of these studies provide crucial information  on the behavior of
              isolated hydrogen impurities in these materials.  The focus will be on the
              group-III nitrides  and the II-VI compounds; in particular, the wide gap
              materials currently being developed for short wavelength lasers and other
              electro-optical applications.  Hydrogen is an important impurity in these
              materials that reacts with other impurities to modify the related electrical
              and optical properties, thus understanding its effects is crucial to
              engineering these materials for specific uses.   The muonium studies will yield
              information on the isolated hydrogen precursor to so-called passivation
              complexes that is very difficult to obtain by any other means.  The various
              sites and charge states for H (Mu) will be obtained,  the motion or diffusive
              characteristics of each state will be examined, and various transitions between
              these states characterized.  This project follows very successful studies of Mu
              in the cubic semiconductors in which a complete model of the dynamics of  Mu
              states and transitions was developed.  The hexagonal wurtzite structure has
              twice as many sites for Mu as diamond or zincblende structures making
              assignments of the observed sites and transitions more difficult.  Mu forms a
              shallow donor in some of the II-VI compounds in addition to the usual
              deep-level states; thus the crossover from deep to shallow behavior will be
              investigated in II-VI alloys.   The ultimate goal of this project is to provide
              sufficiently detailed characterization of the observed Mu states that an
              accurate dynamic model of muonium in the wurtzite materials can be realized. 
              Experience with other semiconductors indicates that the Mu results yield a
              semi-quantitative model for H impurities. This research will be conducted with
              students who will receive training in preparation for useful employment in the
              scientific/technical workforce of the 21st Century. 

Understanding the role
              of hydrogen impurities in the semiconductors being developed for blue and UV
              lasers  and other optical applications is crucial to engineering these
              materials for specific uses.  However,  many aspects of the behavior of
              hydrogen impurities have been extremely difficult to study directly.  In this
              project, we investigate an artificially produced impurity known as muonium that
              is formed by implanting a short lived particle into these materials.  Muonium
              mimics the behavior of hydrogen in essentially all its important properties,
              but is far easier to study.   The materials we plan to investigate include
              gallium nitride, aluminum nitride and other semiconductor compounds.  These
              laser materials have a common structure known as wurtzite and our main goal is
              to develop a complete model of the behavior of muonium (hydrogen) impurities in
              materials with this structure.  Our previous very successful studies of muonium
              in more common semiconductors, such as silicon and gallium arsenide which have
              a cubic structure,  provided a detailed picture of  the properties of isolated
              hydrogen impurities in the cubic semiconductors and serves as a guide for the
              current work.  The results of this project will provide the experimental data
              for comparison to the theoretical calculations currently being used to predict
              the behavior of hydrogen within the technologically important wurtzite
              semiconductors.  Successful completion of this work will allow a better model
              of the long term effects of hydrogen on the electrical and optical properties
              of short wavelength laser materials, and how these effects may be modified by
              various processing steps and aging under typical device use conditions. This
              research will be conducted with students. They will receive training in a
              forefront area of contemporary condensed matter physics and materials science
              in preparation to enter the scientific/technical workforce of the 21st
              Century.

