Title       : TSU College of Science and Technology Enhancement Program (STEP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a0102874

Award Number: 0102874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Davis davis_dc@tsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Southern University
	      3100 Cleburne
	      Houston, TX  770044501    713/527-7011

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Texas Southern University (TSU) proposes a Science and Technology Enhancement
              
Program (STEP) One-Year Planning Grant to the NSF Historically Black College
              and 
University Undergraduate Program (HBCU UP). The objective is to increase
              the 
recruitment, retention and graduation rates of students in undergraduate
              programs
 in science, mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET) areas
              through quality
 enhancements of teaching and student learning at the
              University. The TSU STEP
 will achieve this overall objective through four (4)
              programmatic thrusts: 
Student recruitment and retention for academic success,
              Faculty development 
in teaching and scholarly achievements, Curricular
              reforms through use of 
technology, and Assessment and evaluation for
              sustainability beyond NSF funding.
 These programmatic thrusts will have
              measurable goals and timelines to achieve
 the overall objectives of the TSU
              STEP. 

During this one-year planning period the TSU STEP will develop a
              comprehensive
 recruitment and retention plan for science and technology.
              Industry will become an
 integral part of the S&T programs trough establishing
              a Corporate and Professional
 Advisory Committee for the College of Science
              and Technology and a discipline
 specific one for each department.
              Comprehensive plans to assist faculty teaching 
with technology and enhancing
              their research capacity will be developed. Each
 undergraduate academic
              program will recommend improvements in their curriculum
 to enhance the
              quality of the education. An assessment and evaluation plan will be
 developed
              such that the TSU STEP will be sustainable after NSF funding has expired.
              







