Title       : Novel Studies of Vortex Matter and Peak Effect using In-Situ Neutron Scattering
               and AC Magnetization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0102746

Award Number: 0102746
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xinsheng Sean Ling xsling@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to a young professor for a study of vortex
              matter phases and phase transitions related to the peak effect in type-II
              superconductors, using in situ neutron scattering and ac magnetization
              measurements. In spite of the technological importance of type-II
              superconductors, the vortex matter phases are poorly understood. For many
              years, it was thought that a genuine order-disorder (melting) phase transition
              cannot occur in vortex matter systems due to the destructive effects of random
              pinning. Recently it was proposed that a topologically ordered vortex solid
              phase (Bragg glass) could exist in weakly disordered type-II superconductors.
              The melting (disordering) of the Bragg glass phase has been suggested as the
              origin of the well known but poorly understood peak effect anomaly seen in many
              type-II superconductors. There is preliminary experimental evidence suggesting
              that the peak effect is a genuine order-disorder phase transition in the
              superconducting vortex matter. This project will use in situ small angle
              neutron scattering to determine the vortex matter phase diagram in a classic
              type-II superconductor, Nb. The effects of disorder on the supercooling and
              superheating of vortex matter will be investigated. This project will also
              explore a possible application of neutron spin echo technique for studying the
              metastable vortex phases. These studies will establish a basic understanding of
              the magnetic properties of type-II superconductors. The graduate and
              undergraduate students participating in this project will have the opportunity
              to work at the Center for High-Resolution Neutron Scattering at the NIST and at
              the Institut Laue Langevin in Grenoble, France with researchers from around the
              world. This should prepare the students for future careers in academia,
              industry, or government.
%%%
Vortices in type-II superconductors form a
              condensed matter system of technological and scientific interests.
              Superconductors are of technological interest because they are able to carry
              high electrical currents without loss due to resistance.  The current-carrying
              capability of a superconductor is determined by a subtle competition between
              the vortex-vortex interactions, the random pinning (vortex-pin interactions),
              and thermal fluctuations. In spite of the technological importance of type-II
              superconductors, the vortex matter phases are poorly understood. This
              individual investigator award is to a young professor who will study the
              physics of vortex matter using in situ neutron scattering and ac magnetization
              measurements. These studies will establish a basic understanding of the
              magnetic properties of type-II superconductors. The graduate and undergraduate
              students participating in this project will have the opportunity to work at the
              Center for High-Resolution Neutron Scattering at the NIST and at the Institut
              Laue Langevin in Grenoble, France with researchers from around the world. This
              should prepare the students for future careers in academia, industry, or
              government.
***

