Title       : Robust Feedback Control and Analysis of Queueing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0102266

Award Number: 0102266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin V. Day day@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project develops mathematical techniques for the analysis of optimal robust
              control (service) strategies for queuing systems.  Fluid models (deterministic,
              continuous state and time variables) are considered which describe queuing
              network configurations motivated by applications in manufacturing,
              communications and vehicular traffic control.  Optimal control problems are
              formulated using the general approach of nonlinear robust control, resulting in
              an appropriate Hamilton-Jacobi-Isaacs (HJI) partial differential equation which
              determines the value function of a dynamic game.  Solutions to this HJI are
              constructed by methods similar to classical techniques involving
              (bi)characteristics or a field of extremals.  While this approach is well
              understood in general, it has had little development in applications to queuing
              networks.  One reason for this is that the precise mathematical description of
              queuing systems often involves a Skorokhod problem formulation to account for
              the changes to systems dynamics when some of the queues become empty.  A major
              goal of the project is to develop this approach for a variety of examples (e.g.
              different network structures and cost criteria) in order to discern the
              mathematical structure of solutions to the HJI, the form of the optimal
              policies themselves, and how the unique features of the Skorokhod problem
              formulation can be treated in this approach.  Using the understanding of
              solutions to the HJI gained through these case studies, numerical methods are
              developed to analyze larger and more complex examples.  The mathematical tools
              produced will contribute to the theory of robust control in general, to
              problems involving Skorokhod dynamics in particular, and will introduce robust
              control techniques to the area of traffic control.

The flow of "traffic"
              through a network, whether vehicles on a system of intersecting roads, products
              in a multistage manufacturing process, or "packets" of information in an
              electronic network, is an increasingly important aspect of our commercial and
              public services infrastructure.  In the familiar example of vehicles on a
              system of roads the network consists of several intersections connected by
              roads of various sizes.  The different streams of traffic that meet at an
              intersection must take turns or share the limited capacity of the intersection.
               The efficiency of the network depends on the strategy which controls the
              traffic streams that are allowed to use the various intersections at each
              moment of time.  (In the most familiar vehicular setting this simply means the
              scheme which governs the sequence and timing of traffic lights.)  Now that
              sensors are available to detect the number of vehicles waiting or traveling on
              each of the roads in a network, the design intelligent signal light control
              strategies to manage the network with optimal efficiency is a natural goal. 
              The same general issue of service allocation strategy is present in
              manufacturing or communication systems, although the terminology and specific
              features of the networks are different in those settings.  Traffic and network
              engineers have developed various ways to study the performance of network
              service control strategies "experimentally" and to adjust those strategies to
              current network conditions in an adaptive way.  However, with only a few
              exceptions, past research has not developed systematic tools to identify
              service control strategies whose performance is optimal in a precise
              mathematical sense.  This project develops mathematical ideas and tools for
              this purpose.  The new understanding and mathematical techniques which result
              should be a valuable contribution to the management and design of high
              performance networks.
