Title       : The Living and Learning Science Retention Program(LALSRP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0102892

Award Number: 0102892
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2573421            (Estimated)
Investigator: Yvonne M. Coston ycoston@st-aug.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Wilson  (Principal Investigator former)
              Gloria E. Payne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Augustine's College
	      1315 Oakwood Avenue
	      Raleigh, NC  276102247    919/828-4451

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Living and Learning Science Retention Program (LALSRP) at Saint
              
Augustine's College is designed to facilitate entry into the junior year by
              providing a 
support system for entering freshmen and sophomore science,
              mathematics and computer 
science (SMC) majors. A comprehensive approach to
              provide a support system will be 
accomplished by implementing the following
              objectives: 
1. To revise and update curriculum to incorporate cooperative
              learning which will 
enhance study skills and generate independent learners;
              
2. To provide participants with intramural research experiences which will
              increase 
their analytical reasoning skills and provide hands-on laboratory
              experiences; 
3. To build students' confidence so that they can successfully
              pursue an 
undergraduate degree in science and technology by providing
              positive role 
models, mentors and a strong academic support system; 
4. To
              assist participants in the understanding of the process involved in pursuing a
              
degree in science and technology by offering seminars, workshops and field
              trips; 
and 
5. To enhance and develop faculty participants by providing
              research and curriculum 
development opportunities. 

In order to accomplish
              the stated objectives, the program will consist of five components: 
(1)
              Curriculum Enrichment which will include a Pre-freshman Summer Bridge Program,
              
Enrichment Center and a Village of Science and Technology (VOSAT); (2)
              
Undergraduate Research Experience; (3) Seminars and Workshops; (4)
              Scholarships and 
(5) Faculty Development. 

This program will enhance the
              living and learning community on the campus of 
Saint Augustine's College. It
              will serve as a model that can be replicated across the 
campus and can also
              be applied to other disciplines. It is anticipated that by the end of 
the
              5-year funding period, the number of SMC graduates at Saint Augustine's College
              
will increase 2 fold. In five years the campus will have an established
              infrastructure to 
support the transition of freshmen into the junior year.
              The dormitory VOSAT in 
particular, will stimulate scientific and
              technological discussions among majors and 
nonmajors on the campus. This
              proposed Living and Learning Science Retention 
Program will support 30-50
              students each year and impact approximately 1,400 
undergraduate students who
              reside on the campus of Saint Augustine's College. This 
program will serve as
              a model that can be replicated on any campus that has a minority 
based
              population. 

