Title       : Limit Theorems and Statistical Inference for Ergodic Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0102268

Award Number: 0102268
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239958             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Woodroofe michael@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 0102268
Limit Theorems and Statistical Inference for Ergodic
              Processes


A major goal of the project is to develop a new approach to the
              change point problem in which the abrupt change of the latter is replaced by an
              arbitrary monotonic change.  The new procedure uses a penalized likelihood
              ratio statistic for testing equality of means against a non-decreasing trend,
              derived for independent normal observation errors.  The properties of the test
              can be studied in the more general context of dependent, but stationary and
              ergodic errors.  Applications of such procedures should be evident in the
              analysis of climate changes results from cataclysmic events or legal
              intervention, such as the required reduction on vehicle emissions.

Current
              work by the principal investigator and students has determined the asymptotic
              null distribution of the test statistic for stationary ergodic errors under
              modest conditions, thus allowing application to historical data sets, like
              weather data.  Remaining questions include developing a sequential analogue for
              applications to quality control, alternative penalizations, and estimating a
              variance parameter after an isotonic regression.  A second major goal of the
              project is to develop asymptotic distribution theory in a context that is
              applicable to the first.  The central limit theorem will be studied for
              additive functionals of a Markov chain with special attention to chains in
              which the current state is a function of the previous state and an independent
              variable.  Many linear and non-linear time series models are of this form. 
              Conditions for the existence of a stationary distribution have been widely
              studied for such processes, but there is much less work on central limit theory
              for their additive functionals.  The principal investigator plans to develop
              central limit theory in this context.  Previous work has shown that additive
              functionals can be written as a martingale plus a remainder term of smaller
              order in many cases, and then asymptotic normality can be deduced from the
              martingale central limit theorem.  This approach does not require Harris
              recurrence or other strong forms of asymptotic independence.  It will be
              developed, and statistical applications explored, especially applications to
              the modified change point problem. Other statistical applications include
              setting approximate confidence intervals.  In some cases, approximate
              confidence intervals may be obtained from a multivariate central limit theorem.
               For others, it is necessary to develop tightness of empirical processes, and
              this question will be studied.  In highly structured models, it is possible to
              go beyond asymptotic normality to (Edgeworth like) asymptotic expansions from
              which corrected confidence intervals can be formed, intervals whose actual
              coverage probability converges to the nominal value at a fast rate.  A third
              major objective of project is to develop such expansions.  Previous work by the
              principal investigator, co-workers, and students has developed expansions of
              this nature for adaptively designed linear models and auto regressive
              processes.  This work will be extended to processes whose finite dimensional
              distributions form exponential families, a large class of processes that
              includes Markov Chains and many semi-Markov processes.

