Title       : Many-Body Computational Methods for Electronic Structure of Cluster and
               Molecular Nanosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0102668

Award Number: 0102668
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lubos Mitas lmitas@unity.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              

0102668
Mitas
This award supports research on many-body computational
              approaches for electronic and atomic structures of real materials.  Research
              focuses on further developing quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) methods and on their
              applications to nanoscale systems.  One focus of the work is to expand the
              capabilities of QMC for calculations of Born-Oppenheimer forces on ions,
              excited states and optical absorption, the effects of zero point motion on
              excitations in systems with light atoms.  The PI will use QMC  together with
              these enhancements, to investigate molecular nanosystems and clusters with
              promising potential for scientific discoveries and applications.  Specific
              activities include: determining the electronic structure of thiolate
              derivatives which are being explored as prototypes for molecular devices, and
              determining optical and structural properties, and excited states of SinHm and
              SinOlHm nanocrystals which exhibit ultrabright luminescence effects. An
              important aspect of this activity is the training of undergraduates and
              graduate students in advanced electronic structure methods and in efficient use
              of parallel and distributed computational platforms at national supercomputing
              facilities.
%%%
This grant supports research and education in computational
              methods that can determine the quantum states of electrons and their excitation
              energies in nanostructures to high accuracy.  The PI plans to develop
              extensions of existing methods to enable the accurate determination of atomic
              positions, electronic excited states, and optical absorption spectra. These
              enhanced quantum Monte Carlo-based tools will be applied to specific nanoscale
              structures of atoms and molecules that are of fundamental interest and may have
              direct impact on nanoelectronics and other emerging technologies.
***

