Title       : HBCU-UP Planning Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2001   
File        : a0102676

Award Number: 0102676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aliakbar M. Haghighi haghighi@benedict.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Juanita S. Scott  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Benedict College
	      Harden and Blanding Sts
	      Columbia, SC  29204    803/256-4220

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A majority of entering students begin their college careers with
              inadequate
mathematics background to pursue SMET careers. The purpose of the
              proposed
planning program is to design a comprehensive program to overcome
              these
entering deficiencies to improve the participation and performance of
              minority
students in SMET disciplines. The overall goals of the planning
              program will be
(a) to assess the strengths, weaknesses and needs of
              mathematics instruction as
well as other gate-keeping courses in the SMET
              disciplines; and (b) to assess 
undergraduate student research needs and
              opportunities in SMET disciplines on 
and off campus.

Assessment includes,
              student performances on many items such as the Sophomore 
Proficiency
              Examination, Major Area Examinations, Graduate and Professional
School
              Entrance Examinations, success in advanced programs, presentations of
              
research papers at professional conferences, professional publications, and
              the 
type of employment and advancement in ranks.

Assessment of the quality
              of faculty members in the SMET disciplines will be done
by a review of the
              credentials of faculty members as compared to the SMET faculty
in other
              institutions and the standards set by accrediting bodies and performance
              
portfolios. In assessing faculty development and recruitment needs, the ratio
              of 
instructor/students in mathematics and other SMET disciplines will be
              compared 
with other majors at Benedict, as well as with other similar
              institutions.

Visitation to other institutions with SMET's curricula that
              have recently been 
reformed due to NSF effort, self-study or otherwise, will
              help Benedict to have
a better assessment of the College's current SMET's
              curricula. This is also the case
when selected staff members of the Task Force
              visit sites that they have recently 
reformed their SMET's curricula.

The
              current and future technology needs for SMET courses, in general, and
              SMET
majors, in particular, will be assessed.

Consultants with expertise in
              SMET curricula will be used in the overall process of
assessing the current
              curricula and potentially improving and/or redesigning them. 
It will be made
              certain that high-level decision-making administrators (President, 
his
              cabinet, and deans) review the comprehensive proposal and approve its contents
              
before submission to NSF .

An internal advisory committee, (Task Force),
              will help to guide the work and to 
assess the planing program. In particular,
              this committee will help assess and analyze
 data and plan/design the
              curriculum for the comprehensive program.

It is anticipated that the
              proposed project will result in the development of a 
competitive proposal for
              submission to the National Science Foundation for funding 
through the HBCU-UP
              Program. The proposal will be based on an accurate assessment of
current and
              future needs in the SMET programs at Benedict College. Results of
              these
assessment activities will also provide information needed by the
              College to improve 
other areas that bear on the performance of students in
              the SMET disciplines.

