Title       : Dynamic Transitions in Magnetic Vortex Lattices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2001     
File        : a0102692

Award Number: 0102692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eva Y. Andrei   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will fund a project that will employ a new
              pinning-force microscope in conjunction with fast transport measurements, to
              address key questions on vortex dynamics.  These include: a) the mechanism of
              current driven metastable to stable transitions; b) the nature of moving vortex
              phases and the transitions between them; c) effects of boundaries on dynamics
              and phase segregation in the peak effect region; d) the mechanism of frequency
              memory in vortex states.  The planned pinning force microscope will image not
              the vortices themselves but the contrast between regions with different pinning
              forces.  It will be capable of distinguishing between a strongly pinned
              disordered vortex state and a weakly pinned ordered one with spatial resolution
              of about 1micro-m, and its operation will not be limited to low fields.  By
              taking advantage of the fact that the vortex motion can be frozen in place and
              that the imaging is non-invasive, the microscope will be capable of resolving
              vortex motion with excellent temporal resolution (about 1ms).  This method will
              allow access to regimes of vortex dynamics not possible by existing vortex
              imaging techniques.  The students and young researchers involved in this work
              will gain skill in applying newly developed new techniques to questions of
              interest.  The knowledge and skills that they will learn will be of use to them
              in future research and development careers.
%%%
A limiting factor to the use
              of Type-II superconductors in technology is that at a particular magnetic field
              strength, magnetic vortices form.  These vortices can become "de-pinned" which
              then cause the superconductor to loose its zero resistance state.  Because most
              properties of Type-II superconductors are governed by the physics of vortices,
              it is of fundamental and technological interest to study the physics of the
              motion these vortices.  Several newly discovered phenomena have made it clear
              that our present understanding of vortex dynamics (or motion) is flawed.  It
              appears that, due to the presence of a random pinning force, the phase
              transitions and the onset of vortex motion are very interesting and more
              complex than originally thought.  This individual investigator award will fund
              a program to address these issues by imaging the pinning force distribution in
              the vortex phases with a novel high resolution microscope that we propose to
              build in our laboratory.  A strong educational component will be an integral
              part of the project.  Students at both graduate and undergraduate levels as
              well as a post doctoral fellow will actively participate in all research and
              development aspects of the program.  The knowledge and skills that they will
              learn will be of use to them in future research and development careers.
***

