Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a0102090

Award Number: 0102090
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tara M. Sirvent   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : T,Sirvent
	      728 Millard Hill Road #C
	      Newfield, NY  14867    607/564-7869

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
              FY2001.  The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
              protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
              not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
              opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
              microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
              established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
              research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
              fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
              research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
              of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
              locations. 

The research and training plan is entitled "Using the Tools of
              Molecular Biology and Chemistry to Characterize Pigment Biosynthesis in the
              Chestnut Blight Fungus."  The goal of this research is to analyze the pathway
              for production of polyketide pigments in the fungus Cryphonectria parasitica. 
              Genes required for biosynthesis of emodin and other related anthraquinone
              compounds are being cloned, sequenced, and characterized from an ordered cosmid
              library and by PCR amplification of PKS genes.  These approaches will permit
              analysis of genetic diversity within a conserved pathway present in numerous
              fungi and plants.

