Title       : Electrodynamics of Electron Liquids and Electron Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0102405

Award Number: 0102405
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Gruner gruner@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will support an experimental project focusing
              on the low energy electrodynamics of novel materials with strong
              electron-electron interactions, disorder and reduced dimensionality. The
              materials to be investigated include: a) metals such as NbSi where the
              interplay of interactions and disorder leads to a metal-insulator transition
              and to a nonmetallic state, where quantum effects and randomness is essential;
              b) molecular nanowires, strictly one-dimensional chains of atoms such as Mo6Se6
              where electron-electron interactions and/or disorder lead to a Luttinger Liquid
              in case of interactions, and an Anderson-Mott localized state in case of
              disorder; and c) metals such as UPt3 where electron-electron interactions are
              strong, the so-called heavy fermion systems.  In the latter materials, magnetic
              correlations may place the materials close to a magnetic instability, which
              could be viewed as a Quantum Critical Point.  In all cases the primary interest
              will be the so called quantum limit where the energy associated with the
              electromagnetic field is larger that the thermal energy, a region of the
              parameter space which has not been explored by experiments to date.  The
              graduate students and post docs working on this project will receive excellent
              training that will prepare them for future careers in academia, industry, or
              government laboratories.
%%%
Electrons in materials can, just like atoms,
              assume an electron liquid, electron solid and electron glass state. In contrast
              to atomic arrangements, such states are more difficult to achieve and at the
              same time quantum effects play a more prominent role in most of the properties
              of such collective electron states. Because of the electronic charge, such
              states strongly interact with electromagnetic radiation, thus optical studies
              lead to fundamental information about such states. At the same time,
              development of such states lead to materials with unique, novel optical and
              electromagnetic characteristics. Typically the response to such radiation
              occurs at frequencies below the optical spectral range, at microwave,
              millimeter and sub-millimeter wave frequencies. This individual investigator
              award provides support to an experimental program that will explore the various
              electron states of matter, by developing new instrumentation and also by
              conducting novel type of experiments in the frequency ranges mentioned above on
              materials where such electron states occur. The graduate students and post docs
              working on this project will receive excellent training that will prepare them
              for future careers in academia, industry, or government
              laboratories.






