Title       : Application of Luminescence Dating in North American Archaeology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0102428

Award Number: 0102428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136625             (Estimated)
Investigator: James K. Feathers jimf@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Perhaps the most important task of archaeology is providing a chronology for
              the material remains that are recovered.  Any statements about how and why
              cultures have changed in the past are predicated on an accurate and precise
              chronology.  Archaeologists have utilized an array of physical methods for
              determining age, most commonly radiocarbon dating. Luminescence dating, which
              is widely used in Europe, has seen less use in American Archaeology.  The
              National Science Foundation is supporting research by the University of
              Washington's Luminescence Dating Laboratory, directed by Dr. James Feathers, in
              expanding the application of this dating method in American archaeology.  This
              research involves addressing some chronological problems that have not been
              resolved by other dating methods but which are particularly suitable for
              luminescence dating.

Luminescence can be used to date buried sediments,
              pottery and burned lithics.  Primarily pottery dating, with some lithic dating,
              is being addressed in this project.  Luminescence dates pottery to the last
              time it was heated, usually when it was made or used.  Since the manufacture or
              use is the event that archaeologists are interested in, luminescence has the
              principle advantage of providing direct dates for pottery and does not rely, as
              do other dating methods, on association of the pottery with some other event
              that is dated.

This has some particular advantages for some chronological
              problems, which are being addressed by this research:
     1) Archaeologists
              are interested in regional settlement dynamics, but small sites, particularly
              those which contain mainly surface material, are difficult to date and thus
              place in a settlement chronology.  Are these sites the same age or different
              age than larger sites and what does this mean for how the population was
              dispersed across the landscape? Undiagnostic pottery sherds are often the only
              artifacts found at these sites.  Luminescence is the only method that can date
              them.
     2) A particularly vexing problem in archaeology is the mixing in
              one deposit of materials of different age. This confounds interpretations of
              cultural history and blurs evidence on the tempo of change.  By directly dating
              artifacts (in this case pottery sherds), as luminescence can, one can begin to
              tease apart the different occupations.
     3) Duration of occupation in one
              location is an important variable for understanding population trends and their
              impact on environment, economy and political complexity.  Determining duration
              has long been problematic in archaeology.  By directly dating a number of
              pottery sherds, luminescence can provide a measure of duration that is
              statistically quantifiable.  Pottery tends to have a relatively short use-life,
              and emphasis on sherds that have the most fragile fabrics will minimize
              problems of artifacts that may last longer than the occupations.
     4)
              Dating pre-ceramic sites can also be difficult.  Luminescence is able to date
              heat-treated stone tools as well as pottery and offers a solution to improving
              the earliest chronologies in America. 

These problems are being addressed in
              this research through work in the Mississippi Valley, the Tennessee Valley,
              eastern Mississippi, central Alabama, and other localities in the Midwest and
              Southeast.  Research into improving the accuracy and precision of luminescence
              dating of pottery is also being undertaken.

