Title       : The Structure of Self-similar Stable Processes with Stationary Increments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0102410

Award Number: 0102410
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murad S. Taqqu murad@math.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0102410
Taqqu
	The focus of this research is on a special class of stochastic
              processes with the following three properties: stationary increments,
              self-similar and stable non-Gaussian probability laws (stable sssi processes,
              in short). Unlike the Gaussian case, there are infinitely many different stable
              sssi processes. This overwhelming variety may be regarded as a fundamental
              problem. One now has to understand how these processes are different or what it
              is that they have in common. However, non-Gaussianity also brings to the
              picture new tools that were unavailable in the Gaussian case. It has been known
              for quite some time now that non-Gaussian stable processes having some
              invariance property, like self-similarity or stationarity of the increments,
              can be associated with nonsingular flows. It is then based on some properties
              of these flows that one can describe the structure of the corresponding stable
              processes. The focus will be at first on an important subclass of stable sssi
              processes called self-similar mixed moving averages. The connection of
              self-similar mixed moving averages to nonsingular flows allows one to decompose
              them into separate, independent processes and then explore each part in the
              decomposition separately.
	The purpose of this research is to better
              understand a class of random processes that have characteristics that one
              encounters in many areas of applications. Examples of such processes include
              the limit of the so-called renewal reward processes applied in
              telecommunications and "random wavelet expansions" introduced in probabilistic
              modeling of images. These processes are fractal-like. They display scale
              invariance and tend to take often extreme values that deviate greatly from the
              mean. Their mathematical structure is complex. The goal of this research is to
              develop tools that can be used to analyze that structure

