Title       : Developments on Quantile Regression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0102411

Award Number: 0102411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242530             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xuming He he@stat.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Portnoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Francis Galton, the progenitor of modern regression, chided those of his
              statistical colleagues who "limit their inquiries to Averages and do not revel
              in more comprehensive views". Arguing that any complete analysis of the full
              variety of experience requires the entire distribution of a trait, not just a
              measure of its central tendency, he introduced the empirical quantile function
              as a convenient graphical device for this purpose. Unfortunately, the very
              success of least squares methods throughout applied statistics has obscured the
              need for a more complete analysis of the statistical relationship among
              variables. The least squares regression limits its inquiries to the conditional
              mean function and thus can fail to find when structural relationships in the
              data may depend on the size of the response.  For example, patients with long
              survival times may respond to treatment differently from those with average
              survival times; or persons with long periods of unemployment may respond to
              training differently from those with shorter unemployment periods.  Such
              differences could not be seen in standard analyses that model only the mean
              response. The investigators propose to extend conditional quantile functions to
              more complex situations, specifically to parametric and semiparametric
              regression quantiles for correlated or censored response variables (which are
              common in both examples mentioned above). The computation of the conditional
              quantile functions is facilitated by modern linear programming algorithms, and
              appropriate statistical inference can be developed through traditional large
              sample theory or Markov Chain Marginal Bootstrap being developed by the PI and
              his colleagues.

Conditional quantile functions help data analysts understand
              general heterogeneity in the population. They are often of direct interest in
              applications ranging from biomedical research, economic and business analyses
              to infrastructure studies. The proposed research is to establish a firm
              statistical theory for regression quantiles and provide a complete toolkit for
              their applications in complex problems with correlated and/or censored data.
