Title       : Conservation Laws for Multiphase Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0102480

Award Number: 0102480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234997             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Glimm glimm@ams.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley J. Plohr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Multiphase flow is a branch of fluid dynamics of considerable difficulty,
              importance, and interest. The defining equations result from averages of some
              primitive equation, such as the Navier-Stokes or Euler equations. Nonlinear
              terms in the primitive equations lead to new unknowns in the averaged equation
              and the need for closure relations. These are difficult to determine, or even
              to measure experimentally. Closure is nonunique, as different closures apply to
              different flow regimes, and different closures may define competing equations
              to describe the same flow regime. The different equations may be complementary
              in that they describe the same situation in differing levels of detail. They
              also may reflect unresolved differences of scientific opinion. For these
              multiple reasons, the analysis of the equations is of considerable importance
              to science. The proposal here is primarily concerned with methods of analysis
              that delimit or shed light on the closures that are valid descriptions of fluid
              flow.

Multiphase flow, and more generally the study of turbulence, is one of
              the major unsolved problems of importance to physics and to engineering. Flow
              of oil, gas, and water mixtures in a pipeline or in the rocks of a petroleum
              reservoir provide examples of such flows.  Thermal mixing layers in meteorology
              leading to formation of thunderstorms provide another example. The formation of
              salt domes in geological formations, the study of controlled fusion to provide
              ample energy sources, and the study of late stage supernovae, or stellar
              explosions are further examples. In all cases, the phenomena is too complex,
              detailed and varied to be described usefully at a fine level of detail. Just as
              with the process of addition of milk to coffee, the initial swirls of milk in
              the coffee are artistic and complex, but the coffee-milk mixture after stirring
              is better described by averages of coffee and milk. Such a study of averages of
              mixtures, and the appropriate equations is the purpose of this proposal.
              Because of the importance of the problem, many methods are used for the study
              of mixtures: experiment, theory and numerical simulation. The mathematical
              aspects of the equations describing the mixture also give an important window
              into this subject and will be the primary focus of this investigation.  

