Title       : Statistical Methods for Some Applied Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0102529

Award Number: 0102529
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172207             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yehuda Vardi vardi@stat.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cun-Hui Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

 Abstract DMS 0102529 ----------


           STATISTICAL METHODS FOR
              SOME APPLIED PROBLEMS

Stochastic models and methods for a number of
              real-life problems will be developed together with appropriate statistical
              inference tools. Results of the proposed research will be applicable and
              directly relevant to important areas of applications.  The first topic concerns
              statistical methodology for problems originating by users' command streams in a
              multi-users computer network.  Statistical modeling of such data has important
              applications in networks' intrusion-detection, in designing intelligent
              computer/internet environments with learning capabilities, and more.  The goal
              is to develop a practical methodology for profiling individual users or, more
              generally, random sequences of commands originating from a fixed given source.
              Our methods allow the system to recognize 'statistical signature' of users, and
              to flag out masqueraders who might assume the e-identity of a legitimate user.
              The data pose huge practical challenges, because of its shear size and
              complexion and our current method has very good operating
              characteristics
(false- and missing- alarms) on two publicly available test
              data. 

The second topic concerns the development of a new concept of
              data-depth functions, based on multivariate medians. We provided a new
              algorithm for calculating an important multivariate median function, and a
              closed form formula for the associated data depth.  The methodology will lead
              to robust, practical tools for multivariate data analysis, inference,
              regression, image processing, and more.  The third topic concerns regression
              analysis and  nonparametric methods for the comparisons of growth curves under
              informative heterogeneous censoring. In many tumor growth inhibition studies,
              tumor sizes are recorded over a period of time, forming a growth curve for each
              experimental subject. The usual noninformative-censoring model is often not
              applicable, because subjects could be censored out of the study due to
              treatments toxicity effects. We propose to develop statistical tests for the
              comparison of tumor growth rates and estimates of regression 
coefficients, in
              the presence of informative heterogeneous censoring. The proposed testing
              procedures are expected to be widely used, since they naturally correct the
              censorship bias, retain high efficiency and 
require no distributional
              assumption of the growth curves or the censoring mechanism. 


