Title       : Measurement of the Vortex Charge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0102736

Award Number: 0102736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213281             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Clayhold jclayho@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will provide support to a young professor at
              Clemson University for his research on the mixed state of type-II
              superconductors.  In particular he will attempt to measure the amount of charge
              bound inside a vortex line in a type-II superconductor.  Recent transport
              models for the mixed state of the high temperature superconductors have invoked
              a nonzero vortex charge as an explanation for the anomalous behavior seen
              experimentally.  In the high temperature superconductors, the value for the
              vortex charge is expected to be enhanced over its value in conventional type-II
              superconductors.  A novel technique utilizing the measurement of the mixed
              state thermoelectric Hall effect (Nernst Effect) will be employed in this
              effort.  The expected sensitivity of this technique means that a null result
              will be as important as a finite value.  The charge will be measured in the
              cuprate superconductors as a function of stoichiometry, temperature, and
              magnetic field.  This research will increase our understanding of these
              technologically useful materials.  The students working on this project will
              develop skills that will help them find jobs in academia, government or
              industrial laboratories.
%%%
Superconductors are materials that have zero
              electrical resistance and thus can carry an electrical current without loss. 
              The technologically useful superconductors are known as type-II.  These
              materials have what is known as a "mixed state."  In the mixed state an
              external magnetic field is able to penetrate the superconductor in quantized
              (fixed) amounts, resulting in vortices.  Recent theories to explain the
              observed anomalous behavior of the electrical and thermal transport in the
              mixed state of the high temperature superconductors invoke the notion of a
              non-zero electric charge for these vortices.  The charge of a vortex has never
              been measured.  In conventional, low temperature superconductors it would be
              too small.  However it may be possible to measure this value in the high
              temperature superconductors.  This individual investigator award will provide
              support to a young professor at Clemson University for his attempt to measure
              the charge bound inside a vortex in a high temperature superconductor.  The
              project will utilize a newly developed, sensitive technique to make this
              measurement.  The technique has enough sensitivity that even a measured value
              of zero for the charge will be significant and have implications for the
              theories of the mixed-state.  This research will increase our understanding of
              these technologically useful materials.  The students working on this project
              will develop skills that will help them find jobs in academia, government or
              industrial laboratories.

