Title       : The Archaeometry Laboratory at MURR: Developing Tools for Archaeological
               Provenance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0102325

Award Number: 0102325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Glascock glascockm@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hector Neff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. O'Brien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Glascock will continue to operate an archaeometric center at the University
              of Missouri and employ the technique of neutron activation analysis to analyze
              the elemental composition  of archaeological materials. This multi-elemental
              technique which allows the major, minor and  trace elements of a material to be
              determined simultaneously and with considerable accuracy and  precision. Of
              particular interest are potential analyses of  ceramics, lithics, metal and
              bone.  Through elemental analysis of archaeological materials, a number  of
              significant kinds of questions can be addressed. NAA provides a taxonomic tool
              because it allows  materials of similar composition to be grouped together. In
              some instances, it also permits the  proveniencing of artifacts and thus may
              provide information about procurement practices, routes of  trade and political
              boundaries. It may also improve understanding of ancient technologies and
              (through analysis of skeletal remains) give insight into prehistoric diet and
              nutrition.  This project is  particularly important because the Missouri
              laboratory is one of the very few which provide NAA  service to archaeologists.
              It also plays an important role in training students and it maintains large
              data bases and is working actively to facilitate scientific access to them.


                  Under this current award, Dr. Glascock will integrate high-resolution
              inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) with standard NAA
              procedures. He will develop calibration standards that will facilitate the
              integration of NAA and ICP-MS data. It is likely that within the coming years
              ICP-MS, because of its relative accessibility and more economic operating
              costs, will play an increasingly important role in archaeometric analysis and
              Dr. Glascock will work to provide standards for the archaeometric community. He
              will also explore the potential of solid-sample analysis via laser ablation and
              investigate new kinds of archaeometric studies such as slip and pigment
              analysis by laser ablation ICP-MS.

