Title       : Charge-Density Waves: Novel X-ray Scattering Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0102677

Award Number: 0102677
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel D. Brock jdb20@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will provide funds for a project to measure
              the dynamic atomic-scale structure of charge-density waves driven by an applied
              electric field over randomly located impurity atoms.  Charge density wave
              systems are a good example of a driven periodic system in the presence of
              disorder.  To perform quantitative tests of some novel theories for such
              systems, several important quantities need to be measured. These include
              measurements of the steady-state (equilibrium) dynamics and measurements of the
              coupling between the electronic and the lattice degrees of freedom.  This
              project will (a) continue to develop X-ray Photon Correlation Spectroscopy (at
              the Advanced Photon Source) for measurements of the equilibrium dynamics and
              will (b) assess (at CHESS) the feasibility of using resonant-elastic-scattering
              to separate the response of the electrons from the response of the crystal
              lattice.  The potential impact of these measurements is large as the results
              relate directly to a diverse array of systems including: magnetic-bubble
              lattices driven by a magnetic-field, Wigner crystals, colloidal suspensions
              driven by an electric field, driven arrays of Josephson-junctions, and the
              growth of crystals on substrates. The impact of this project on advancing
              education and human resources development includes continuing the research
              group's demonstrated practice of pro-actively searching out, recruiting and
              supporting women and under-represented minorities at the undergraduate,
              graduate, and postdoctoral levels.

X-ray diffraction has historically been
              the technique of choice for measuring the structure of matter on atomic length
              scales.  The continuing development of time-resolved x-ray techniques allows
              the atomic positions to be determined on ever-faster time scales during
              chemical, physical, and biological processes.  Time-resolved x-ray measurements
              span length-scales from atomic to macroscopic distances and time-scales from 1
              millionth to 1000 seconds.  This individual investigator project will develop
              new x-ray techniques for studying a variety of problems in condensed-matter
              physics.  X-ray technique development will occur in the process of studying of
              charge-density waves found in the quasi one-dimensional metal NbSe3.  This
              system is known to be a nearly ideal realization of a physical system with a
              large number of internal degrees of freedom that can be driven over disorder,
              thus it forms an. excellent one which to use new improved techniques.  This
              project will (a) continue to develop X-ray Photon Correlation Spectroscopy (at
              the Advanced Photon Source) for measurements of the equilibrium dynamics and
              will (b) assess (at CHESS) the feasibility of using resonant-elastic-scattering
              to separate the response of the electrons from the response of the crystal
              lattice. The potential impact of these measurements is large as the results
              relate directly to a diverse array of other systems, some of which have the
              potential for technological applications.. The impact of this project on
              advancing education and human resources development includes continuing the
              research group's demonstrated practice of pro-actively searching out,
              recruiting and supporting women and under-represented minorities at the
              undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels. 

