Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a0102097

Award Number: 0102097
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian S. Leander bleander@arches.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : B,Leander
	      210 Rumson Road
	      Athens, GA  30605    706/369-9641

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
              FY2001.  The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
              protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
              not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
              opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
              microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
              established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
              research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
              fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
              research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
              of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
              locations. 

The research and training plan is entitled "The Origin and Early
              Evolution of Apicomplexans."  Apicomplexans are microbial parasites that appear
              to have descended from phototrophic dinoflagellates.  "Aseptate gregarines" are
              apicomplexans that inhabit marine worms and possess many ancestral features. 
              Moreover, many taxa of uncertain phylogenetic position possess
              apicomplexan-like characteristics.  Morphological and molecular phylogenetics
              of these "enigmatic taxa" are being investigated and are expected to throw
              light on apicomplexan origins and the evolution of novel characters.

