Title       : NER: Exploration of Phase Transformations at nm-length Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a0102960

Award Number: 0102960
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dragomir Davidovic dragomir.davidovic@physics.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1676,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) project investigates liquid-to-solid
              and vapor-to-solid transformations in nanometer scale clusters.  In
              nanometer-scale systems, phase transformations exhibit irregular variations of
              characteristic parameters and magic numbers.  Other systems exhibiting such
              behavior are atomic nuclei, atoms, quantum dots, cluster beams and metallic
              nanowires. The proposed studies are important in understanding the role of
              clusters in biological systems, including identifying clusters that actuate
              electron transport pathways in biomolecular systems, and the adaptation of
              clusters as they connect to external objects, such as leads, DNA and proteins. 
              A series of electrical transport measurements as a function of pressure and
              temperature are proposed to understand the electronic properties of these
              clusters.  Nanoelectrodes with atomic scale gaps are immersed into a medium
              that is tuned sufficiently close to a bulk phase transformation.  Then, by
              applying electric fields strongly localized in space, a cluster of different
              phase is nucleated locally between the electrodes.  Electron transport
              investigates the electronic properties and stability of the cluster.  Graduate
              and undergraduate students participating in the project receive training in
              nanofabrication technology, including visits to national nanofabrication
              facility, combined with fundamental experimental techniques in the laboratory. 
              This experience makes them competitive for a range of careers in academia,
              industry and government. 
%%%
This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER)
              project investigates liquid-to-solid and vapor-to-solid transformations in
              nanometer scale objects. When the size of the objects approaches one nanometer,
              the transformations are significantly modified, and they acquire properties
              that are typically found in atoms and nuclei.  Consequently, the objects of
              study are referred to with a new name: clusters.  The properties of clusters as
              a function of size vary irregularly, in analogy with the periodic variation
              inside the periodic table of elements in atomic physics. Additionally, there
              are clusters that have very high stability.  These are known as magic-number
              configurations, and are analogous to inert atoms.  These clusters also occur
              naturally in biological systems, and they play important role on electronic
              transfer and binding to bio-molecules such as DNA and proteins.  This project
              breaks new ground in combining nanotechnology on silicon-chip and electron
              transport through individual clusters, to determine their electronic and other
              properties, such as how clusters conduct electricity.  The students involved in
              the project are thoroughly trained in cutting edge technologies important in
              further miniaturization of electronics.  Additionally, they acquire basic
              laboratory skills, and specialized skills in high-level measurements.  This
              experience will allow them to pursue careers in academia, industry and
              government. 

