Title       : Support for the NAS/NRC Committee on Geography and for U.S. Participation in
               International Geographical, Psychological, and History of Science Unions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a0102191

Award Number: 0102191
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $473533             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristen Krapf kkraph@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul W. Turner  (Principal Investigator former)
              David Spaulding  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              As both the foci and the character of scientific inquiries have become more
              global in nature, increasing attention is being given to developing frameworks
              through which scientists from different nations may work together to advance
              fundamental knowledge.  A critical part of the scientific infrastructure
              fostering such collaborations is the International Council for Science (ICSU)
              and its 22 member scientific unions.  This award provides support for U.S.
              participation in three of those unions.  Five years of support are provided for
              U.S. participation in the International Geographical Union and for operations
              of the Committee on Geography at the National Academy of Sciences/National
              Research Council, which serves as the U.S. National Committee for the IGU.  One
              year of support is provided for U.S. participation in the International Union
              of Psychological Sciences (IUPsyS) and for operations of the U.S. National
              Committee for the IUPsyS, and one year of support is provided for U.S.
              participation in the International Union of the History and Philosophy of
              Science (IUHPS).  In addition to activities associated with these three
              international scientific unions, this award also provides core support for
              other activities of the Committee on Geography.  The overall goals of this
              committee are to clarify and set priorities for geography research; to identify
              the role of geography in major policy issues; to support and assure the quality
              of geography content in education; and to encourage and facilitate the
              involvement of geographers in the IGU.  In pursuit of the first three goals,
              the committee is engaged in a series of independently funded studies, including
              studies that examine data needs for place-based decision making; research
              priorities in geography at the U.S. Geological Survey, and the processes
              through which children develop spatial thinking.

This award will facilitate
              activities designed to increase and enhance participation by U.S. scientists in
              international collaborative activities in the geographic and psychological
              scientists as well as by historians and philosophers of science.  These
              collaborations will complement research and educational efforts in the U.S. and
              elsewhere and facilitate continued evolution of a global scientific community. 
              The award also will assist the Committee on Geography in continuing its efforts
              to focus and generate geographic inquiry and education in ways that will better
              meet the needs of academics, practitioners, educators, and students as well as
              government decision makers and the public as a whole.

