Title       : Dynamics of Interface Instabilities and Nanostructure Formation on Si and SiGe
               Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0102652

Award Number: 0102652
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380809             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Nemanich Robert_Nemanich@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses dynamics of film growth and surface and interface
              reactions on Si and SiGe; the approach encompasses interface chemistry, strain
              effects and surface and interface energetics. The primary objective of the
              research is to develop a fundamental understanding of the dynamics of interface
              instabilities for nanostructure formation on Si and SiGe alloys. In situ
              measurements will employ photo-electron emission microscopy (PEEM) with UV
              excitation from a free electron laser (UV-FEL). The research goals include: (1)
              Development of specific approaches to use the FEL PEEM system for in situ, real
              time measurements of the dynamics at Si and SiGe surfaces. The major advantage
              of the LTV-FEL PEEM system is that the high intensity FEL light can be
              wavelength tuned to the appropriate photo threshold to obtain image contrast of
              the desired surface. (2) Development of methods to prepare nanoscale silicide
              islands on Si, and the characterization of the electrical properties of the
              nanoscale islands using scanning probe techniques. The research will relate
              coalescence and ripening processes and shape transitions of the epitaxial
              islands. (3) Dynamics of liquid metal-Si (M-Si) micro-droplets on Si surfaces.
              The metals of Pd, Pt, Ni and Au all exhibit a deep eutectic in the M-Si binary
              phase diagram. Research will explore how interface chemical equilibrium affects
              the evolution of the surface microstructure under various conditions of metal
              deposition or evaporation, or Si deposition. (4) Dynamics and stability of
              metallic interfaces on SiGe. This research will involve in situ PEEM
              measurements of the dynamics of these instabilities. New approaches to avoid
              segregation effects are based on models of the processes. (5) Dynamics of
              strain relaxation and nanostructure formation in SiGe epitaxial layers on
              uniquely oriented Si. For epitaxial SiGe layers on Si, strain is relaxed
              through the formation of misfit dislocations and through the development of
              surface corrugations. This project will explore whether the strain relaxation
              processes are affected by the presence of substrate surfaces with different
              step and terrace structures. The research will also explore the use of surface
              morphology for nanostructure organization. 
%%% 
The project addresses basic
              research issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological
              relevance. An important feature of the program is the integration of research
              and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area. An integrated educational program has been
              developed that includes scientific research techniques, interdisciplinary
              research approaches, and laboratory safety, and involves graduate and
              undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds.
*** 

