Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Microbial Biology for FY2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a0102108

Award Number: 0102108
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura C. Broughton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L,Broughton
	      3700 East Gull Lake Dr.
	      Hickory Corner, MI  49060    616/671-4710

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
              FY2001.  The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
              protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
              not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
              opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
              microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
              established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
              research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
              fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
              research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
              of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
              locations. 

The research and training plan is entitled "Understanding the
              role of the soil microbial community in the arctic tundra: integrating
              microorganisms with climate change theory."  Soil microorganisms control the
              flow of nitrogen, carbon, and phosphorus through ecosystems.  Soil samples are
              being taken from established sites which have undergone existing long-term
              manipulations of temperature and nutrient and light availability.  The sample
              microbial communities in these samples are being studied to determine whether
              treatments known to affect plant communities also affect soil microbial
              biomass, activity, and community composition as measured by terminal
              restriction fragment length polymorphisms (tRFLP).  

