Title       : CONFERENCE: New Perspectives in Transporter Biology to be held from July 21-
               July 26, 2001 at the Omni Tucson in Tucson, Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0102923

Award Number: 0102923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: N. Kent Peters                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Quick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides support for a conference to be held under the auspices of
              the Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology (FASEB) entitled
              "New Perspectives in Transporter Biology."  This meeting is the third bi-annual
              conference on the subject and is scheduled to be held from July 21 - July 26,
              2001 at the Omni Tucson, in Tucson Arizona.  It is expected to be attended by
              approximately 160 researchers.  The conference will bring together biochemists,
              biophysicists, physiologists, and molecular biologists to share information on
              the molecular and physiological properties of the proteins responsible for
              mediating the transport of amino acids, peptides, neurotransmitters, and other
              ions across biological membranes.  Recent work on the structure/function,
              regulation, and physiological roles of these transporters have shown them to be
              critical not only for normal function but as therapeutic targets in disease
              states.  The explosion of new information on these molecules makes this a
              timely topic for interactions among the top transporter biologists.  The
              conference sessions will be devoted to recent findings in the field of membrane
              transport and include the latest information on transporters for amino acids,
              amines, peptides, glucose, as well as vesicular transporters and ion
              exchangers.  Some topics to be examined in depth include transporter
              physiology, structure/function, trafficking and localization, regulation, model
              systems, and diseases states.
The conference will consist of nine oral
              scientific session over five days (morning and evening), and three afternoon
              poster sessions.  Each oral session will be followed by a panel discussion of
              the topic.  In order to promote the advancement of junior faculty, the most
              exciting poster submissions will be selected for short oral presentations
              during the regular oral sessions.  This conference should provide the top
              transporter investigators with a forum for intimate discussions of the
              commonalities and differences among this important class of molecules.


