Title       : FRG: Synthesis of Well-Defined Nanosize Particles and Their Role in the
               Formation of Simple and Composite Monodispersed Colloids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0102644

Award Number: 0102644
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Egon Matijevic metcalfs@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan V. Goia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michal Borkovec  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir Privman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1682,1685,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Focused Research Group  project will address priority areas in the
              formation of uniform particles of simple and composite monodispersed colloids.
              The focus will be on the synthesis of nanosized particles, and modelling and
              characterization of their unique properties which develop for dimensions
              smaller than the typical submicron-sized colloid scales. Experimentral and
              theoretical evidence that a great many monodispersed colloids of spherical and
              other shapes are formed by aggregation of nanosized units will be developed to
              link the nansize and micrometer size particles. Coatings produced by surface
              precipitation and by adhesion of smaller particles on well-defined cores will
              be investigated. Nucleation, growth of nanoparticles, and their aggregation,
              will be kinetically controlled to identify different process stages which will
              be modelled theoretically. Both the intermediate and final products will be
              characterized in terms of shape, size and structure using techniques that
              include combined dynamic and static light scattering. 
%%%
The broader
              impacts on science and technology will span areas involving both physical and
              biological disciplines. These include catalysis, pigments, clays, magnetics,
              ferroelectrics, and several medical areas such as sensors and localized drug
              release. This excellent team effort integrates research and education in such a
              way as to have a significant impact on areas of high interest to industry.
              Students trained in these areas of nanoscience and technology will be very
              competitive in the job market.  This award is co-funded by the Chemistry
              Division and the Division of Materials Research.

