Title       : Synthesis of Heterocyclic Natural Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0102402

Award Number: 0102402
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Weinreb smw@chem.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Steven M. Weinreb, of the Department of Chemistry at Pennsylvania State
              University, University Park, is carrying out the stereoselective total
              synthesis of several complex naturally-occurring molecules of biological
              significance, complemented by the development of new and practical methods for
              organic synthesis. An approach to the total synthesis of the hepatotoxic
              alkaloid cylindrospermopsin uses as a pivotal step Professor Weinreb's
              N-sulfinyl dienophile Diels-Alder methodology. Several structurally unique
              polycyclic marine bryozoan alkaloids of the chartelline/securamine class will
              also be synthesized. The total synthesis of the recently isolated novel
              pentacyclic indole alkaloid tronocarpine will utilize the unique chemistry of
              1-hydroxyindoles. New methods of chemical synthesis will be investigated,
              including a simple alternative to the Eschenmoser coupling reaction for
              preparing vinylogous amides and carbamates, and the use of N-sulfinyl compounds
              as reagents for the formation of glycosidic and N-glycosidic
              bonds.

Construction of the often-complex molecules which display desirable
              biological or pharmaceutical activity requires the development of new and
              sophisticated methods for the synthesis of organic molecules. As new methods
              are developed, they ultimately must be tested and proven effective through
              their application to real synthetic problems. Such testing also provides
              training in the thought processes and practice of organic synthesis, vital to
              the educational development of students who will become the next generation of
              practicing organic chemists. With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program, Professor Steven M. Weinreb, of the Department of Chemistry
              at Pennsylvania State University, University Park, is exploring the development
              of new and practical methods for organic synthesis and applying them to the
              total synthesis of several complex naturally-occurring molecules of biological
              significance.
