Title       : Symposium on Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics - VI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a0102961

Award Number: 0102961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Kass kass@stat.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A symposium entitled "Bayesian Statistics in Science and Technology: Case
              Studies VI" will be held at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh,
              Pennsylvania, on Friday September 28 and Saturday September 29, 2001.  The
              symposium will include two extended presentations of applications of Bayesian
              methods in problems in which the statistician was an integral member of the
              research team, and one case study of statistical methods analyzed by a panel of
              three experts.  Two contributed poster sessions will also be held.  The
              objectives of the symposium are to (i) Highlight the close interplay of
              statistical theory and applications in the context of substantive scientific
              research, (ii) Contribute to the development of Bayesian statistics, by
              identifying problems without standard solution, and encouraging the extension
              of the theory and its implementation so that possible approaches to analyses
              may be found. (iii) Bring to the fore the topic of reporting of Bayesian
              statistical analyses to the scientific community, and discuss effective and
              relevant means of communicating both the methods used in, and the conclusions
              drawn from quantitative analyses. (iv) Provide a small meeting atmosphere for
              young researchers and graduate students to present their work and to interact
              with senior colleagues, and to learn about the recent advances in
              implementation of Bayesian method in substantive problems. (v) Encourage the
              collaboration between statisticians and researchers in subject mater
              disciplines, by emphasizing the many challenging statistical problems that
              arise in the course of scientific research. (vi) Disseminate the results of the
              research presented at the workshop by publishing a volume containing
              well-documented and peer-reviewed case studies and data sets, and other
              selected workshop presentations. 

As increasingly much background
              information becomes available to scientists undertaking an investigation, it is
              important to utilize previous knowledge effectively in designing studies and
              analyzing data. Bayesian statistical methods are tailored to this purpose.
              There have been many recent advances in Bayesian statistical theory and
              computation, but scientific meetings rarely spend substantial time discussing
              applications. The purpose of this symposium is to concentrate attention solely
              on applications of Bayesian statistics. The goal is to elucidate the interplay
              between theory and practice and thereby identify successful methods and
              indicate important directions for future research.

