Title       : Mechanisms of Incongruent Reduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a0102481

Award Number: 0102481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth H. Sandhage   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Snyder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Chemical reactions that convert a solid oxide into new fluid and solid
products
              with compositions that differ from the initial oxide are
considered to be
              "incongruent" (e.g., incongruent melting, incongruent
dissolution).  While
              some types of incongruent reactions are well
understood, the basic kinetic
              mechanisms by which oxides undergo
"incongruent reduction" with molten metals
              are not.  The objective of this
research is to develop a fundamental
              understanding of the kinetic
mechanisms (rate-limiting steps, microstructural
              evolution) by which a
solid oxide undergoes incongruent reduction with a
              reactive metallic
liquid.  In this work, the incongruent reduction of aluminum
              oxide in
contact with Mg-Al liquids (which involves the formation of solid
              magnesium
aluminate spinel) will be examined.  Novel experiments with in-situ
              x-ray
diffraction will be used to track, in real time, the formation of spinel
              on
alumina surfaces immersed under molten Mg-Al layers.  The kinetics
              of
alumina weight change upon immersion in Mg-Al melts will also be
              studied
under steady-state conditions.  These kinetic measurements (phase
              change,
mass change) will be used along with microchemical and
              microstructural
analyses of the alumina/melt interface to identify the
              rate-limiting
step(s) of incongruent alumina reduction.
%%%
The rate of
              reaction between ceramics and liquid metals is of vital
importance for a
              number of advanced technologies, such as: 1) novel,
low-cost, reactive
              infiltration processing of ceramic/metal composites for
automotive
              applications (e.g., cylinder liners, brake components, bearing
sleeves), and
              2) investment casting of advanced titanium alloys for
lightweight and strong
              structural components in aircraft.  The purpose of
this research project is to
              develop a better fundamental understanding of
the mechanisms of reactions
              between solid ceramics and liquid metals, so
that the rate of such reactions
              can be better predicted and controlled.
This research will involve the use of
              state-of-the-art analytical equipment
to track the progress of such reactions
              in real time at interfaces between
solid ceramics and liquid metals.


