Title       : NER: Development of a Nano-lithography Based Manufacturing Protocol for Polymer
               Nanofluidic Platforms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0102639

Award Number: 0102639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ly James Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
              Chia-Hsiang Menq  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1468,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Nanoscale Science and Engineering (NER) grant is to  develop a
              nano-manufacturing protocol based on the combination of a novel
              nano-lithography process and an ultra precision motion control technology. This
              instrument is capable of economically producing well-defined pores or channels
              in the nanometer scale (10~100 nm) on thin polymer layers.  Exploratory
              research to prove the design concept will be carried out in this project.  If
              the concept is successfully demonstrated, the investigators  will write a
              follow-up proposal for fabrication, characterization, and testing of a
              prototype manufacturing instrument.  The nano-scale transport phenomena (i.e.
              nanofluidics) using the well-defined features generated by this instrument will
              also be studied.

The application of nano-fabrication technology to create
              precisely designed miniature devices represents an exciting research challenge.
               Strategies that have been explored for fabricating patterned nanostructures
              include lithography with photons (X-ray or EUV), particles (electron or ion
              beams) and scanning probes. X-ray and electron beam lithography (EBL) are
              expensive and high energy techniques.  For large-throughput manufacturing like
              microprocessors and memories in the IC industry, they may be affordable.
              However, for markets with very broad product needs and relatively short product
              lifetimes as in the bio-medical field, the development of cost-effective
              methods that are capable of writing and replicating nanostructures in a wide
              range of materials is essential. The scanning probe lithography (SPL) and
              associated replication methods represent the most promising technology that may
              have economics superior to those based on photons or particles. These emerging
              lithography technologies are aimed at micro-electronic applications in which
              only a low aspect ratio is needed and bio-compatibility is not an issue. For
              many medical and chemical applications, there is an urgent need to develop new
              manufacturing methods that can fabricate polymer and metal devices with a high
              aspect ratio and nano-sized features.


