Title       : NIRT: The Evolution and Self-Assembly of Quantum Dots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0102794

Award Number: 0102794
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Voorhees p-voorhees@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Asta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen H. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Miksis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Golovin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1674,1682,9162,9263,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering" (NSF-00-119).  The resulting grant is co-funded by the
              Divisions of Materials Research and Mathematical Sciences.  

Nanostructures
              such as quantum dots and quantum wires can be employed to yield devices with
              novel electronic properties.  One particularly promising route to quantum dot
              formation is via the spontaneous self-assembly process that occurs during
              heteroepitaxy.  To control the quantum dot formation and self-assembly process
              to the extent that these novel electronic devices become a reality, this team
              of researchers will investigate the mechanisms of dot formation, and develop
              predictive models of the dot formation and self-organization
              process.

Achieving this goal requires an integrated interdisciplinary effort
              that can address the quantum dot formation and self-assembly process from the
              atomistic to the continuum or nanometer length scales.  The work of this group
              will thus involve, for example, first-principle calculations of surface
              energies and surface diffusion coefficients, calculations of the evolution of
              quantum dot shape and composition during deposition, and the nonlinear dynamics
              of pattern formation or self-assembly of quantum dots.  Each effort will feed
              into the other, as the information at the smaller length scales will be
              employed in the larger scale calculations, enabling us to bridge length scales
              that range from the fraction of a nanometer to thousands of nanometers.  The
              ultimate goal of the project is to develop an understanding of the important
              materials issues governing formation and self-assembly of quantum dots, and to
              develop predictive models that enable the first-principles design of quantum
              dot nanostructures.  The models can then be used to design and create specific
              quantum dot structures, providing for possible breakthroughs in the fabrication
              of new quantum dot electronic devices.
%%%
***


