Title       : HBCU-UP Planning Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0102801

Award Number: 0102801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49804              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph H. Silver silverj@savstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Obi C. Emeh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ijaz A. Awan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pravin K. Raut  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suversha Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Olarongbe Olubajo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Savannah State University
	      State College Branch
	      Savannah, GA  31404    912/356-2186

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This planning grant proposal is written in response to the NSF 00-131
              Program
Solicitation for Historically Black Colleges and Universities
              Undergraduate 
Program (HBCU-UP). We believe that this planning grant will
              provide substantial
assistance to Savannah State University (SSU) in
              conducting an assessment of science,
mathematics, engineering and technology
              (SMET) education. Accordingly, Savannah
State University will develop an
              institutional plan to enhance SMET education through 
curriculum improvement,
              faculty development, and infrastructure facility acquisition
and utilization.
              This planning grant will not only significantly enhance the academic
              
environment at SSU, it will also assist the institution in assessing its
              strong programs
as well as those SMET disciplines, where SSU is not producing
              enough qualified 
graduates (with GPA 3.0 or higher) to enter graduate
              programs, be competitive and 
receive their Masters or Ph.D. degrees.
              

Savannah State University is already assessing its programs and thus NSF
              support
will complement our planning process to improve curricula and
              instructional 
programs in those disciplines that are not producing large
              enough numbers of
well qualified graduates entering graduate school or the
              work force in SMET-
related fields. This assessment period will end during the
              mid-semester in the 
Spring of 2001; planning will take place between March
              2001 and August 2001. 
We anticipate receiving continued support from the NSF
              to plan the SMET
improvement grant proposal. 


