Title       : Parallel Adaptive Lagrangian Discontinuous Galerkin Simulation of Pediatric
               Brain Injury
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0102805

Award Number: 0102805
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262173             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abani K. Patra abani@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of this work is to develop the computational tools to better
              study "shaken baby syndrome". This project will develop highly accurate
              parallel adaptive Lagrangian discontinuous Galerkin techniques for the
              simulation of fluid mechanics and solid mechanics. These techniques will be
              central to the development of high fidelity simulation tools for investigation
              of pediatric brain injury mechanisms and preventative strategies. Even the most
              powerful computers today using the best available codes would need weeks or
              months to do these calculations. Moreover, even those heroic calculations would
              not provide reasonable simulations due to the poor numerical accuracy of the
              lower order (O(h)) finite element / finite difference schemes and explicit time
              integration schemes (O(Dt)) used.

The key element of the new strategy is the
              development and use of parallel adaptive hp Lagrangian discontinuous Galerkin
              schemes that provide the accuracy and efficiency necessary for dealing with the
              complex geometric and material structure of the brain tissue, associated
              membranes, and blood vessels. These schemes will enable the use of higher order
              approximations to obtain accuracies that are O(hp) and O(Dtk), for p, k > 1.
              While the pediatric brain injury application will drive the research into this
              new class of parallel computational techniques, the codes and methodology
              should be useful for a much wider class of problems.

