Title       : Computation of Nearly Singular Integrals with Applications to Fluid Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0102356

Award Number: 0102356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165499             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Thomas Beale beale@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0102356
Beale

The proposed work is concerned with the development of
              improved 
methods for computing singular or nearly singular integrals, and
              with 
applications to numerical methods for simulating fluid flow with moving
              
boundaries.  In many scientific problems, quantities of interest can be
              
written in terms of integrals such as a double layer potential on a
              
boundary. When such an integral is evaluated near the boundary, usual
              
quadrature rules are inaccurate because of large derivatives in the
              
integrand. It is desirable to calculate such values in a way that is simple
              
and efficient, without requiring a special choice of quadrature points. The
              
present approach uses regularization of the singularity and a standard
              
quadrature rule, followed by local corrections derived from asymptotic
              
analysis.  This technique will be used to design an alternate version of the
              
immersed boundary method of C. Peskin, a computational method which 
has
              been used to model various biological processes. In this method 
viscous,
              incompressible fluid is influenced by a membrane or interface 
which exerts a
              force on the fluid.  In two dimensions, the force can be 
expressed in terms
              of nearly singular integrals to which the proposed 
approach can be applied. 
              It is hoped that this modification will extend the 
usefulness of the immersed
              boundary method in realistic applications.  
Application may also be made to
              methods for computing flow with 
moving boundaries separating different
              fluids.  The technique for nearly 
singular integrals will be extended to
              surface integrals in three-space, 
generalizing work already done for marker
              points on surfaces.  Related 
work will concern interfaces in inviscid,
              potential flow using improved 
regularizations of boundary integrals.

Many
              scientific processes involve moving boundaries, for example, the 
boundary of
              a drop of one fluid moving through another, or a membrane in 
living tissue. 
              Numerical models of such processes encounter special 
difficulties, since it
              is simplest to compute quantities at a set of points 
which are regularly
              spaced and unchanging.  There are presently several 
numerical approaches
              which avoid changing fundamentally the way the 
region is approximated at each
              new time. In some cases important 
quantities can be written as integrals over
              boundaries.  These integrals 
arise as solutions of differential equations and
              are usually singular, or 
nearly singular; that is, large values appear,
              representing the strong 
interaction of nearby points, as in the inverse
              square law of gravity.  
Special techniques are needed to calculate such
              integrals accurately and 
efficiently.  This proposal is concerned with the
              development and 
application of methods of this type.  The use of integral
              representations to 
modify the design of existing methods for computing fluid
              motion with 
moving boundaries might improve the ability of these numerical
              methods 
to make reliable predictions.

