Title       : FRG: Origin of the Spin-Relaxation Lifetime on a Nanometer-Scale for
               Metal-Semiconductor Interfaces: A Combined Theoretical and Experimental
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0102755

Award Number: 0102755
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500929             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Thibado   (Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Oliver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent P. LaBella  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laurent Bellaiche  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1682,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This FRG project explores local electronic spin injection and transmission in
              semiconductor heterostructures and ferromagnetic metal films on semiconductors.
              The approach is to fabricate a series of III-V heterostructures(e.g.,
              AlGaAs/GaAs, InGaAs/InAlAs, InAs/InP, etc.) and hybrid
              ferromagnetic/semiconductor systems, and to combine state-of-the-art surface
              science instrumentation with first principles total energy calculations which
              include electron spin. The local structural properties of the layers will be
              determined during growth using an in situ scanning tunneling microscope (STM).
              The fraction of spins able to traverse the interface will be determined using a
              spin-polarized STM technique, which uses a single crystal Ni<110> STM tip as a
              source of a 100% spin-polarized electron injection current. The structural
              information obtained with the STM will be used as the input structure for the
              first-principles total-energy calculations to provide a detailed picture of
              local electronic and electromagnetic field properties of the surfaces.
              Comparing this information with the experimentally measured local
              spin-injection probability map will assist in identification of mechanisms
              responsible for electron spin flip with near atomic resolution. Ferromagnetic
              metal films (e.g., elemental Co) on semiconductors will also be grown.
              Nucleation and growth of submonolayer thick films will be studied using in situ
              STM. By counting the number of Co islands formed for a set of 0.1 monolayer
              thick films each grown at a different temperature fundamental parameters
              governing the nucleation and growth are expected to be identified. To quantify
              this information, Monte Carlo computer simulations that mimic the growth
              procedure and predict the experimental outcome will be conducted. From these
              calculations, diffusion coefficients and activation energies for diffusion are
              obtained. With only 0.1 monolayer of Co on the semiconductor surface, local
              spin-injection properties will also be investigated. This allows local
              monitoring of the effects of Schottky barrier formation on the spin injection
              process. First-principles total-energy calculations will also be carried out
              for these surfaces and the results compared to the experimentally measured
              local spin-injection map to identify mechanisms for spin-flip scattering. After
              completion of one monolayer of Co, either thicker elemental Co films or
              alternate monolayers of MnAl and Co will be grown to form the Co 2MnAl Heusler
              alloy. Elemental Co films allow systematic studies of structural and magnetic
              quality on a simple one-component system, while the Heusler alloy provides a
              cubic structure, closely lattice matched to InP, and is thought to be an ideal
              spin-injection contact, since only one spin participates in electrical
              conduction. The magnetic quality of the overlayers will be determined using
              SQUID magnetometry, and the structural quality of the films will be determined
              using X-ray diffraction. Ferromagnetic metal contacts will be fabricated in
              situ on the high-electron mobility semiconductor quantum well structures, and
              transport properties evaluated. The outcome will be modeled using transport
              theory which takes into account the detailed structure of the interface. The
              theoretical component of these studies will be conducted in a collaborative
              arrangement with the Theory Group at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory
              (NREL), allowing students to travel to the NREL and gain additional research
              experiences and skills.
%%% 
The project addresses basic research issues in a
              topical area of materials science with high technological relevance. These
              studies will improve fundamental understanding of factors important to the
              evolving field of spintronics, which combines conventional electronics and spin
              transport. An important feature of the program is the integration of research
              and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area. The interdisciplinary project strives to
              develop strong technical, communication, and organizational/management skills
              in students through unique educational experiences made possible by a forefront
              research environment, and collaborative activities with a national facility.
              
*** 

