Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a0102084

Award Number: 0102084
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Beronda L. Montgomery bkmontgomery@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : B,Montgomery
	      839 W. Lincoln Ave., Apt. 305
	      Woodland, CA  95695    530/666-5415

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
              FY2001.  The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
              protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
              not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
              opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
              microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
              established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
              research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
              fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
              research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
              of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
              locations. 

The research and training plan is entitled "Utilizing
              biochemical and genetic methods to dissect how a cyanobacterium senses and
              responds to changing light conditions."  The test organism is Fremyella
              diplosiphon.  A detailed biochemical analysis is being made of RcaE, a putative
              phytochrome-like photoreceptor that controls the process of complementary
              chromatic adaptation (CCA). Specifically, the experiments address the
              phosphorelay model which holds that RcaE is the photoreceptor that
              differentially controls the phosphorylation state of the response regulator
              RcaF in different light qualities, which in turn regulates the phosphorylation
              levels of RcaC.  

