Title       : UMEB: Ecology of Global Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0102422

Award Number: 0102422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Fahrbach susanfah@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evan H. DeLucia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1135      UNGRAD MENTORING IN ENVIR BIOL
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1135,1228,9169,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A mentored research program for undergraduates in environmental biology will be
              created at the University of Illinois in Urbana-Champaign (UIUC).  The
              scientific theme of "The Ecology of Global Change" will draw upon a primary
              research focus in a recently created interdepartmental Program in Ecology and
              Evolutionary Biology (PEEB).  The Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental
              Biology (UMEB) Program will add an entirely new undergraduate component to
              PEEB.  Experience gained in the administration of a successful (since 1992)
              HHMI-funded undergraduate research program will be used to "jump-start" the
              UMEB efforts, but the UMEB Program will be completely independent and have a
              strong focus on improving the quality of faculty mentoring of underrepresented
              minorities.  Students (eight per year, recruited from the 200+ Black and
              Hispanic/Latino undergraduate majors in the life sciences at UIUC, as well as
              from students in other majors interested in environmental biology) will
              participate in a two-year program (sophomore-junior academic years, plus
              summers) of mentored research, career-development activities (including
              training in how to be a successful mentee), a poster session, a research
              symposium, and social events.  UMEB Fellows also will take a course together
              (Illinois in the changing Earth System) and share housing over the summer,
              activities that will further promote the development of a sense of community. 
              Faculty mentors will be drawn from the PEEB.  All mentors will participate in a
              "mentoring the mentors" workshop at the start of each summer as well as in the
              research presentations.  Both mentors and mentees will be supported by a team
              consisting of a UMEB program administrator (Evan DeLucia, director of PEEB), a
              faculty assistant (Susan Fahrbach, director of UIUC's HHMI-sponsored programs),
              a mentoring assistant (Claudia Washburn, manager of UIUC's HHMI-sponsored
              programs) and a graduate administrator.  The UMEB Program's goal is to
              identify, early in their academic careers, students with an interest in
              environmental biology and then guide them through the maze of UIUC's resources.
               The coordinated program of activities encompassing the sophomore and junior
              years is intended to attract undergraduates, particularly underrepresented
              minorities, to graduate training and careers in fields related to the biology
              of a changing planet.
