Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a0102080

Award Number: 0102080
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthea K. Lee aklee1@yahoo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : A, Lee
	      21611 Paseo Palmeyyo
	      Mission Viejo, CA  92692    510/351-8434

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
              FY2001.  The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
              protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
              not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
              opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
              microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
              established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
              research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
              fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
              research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
              of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
              locations. 

The research and training plan is entitled "Development of a
              two-species biofilm to study bacteria-bacteria interactions."  This project
              applies the power of bacterial genetics to an environmental biofilm to
              determine the intricate associations between 2 different species of bacteria. 
              Shewanella and Desulfovibrio species are ubiquitous environmental bacteria that
              form natural biofilms and promote steel corrosion.  This ecological system is
              genetically and chemically tractable and is being used to develop a model for a
              2-species biofilm to examine the structural impact of each species on the
              biofilm, identify and characterize genes that are induced or expressed during
              biofilm development, and identify parameters essential for maintaining the
              2-species biofilm.  

