Title       : Mixed Alkali Effect for Mitigation of Sodium-Accelerated Corrosion of Silicon
               Nitride Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0102340

Award Number: 0102340
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry H. Du hdu@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0102340
Du

This project is proposed to study the mixed alkali effect (MAE)
              in the corrosion behavior of  Kyocera's SN282, a turbine-grade Si3N4 ceramic,
              and chemically vapor deposited Si3N4 in oxygen environments containing single
              alkali (sodium, cesium) and mixed alkali (sodium and cesium) elements.  It aims
              to reveal the potential and establish the understanding of MAE in
              high-temperature corrosion retardation of Si3N4 ceramics.  Questions that will
              be answered include: (1) Will the incorporation of Na and Cs in the oxide layer
              on Si3N4 be mutually retarded compared to a single alkali (Na or Cs) situation,
              and if so, what is the quantitative correlation? (2) How will the corrosion
              kinetics (rate and activation energy) and oxide characteristics (composition,
              phase, morphology, and structure) compare under mixed alkali and single alkali
              conditions?  (3) Is MAE in corrosion a function of alkali ratio (e.g.,
              [Na]/[Cs]) in the oxide and in the environment? (4)  Do corrosion minima exist
              at some alkali composition(s)? (5) How will MAE affect the corrosion mechanism?
              And (6) What are the effects, if any, of the additive and impurity cations in
              SN282 on (1)-(5)?  The objectives of the project will be achieved by evaluating
              the corrosion kinetics of Si3N4 in O2-NaNO3, O2-CsNO3, and O2-NaNO3-CsNO3 gas
              mixtures of selected compositions over a broad temperature range and by
              characterizing the oxide layers using various analytical tools.
 %%%
The
              susceptibility of silica-forming ceramics to hot corrosion by sodium salts
              remains a severe roadblock to the exploitation of ceramic benefits in advanced
              gas turbine engines and other structural applications.  A critical need exists
              to search for means to mitigate the corrosion problem in order for the
              realization of their projected applications.  This project aims to explore the
              mixed alkali effect (MAE) in silicate glasses for corrosion retardation of
              silicon nitride ceramics in sodium-containing environments.  MAE refers to the
              pronounced, non-linear changes in many properties of a glass when a dissimilar
              alkali oxide is added.  The premise of the proposal rests on two known facts. 
              First, sodium-accelerated corrosion of silicon nitride results from the
              dissolution of the oxidation layer through sodium incorporation.  Second, MAE
              lowers the alkali activity and reduces alkali diffusivity in silicates by 2 to
              6 orders of magnitude.  This project represents the first known attempt to use
              the MAE concept to address sodium-accelerated corrosion of silica-forming
              ceramics.  It will yield rich kinetic and analytical information on and
              insights into MAE in high-temperature corrosion of Si3N4.  The knowledge
              generated will provide the design and user communities with the scientific
              basis for practical exploitation of MAE for corrosion retardation and
              durability improvement of silica-forming ceramics for advanced turbine engines
              and other demanding applications where they would otherwise be unsuitable. 
              


