Title       : Superconductivity and Magnetism of Strongly Correlated Electron Systems Studied
               by MuSR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0102752

Award Number: 0102752
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yasutomo J. Uemura tomo@lorentz.phys.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award funds research that aims to apply the muon
              spin relaxation (MuSR) technique to the study of superconductivity and
              magnetism in a variety of systems including; high-Tc cuprate, intercalated
              HfNCl, other superconductors, and low-dimensional and/or geometrically
              frustrated spin systems.  The MuSR method will allow accurate determination of
              the magnetic field penetration depth in type-II superconductors, and of
              spontaneous magnetic fields and spin fluctuations in magnetic materials.  This
              project will also include attempts of charge doping via the formation of field
              effect transistors (FET).  The MuSR and FET results will elucidate the
              evolution from insulators to superconductors to simple metals in
              superconductors, and from spin singlet states to frozen spin states in magnetic
              systems.  Emerging pictures will be considered from a unified point of view
              regarding crossover from gapped to ungapped states near quantum phase
              transitions.  The project will also support highly motivated graduate students
              at Columbia, give them the unique experience of international collaboration,
              and promote a greater role of female PhD students / researchers in experimental
              physics.     
%%%
During the recent 15 years, several novel superconductors
              with very high transition temperatures have been discovered.  They include
              high-Tc copper oxides and intercalated HfNCl.  Muon spin relaxation (MuSR) is a
              new and powerful experimental method for studying superconducting and magnetic
              properties of solids by using a beam of sub-atomic particles (Mu-meson)
              produced by high-intensity proton accelerators.  This individual investigator
              award will support research in which the Columbia University group will apply
              the MuSR technique to studies of several high-Tc superconductors and relevant
              magnetic materials to elucidate how charges and spins are correlated to exhibit
              a variety of novel phenomena in solids.  This project will provide information
              crucial for increasing transition temperatures, which would help in the
              application of high-Tc superconductors to commercial electronic devices and
              power cables.  The project will also support highly motivated graduate students
              at Columbia, give them the unique experience of international collaboration,
              and promote a greater role of female PhD students / researchers in experimental
              physics.
***

