Title       : Nonequilibrium Dynamics and Mode Locking in Charge Density Waves and Flux
               Lattices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1992   
File        : a9217284

Award Number: 9217284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ofer Biham   (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Cristina Marchetti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9176,
Abstract    :
              Sliding charge density waves and flux lattices in superconductors              
              exhibit unusual transport properties due to cooperative phenomena              
              and quenched impurities.  In the past these systems were studied               
              using mean field theory and small scale simulations on sequential              
              computers.  These simulations provided good qualitative results and            
              insight, but failed to provide quantitative answers.                           
                                                                                             
              Recently large scale simulations on parallel computers, such as                
              those carried out by the principal investigators of this grant and             
              their collaborators, have begun to yield new quantitative results              
              in this field.  Motivated by these advances, parallel architectures            
              will be exploited in this grant for an extensive study of the                  
              collective dynamics of charge density waves and flux lattices.  In             
              their simplest version, the numerical models for these systems are             
              well suited for parallel machines.  Our research emphasizes the                
              search for new algorithms for an efficient parallelization and the             
              use of visualization techniques.  The second stage of our research             
              will focus on strongly disordered elastic media, where dislocations            
              can tear the lattice, and Multiple Instruction Multiple Data                   
              architecture will be more suited for numerical studies.  The                   
              dynamics of strongly disordered elastic media is both a problem of             
              great theoretical interest in condensed matter physics and a                   
              testing ground for developing new algorithms for a Multiple                    
              Instruction Multiple Data environment.                                         
                                                                                             
              This research is funded jointly by the Materials Theory program in             
              the Division of Materials Research and the New Technologies program            
              in the Division of Advanced Scientific Computing.  The grant is                
              funded through the Computational Approaches to Real Materials                  
              program which is under the High Performance Computing and                      
              Communication Initiative.                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              This theoretical and computational research will focus on two                  
              problems that share common computational requirements.  One problem            
              deals with the movement of electric charge in solids due to wave               
              motion, while the other deals with high temperature                            
              superconductors.  The research is of fundamental interest to the               
              materials research community and also has potential to impact                  
              industrial applications.  What makes this research program unique              
              is the use of new massively parallel computers to deal with these              
              problems for the first time.  This raises the possibility for                  
              significant breakthroughs, in addition to the development of new               
              algorithms for similar problems in other areas of computing.
