Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Processes Governing Air-Sea Transfer and
               Oceanic Cycling of Atmospheric Trace Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9217495

Award Number: 9217495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11455              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Church tchurch@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5918,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This two-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research                  
              in atmospheric chemistry between Thomas M. Church of the                       
              University of Delaware and Alain Veron of the University of                    
              Aix-Marseille III.  The collaboration focuses on a problem of                  
              common concern; that is, the delivery of atmospheric pollution                 
              from both North American and the European continents to the                    
              North Atlantic Ocean.  The investigators will study the processes              
              governing air-sea transfer and oceanic cycling of atmospheric                  
              trace elements.  Sampling will occur on two joint international                
              cruises for aerosol, precipitation, fog and sea water samples.  The            
              samples will be then be analyzed for trace metals, stable isotopes             
              and radionuclides which are identifiers of continental sources and             
              atmospheric transports to the sea.  These atmospheric elements                 
              and their isotopes are useful for tracing oceanic circulation and              
              biogeochemical cycling.                                                        
                                                                                             
              The U.S. side will prepare and organize the ocean going                        
              sampling equipment. The atmospheric and oceanic samples will                   
              be analyzed jointly in a newly established French clean laboratory             
              and at existing U.S. laboratories in Delaware and California.                  
              The U.S. investigator brings to this collaboration expertise in                
              analysis of stable elements and radionuclide isotopes.  This is                
              complemented by unique atmospheric trace elements developed                    
              by the French investigator.  The results will advance our                      
              knowledge of continental origins of air pollutants and their                   
              deposition in the North Atlantic Ocean.
