Title       : Mass Spectrometer for Structure-Function Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1993       
File        : a9217648

Award Number: 9217648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202973             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Dias   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gladys F. Maley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Trimble  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carmen A. Mannella  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony P. DeCaprio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443456    518/474-2011

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9126,
Abstract    :
              9217648  Dias  Support is requested to purchase a Mass Spectrometer, to serve a
              group  of investigators currently conducting structure-function research in 
              biochemistry, molecular and cell biology. The major user group projects 
              include: 1) The characterization of human glycoprotein hormone  recombinant
              mutants being used for structure-function studies; 2)  elucidation of the
              active site of deoxynucleotide metabolizing enzymes;  3) characterization of
              mitochondrial channel proteins; 4) the  identification of substrate binding
              sites of P450 enzymes, 5)  structural characterization of chimeric brain
              glutamate decarboxylase  recombinants and identification of the ATP binding
              site; 6) structural  characterization of oligosaccharide structures of
              glycoprotein  biosynthesis and processing pathways; 7) structural
              characterization of  two polyglutamyl folate hydrolase forms and of the
              substrate hydrolysis  products; 8) structural characterization of
              toxicant-adducts to  neurofilament proteins. A minor users group will: 1)
              characterize  estrogen metabolites (conjugates) induced by dioxin; 2) determine
               partial sequence and molecular ion of the major protein associated with  lupus
              inclusions; 3) determine the structure of as yet unidentified  brain
              neuropeptides; 4) map the lysine binding sites of plasmin which  bind to cell
              surface proteins; 5) perform structural characterization  of synthetic peptide
              products prepared in the WCLR core peptide  synthesis facility.    The triple
              quadrupole tandem mass spectrometer proposed for purchase  will be the
              centerpiece of a core facility which will service the needs  of a primary user
              group, but will also be available to all scientists  at the WCLR and their
              collaborators. The core facility will be staffed  with a mass spectrometrist
              who will interface between principal  investigators and the instrument, and who
              as director of the facility  will perform the structural analysis of peptides,
              proteins,  glycoproteins and oligosaccharides by tandem mass spectrometry.  
              Additionally, the mass spectrometrist will be charged with developing  new mass
              spectrometry methodologies particularly with regard to the  needs of particular
              research problems. The mass spectrometrist will  also be responsible for
              maintenance of the instrument, exclusive of the  Service contract, and will
              serve as a member of the Internal Advisory  Committee. The proposed mass
              spectrometry facility will utilize the  protein chemistry core facility
              resources and personnel to assist  investigators with preparing samples for
              mass spectrometry.
