Title       : Importance of Flow and Flux Micro-Environment to Soft-Bottom Benthos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1993   
File        : a9217020

Award Number: 9217020
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas C. Miller dmiller@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The paradigm emerging from various studies of organisms and flow is            
              that the responses are widespread and morphology-specific.  The                
              overall goal of this project is to determine the importance of flow            
              and sediment flux microenvironments to deposit and suspension                  
              feeder's responses. The major hypotheses of the project are that:              
              A. suspension feeding is a response to food particle flux, not flow            
              speed and seston concentration alone; and, B. deposit feeding is a             
              response to deposition of fine particles of high food value.  These            
              hypotheses will be tested by observing the feeding behavior and                
              rate of several species of sandflat macrofauna in a factorial                  
              manipulation of fluid flow, particle flux and bed characteristics.             
              In the first year, the bulk flow and sediment flux experiments will            
              be conducted to further delineate the roles of flow and sediment               
              flux in mean population behavior of four target species of                     
              polychaete worms. In the second year, critical tests of the                    
              hypotheses will be undertaken through manipulation of flow, flux               
              and particle food value as operationally defined by labile protein             
              measurements. The results of this project will have important                  
              implications for the modeling of benthic feeding biology, for                  
              explanations of form and function as adaptations to flow, and for              
              the design of laboratory flow microcosm experiments.
