Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: A Digital Sky Survey of theNorthern Galactic
               Cap
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1993  
File        : a9217948

Award Number: 9217948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : April 1,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Gunn jeg@astro.princetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin L. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              10        Physical Sciences                       
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a no-cost award to Professor James Gunn of Princeton                   
              University to support a U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research Project                
              with Professor Masataka Fukugita of the Yukawa Institute for                   
              Fundamental Physics, Kyoto University.  The project allows                     
              several Japanese astronomers to participate in the Sloan Digital               
              Sky Survey (SDSS) project being carried out by the Astronomy                   
              Research Consortium (ARC).  The SDSS will produce a detailed                   
              digital photometric map of half of the northern sky to about 23rd              
              magnitude.  This map will be used to select about a million                    
              galaxies and a hundred thousand quasars for which high-resolution              
              spectra will be obtained with the same wide-field special-purpose              
              telescope.  The imaging survey will also be used to produce a                  
              catalog in four colors of all detected objects in about 10                     
              galaxies, a similar number of stars, and about one million quasar              
              candidates.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The scientific value of such a set of data is vast.  Applications              
              range from critical investigations of large-scale structure in                 
              three dimensions to the relationships of galaxies with their                   
              environments to the faint-end luminosity function of disk dwarf                
              stars.  The Japanese astronomers will collaborate in the design                
              and fabrication of the SDSS main mosaic CCD imaging camera.
