Title       : Rhenium Enrichment in Organic-Rich Sediments: EnvironmentalControls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1993   
File        : a9217558

Award Number: 9217558
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger W. Baier                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184035             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Debra Colodner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 9189,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The marine geochemistry of rehenium (Re) has attracted interest in             
              recent years due to its extreme enrichment in reducing relative to             
              oxygenated sediments and the utility of ReOs geochronometer for                
              dating ancient black shales.  Recent work has pointed out the                  
              essential features of its oceanic behavior, including its long                 
              residence time and conservative distribution in seawater.  In this             
              regard, Re is similar to Mo and U in its marine chemistry, all of              
              which occur as oxo-ions or oxo-ionic complexes in oxic seawater.               
              All three elements are also enriched in anoxic sediments relative              
              to oxic sediments, by factors of 500 (for Re) to 5-50 (for Mo and              
              U).  It appears that Re is not enriched in any other sedimentary               
              phase.  Recent work has suggested that these elements (as well as              
              V) may be used as indirect proxies for the redox state of ancient              
              oceans, or of depositional environments.  These suggestions follow             
              one of two approaches: the first would utilize the sedimentary                 
              concentrations of the elements, while the second relies on records             
              of their seawater concentration contained in foraminiferal calcite.            
              This research will studt Re in the context of these other elements             
              to determine whether it may be a useful indicator of                           
              paleoenvironment using either of the two approaches.  Re                       
              concentrations will be measured in pore waters and sediments from              
              a variety of depositional environments, including anoxic basins,               
              low-oxygen hemipelagic sites, and fully oxygenated hemipelagic                 
              sites.  The results of this investigation will attempt to answer               
              basic questions about the mechanism of Re enrichment in anoxic                 
              sediments and relate Re behavior to environmental parameters.
