Title       : Parallel Techniques for Problems in Vision & Robotics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1994        
File        : a9217528

Award Number: 9217528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123282             (Estimated)
Investigator: Viktor K. Prasanna prasanna@ganges.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6840,9215,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research continues earlier efforts of the PI in studying                  
              parallelism for image understanding and robotics as well as in                 
              understanding the power of reconfiguration.  There are three                   
              spheres of emphasis in this work:  1. design and analysis of                   
              efficient parallel algorithms for roblems in vision and robotics on            
              well-established parallel models of computation,  2. implementation            
              of the parallel solutions on state of the art parallel machines,               
              and  3. a study of the power of reconfigurable meshes in solving               
              fundamental problems of interest to the parallel processing                    
              community as well as problems arising in image processing, vision              
              and robotics. These problems are among the generic high and                    
              intermediate level problems in image understanding and robotics.               
              Specifically, in image understanding, design and analysis of                   
              algorithms for motion analysis (object tracking), image and stereo             
              matching, model based object recognition as well as algorithms for             
              several symbolic computation based approaches used in understanding            
              images will be investigated. In robotic applications, parallel                 
              solutions to a variety of practical problems in real time robot                
              motion- and task-planning arising in terrain navigation and                    
              industrial automation will be investigated. The parallel models to             
              be employed include the mesh-connected processor array,                        
              reconfigurable mesh array, and the hypercube. The algorithms will              
              be implemented on Connection Machine CM-5, Maspar MP-1 and the                 
              Image Understanding Architecture (IUA). In the work on the                     
              reconfigurable mesh model, design and analysis of fast and                     
              processor efficient parallel solutions to several fundamental                  
              problems on the reconfigurable mesh will be investigated. Problems             
              to be considered include arithmetic problems, image problems and               
              geometric problems on planar points. Known techniques on other                 
              parallel models will be studied for possible mapping onto the                  
              reconfigurable mesh.
