Title       : RUI: Behavioral Cues Responsible for the Initiation and Maintenance of Copepod
               Swarms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1993  
File        : a9217422

Award Number: 9217422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70189              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie W. Ambler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millersville University
	      
	      Millersville, PA  17551    717/872-3024

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will examine the potential cues that initiate and                 
              maintain swarm behavior in the marine copepod, Dioithona oculata,              
              by computerized motion analysis to study individual and swarm                  
              responses to light intensity and pheromones.  A conceptual model               
              is presented for the swarming behavior pattern: diel light cycles              
              provide a releasor cue, a threshold light intensity provides an                
              arousal cue, and gradients of light intensity elicit a swarming                
              response.  Cues for individuals to orient in the swarm may be light            
              intensity, and/ or pheromones. The study will first determine                  
              photosensitivity by phototaxis, and response to chemical pheromone             
              signals by recording individual swimming tracks. The swimming                  
              behavior and spatial distribution of individuals in a swarm will be            
              quantified for laboratory swarms in experimental light gradients,              
              changes in light intensity, and presence of a swarm marker (beam of            
              light).  The life history stage composition of laboratory swarms               
              will be manipulated to test for the effect of pheromones from adult            
              females and other swarming stages.  Laboratory swarm behavior will             
              be compared to that of field swarms. Initially all experiments will            
              be conducted during midday until the presence or absence of                    
              circadian rhythms has been determined.  This study will help verify            
              the conceptual model of swarm behavior, provide a framework for                
              interpreting in situ observations of zooplankton aggregation, and              
              provide mechanisms for explaining swarming which can be included in            
              mathematical models.
