Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Relationship Between Molecular Suprastructure
               and Barrier Properties of MainchainLiquid Crystalline Glassy Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1998    
File        : a9217417

Award Number: 9217417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benny D. Freeman benny_freeman@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              12        Chemistry                               
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 5918,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative                         
              research between Benny D. Freeman of North Carolina State                      
              University, and Claudine Noel of the Ecole Superieure for                      
              Physics and Industrial Chemistry in Paris, France. The                         
              research focuses on mainchain liquid crystalline polymers                      
              (LCPs).  The investigators propose to determine the effect                     
              of systematic structure changes on phase morphology, thermal                   
              properties, and penetrant sorption and transport properties                    
              of LCPs.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              LCPs offer promise as thermal or chemical resistant barrier                    
              films and coatings of potential use to the chemical                            
              processing industry.  Recent studies of LCPs suggest that                      
              these materials are among the most impermeable barrier                         
              polymers currently available.  However, practical                              
              difficulties have limited the success of studies to date in                    
              decoupling chemical and morphological effects on the                           
              transport properties of small molecules through these                          
              polymers.  The investigators propose to advance                                
              understanding of the effects of LCPs' molecular structure on                   
              penetrant sorption and transport properties and, in turn,                      
              determine their high barrier properties.  At North Carolina                    
              State, the sorption and transport properties of small                          
              molecules in these polymers will be studied; whereas, the                      
              French research group will conduct studies on                                  
              characterization and their thermal properties.  The novel                      
              polymeric materials for this study will be provided by                         
              Hoechst Celanese and Miles Laboratories.  The collaboration                    
              takes advantage of the expertise of the investigators and                      
              complementary approaches to this problem.
