Title       : Study of Solar Oscillations, Phase II: Global Oscillations, Analysis and
               Publications, Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1993   
File        : a9217851

Award Number: 9217851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1699040            (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Leibacher leib@noao.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AURA/Nat Optic Astron Obse
	      1200 New York Avenue NW, Suite 3
	      Washington, DC  200053929    202/483-2101

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 5919,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This project provides funds to                                   
              allow for a collaborative effort by the                                        
              National Optical Astronomy Observatories (NOAO)                                
              and the Udaipur Solar Observatory (USO).  The                                  
              effort is part of a Global Oscillation Network                                 
              Group (GONG) research to make observations,                                    
              from different sites around the globe, of the                                  
              oscillations at the surface of the sun, the                                    
              earth's nearest star.  Helioseismology, the                                    
              study of these solar oscillations, has been                                    
              developed as a new powerful tool that can probe                                
              the solar interior with great precision similar                                
              to the way that terrestrial seismology reveals                                 
              information about the interior of the earth.                                   
              During this phase the U.S. side, led by                                        
              Dr. John Leibacher, will assist the Indian                                     
              team, led by Dr. Arvind Bhatnagar, in preparing                                
              the site, setting up the equipment and testing                                 
              the instrumentation and beginning the                                          
              observations.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Scope:  Under the GONG program, NOAO will                                      
              operate four of the six planned stations, in                                   
              Australia, Chile, Hawaii, and California.  The                                 
              fifth station, in the Canary Island, will be                                   
              operated by the Institute de Astrofisica de                                    
              Canarias, Tenerife under a US-Spain cooperative                                
              program.  The staff of USO and of the Tata                                     
              Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR) will                                  
              operate the station at Udaipur.  They have the                                 
              necessary scientific qualifications and the                                    
              experience in solar observations, as well as                                   
              the necessary backing of the Government of                                     
              India, an important element in ensuring the                                    
              success of this long term joint research.                                      
              Visits are planned by the U.S. scientists to                                   
              Udaipur, and by the Indian scientists to the                                   
              NOAO and to other observatories in the U.S. for                                
              training and preparation for the planned                                       
              research.
