Title       : Processes Affecting the Riverine Flux of Uranium Isotopes from Coastal Margins
               to the Ocean: A Study of the Mississippi River and Adjacent Shelf
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  1995    
File        : a9217181

Award Number: 9217181
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger W. Baier                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent A. McKee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LA Univs Marine Consortm
	      8124 Hwy 56
	      Chauvin, LA  70344    504/851-2800

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              Geochemical processes in coastal and shelf environments affect                 
              uranium concentrations in the ocean, and have influenced the                   
              uranium isotope composition of the ocean during past                           
              glacial/interglacial cycles.  The overall aim of this research is              
              to improve understanding of the cycling processes that affect the              
              flux of uranium from coastal margins to the open ocean.  This study            
              focuses specifically on the Mississippi River and the adjacent                 
              continental shelf to achieve the following objectives.  (1) To                 
              characterize the behavior of uranium during river/ocean mixing;                
              and, to identify the processes that govern the estuarine behavior              
              of uranium.  (2) To identify the conditions and processes that                 
              influence the role of shelf sediments as net sources or sinks for              
              uranium; and, to evaluate the general role that river dominated                
              shelves play in the overall ocean chemistry of uranium.                        
                                                                                             
              Water-column and Seabed samples will be collected from the                     
              continental shelf adjacent to the Mississippi River.  Water samples            
              will be partitioned into dissolved, colloidal and particulate                  
              fractions using filtration and ultrafiltration techniques.  Uranium            
              concentrations and isotope ratios will be examined in all fractions            
              to evaluate the fate of U during river/ocean mixing.  Interstitial             
              waters will be extracted from shelf cores and examined for                     
              diagenetic uptake or release of uranium from bottom sediments, and             
              mixing experiments between river water and seawater will be used to            
              study effects of estuarine mixing on uranium.
