Title       : Field Synthesis Fluorescence Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1994       
File        : a9217217

Award Number: 9217217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223533             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick Lanni lanni@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel L. Farkas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9217217  Lanni  The goal of this project is the construction of a fluorescence 
              microscope for high-speed, high-resolution, three-dimensional imaging  of
              biological specimens. The approach to be taken is a direct extension  of
              Standing-Wave Fluorescence Microscopy, demonstrated in this  laboratory
              previously. The proposed instrument will incorporate a  laser-based optical
              system for excitation field sYnthesis, in which  standing wave fields are
              time-multiplexed in the specimen to create an  effective intensity field that
              is peaked at the in-focus object plane.  Fluorescence emission will therefore
              be excited maximally from only  in-focus object features. Serial focal plane
              images will then be  recorded in the usual way, by use of an electronic (CCD)
              camera. The  optical transfer function for this field-synthesis fluorescence 
              microscope (FSFM) covers a band of axial spatial frequencies not  accessible
              through classical optical sectioning microscopy. In  principle, this instrument
              has the speed and transverse resolution of  an imaging system, and axial
              resolution comparable to or better than a  scanning confocal microscope.    The
              significance of this project in the biological sciences can be  stated
              concisely. Microscopes are most severely limited in axial, as  opposed to
              transverse, resolution. This problem is rectified by  confocal scanning, but
              with a loss of the fast, efficient information  transfer that occurs in direct
              image formation. In many biological  problems, particularly in studies of live
              cells, speed and photometric  efficiency are primary constraints. The
              field-synthesis fluorescence  microscope is designed specifically to give
              improved axial resolution  while still retaining the high-performance
              characteristics of an  imaging system.
