Title       : Ionization of Atoms by Electromagnetic Radiation and Charged Particles, Award in
               Indian and U.S. Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1996 
File        : a9217329

Award Number: 9217329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86580              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven T. Manson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5919,5976,
Abstract    :
              Description:  This research proposes a series                                  
              of calculations to explore the ionizing                                        
              interactions of electromagnetic radiation and                                  
              charged particles with atoms and ions.  The                                    
              collaborators are Steven Manson of Georgia                                     
              State University and Pranawa Deshmukh of the                                   
              Indian Institute of Technology, Madras.  During                                
              the initial phase of the project, the Indian                                   
              collaborator will be supported with travel and                                 
              living expenses to do developmental work using                                 
              the computational facilities at Georgia State                                  
              University.  The proposed research will study                                  
              i) the influence of relativistic interactions                                  
              in the photoionization of high-z atoms using                                   
              the RRPA formalism with enough channels to                                     
              obviate truncation errors, ii) investigate the                                 
              inner shell threshold behavior of                                              
              photoionization cross sections, iii)  explore                                  
              the photoionization of ions with the RRPA                                      
              technology, iv) examine the systematics of                                     
              generalized oscillator strengths for neutral                                   
              atoms, excited states, and atomic ions.                                        
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This research will provide training for                                
              graduate and advanced undergraduate students in                                
              the methods of calculating and understanding                                   
              atomic and molecular structure and collisions.                                 
              The techniques and computer codes developed                                    
              will strengthen the theoretical physics program                                
              at the collaborating institutions.  The results                                
              will provide further insight into the basic                                    
              nature of these fundamental atomic processes                                   
              which are important in plasma physics,                                         
              atmospheric, solar, and astrophysics, radiation                                
              physics and therapy, and for studies of                                        
              possible x-ray and nuclear-pumped laser                                        
              mechanisms.
