Title       : Structure, Function and Ontogeny of Invertebrate Respiratory Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1996     
File        : a9217530

Award Number: 9217530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251542             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nora B. Terwilliger nterwill@oimb.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0521800   Shelf & Esturine Ecosystem              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9118,9169,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this grant is to study the developmental changes                
              that occur in structure and function of hemocyanin, the blue copper            
              containing protein that is found dissolved in the blood of                     
              arthropods and molluscs.  Respiratory proteins, hemoglobins,                   
              hemocyanins and hemerythrins, are excellent models for unique                  
              insights into the structure of oxygen transport molecules and how              
              the molecules combine reversibly with oxygen.  We have already                 
              found that hemocyanin expression in the locally abundant Dungeness             
              crab, Cancer magister, is developmentally regulated.  The changes              
              in hemocyanin structure and function that occur during the                     
              transition from larval to juvenile to adult crab are especially                
              striking.  Furthermore, the changes operate in synchrony with                  
              simultaneous changes in salt and water balance - which in turn                 
              affect hemocyanin oxygen affinities.  Most proteins are regulated              
              at the level of transcription of DNA into messenger RNA.                       
              Therefore, Dungeness crab hemocyanin is an appropriate system in               
              which to study the molecular basis of stage and tissue specific                
              gene activation and repression as well as the environmental and/or             
              physiological cues that prompt the changes in gene expression.                 
              Accordingly, we will ask when and where changes in hemocyanin                  
              messenger RNA occur and will investigate the stage-specific sites              
              and manner of hemocyanin synthesis.  We will also determine the                
              effects of daylength and hormonal regulation on timing of                      
              hemocyanin biosynthesis.  In addition, we will characterize an                 
              unusual molt-related protein in the blood of the Dungeness crab and            
              explore its relationship to the oxygen-binding hemocyanins and to              
              insect blood storage proteins.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The successful completion of this project should significantly                 
              increase our knowledge about the structure, function and                       
              development of hemocyanin and other large copper containing                    
              proteins.  Through an integration of approaches including                      
              ecological physiology, developmental biology, biochemistry and                 
              molecular biology, it will be possible to make major contributions             
              to our understanding of how the changing structure of hemocyanin               
              during development of the crab is related to changes in function of            
              the molecule, physiology of the crab and interaction of the crab               
              with its environment.  Information about the crab's development and            
              the role hemocyanin plays in its tolerance to environmental                    
              conditions will enhance management of the commercially important               
              Dungeness crab fishery in the Pacific Northwest.
