Title       : Gallium and Other Reactive Trace Elements in the Atlantic Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1994  
File        : a9217569

Award Number: 9217569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Shiller alan.shiller@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This project will allow the principle investigator to participate              
              in an internationally-sponsored oceanic baseline survey of                     
              dissolved trace elements in the Atlantic Ocean.  Primarily, this               
              investigator will focus on the geochemistry of the element gallium,            
              though certain other elements such as aluminum, manganese, copper,             
              nickel, and cadmium will be determined.  There are several                     
              objectives of this research.  First, the research will answer                  
              certain questions about the behavior of gallium in seawater.  These            
              questions include the cause of the high gallium/aluminum ratios                
              observed in seawater (compared with continental rocks) and to                  
              extent of a mid-depth maximum in gallium/aluminum ratios observed              
              in the North Pacific.  A second objective of the research is to use            
              gallium as a less-reactive analogue of aluminum in the deep waters             
              of the Atlantic.  There has been some interesting previous research            
              using aluminum as a water tracer in the deep Atlantic.  By                     
              comparing the behavior of gallium with that of aluminum, a key                 
              assumption involved in the use of aluminum as a tracer                         
              (conservative behavior in the deep Atlantic) can be tested.  A                 
              final objective relates to the international focus of the research.            
              The cruises are sponsored by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic               
              Commission (sponsored by UNESCO).  The purpose is to put together              
              baseline information on trace element concentrations and to allow              
              an international group of investigators to intercalibrate their                
              results.  This intercalibration is important because of unresolved             
              problems relating to the absolute concentrations of certain trace              
              elements in seawater.
