Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Synthetic Strategies, Structural Aspects and
               Cooperative Behavior of Charge- Transfer Compounds.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1993      
File        : a9217191

Award Number: 9217191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim R. Dunbar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 5918,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research                
              in inorganic and organometallic chemistry between Kim Dunbar of                
              Michigan State University and Patrick Batail of the University of              
              Paris, South (Orsay).  The objective of the research is to                     
              develop low dimensional materials that have useful electrical and              
              magnetic properties.  The investigators will use dinuclear and                 
              cluster metal-metal bonded compounds as precursors to reactions                
              with redox-active organic molecules which have functional groups               
              capable of attaching to a metal. They will synthesize three main               
              types of materials: (1) covalently-linked one dimensional                      
              materials consisting of alternating metal and p-organic groups;                
              (2) network polymers comprised of cross-linked metal units; and                
              (3) metal complexes of new phosphorus ligands.  These are                      
              interesting materials because of their potential for electrical                
              and magnetic properties.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The Michigan State group brings to this collaboration experience               
              in molecular chemistry.  They have been involved in the synthesis              
              of new metal precursors for the design of molecular based charge               
              transfer polymers and materials.  This is complemented by the                  
              French group's expertise in theoretical solid state chemistry,                 
              conductivity, magnetism, and their work on transition metal                    
              clusters.  The collaboration allows the U.S. investigator to                   
              expand her research to the materials area by taking advantage of               
              French expertise.
