Title       : Advanced Design Methods for Critical Components of Concurrent Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1994 
File        : a9217751

Award Number: 9217751
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303606             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gruia C. Roman roman@cs.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this work is to evaluate the potential use of                 
              formal program derivation techniques in the design of critical (yet            
              reasonable-sized) components of concurrent systems.  Several                   
              technical issues will be addressed.  The notion of program                     
              specification will be extended to include not only a behavior                  
              specification but also formally specified constraints, e.g., the               
              characteristics of the target architecture.  The formally stated               
              constraints will provide additional formal guidance to the design              
              process and will lead to the emergence of new program derivation               
              methods.  The formal component of this research will be                        
              complemented by experimentation with a number of case studies                  
              ranging from simple problems having popular appeal in the                      
              literature to real components selected in cooperation with an                  
              industrial partner.                                                            
                                                                                             
              Successful use of formal derivation techniques on industrial-grade             
              problems will require a careful blend of formal methods and                    
              practical insights.  Regarding the latter, experience to date                  
              suggests two particularly promising ideas to evaluate.  First, is              
              the notion of freeing much of the design process from costly formal            
              proofs without compromising the disciplined thinking typical of                
              formal derivation.  Second, is the idea of providing powerful                  
              visual exploration, communication, and prototyping capabilities                
              supplied by an already developed state-of-the art program                      
              visualization facility.
