Title       : Nonlinear Optical Effects in Cadmium Telluride/Cadmium Zinc Telluride
               Superlattices and Quantum Wells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1994   
File        : a9217710

Award Number: 9217710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Sturge   (Principal Investigator current)
              Weikun Ge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In the past few years, very high quality CdTe/Cd(1-x)Zn(x)Te                   
              quantum wells (QW) and superlattices (SL) with x=0.08-0.15 have                
              been grown on Cd(0.96)Zn(0.04)Te substrates at the Centre d'Etudes             
              Nucleares (Grenoble, France), using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE).              
              These structures have an unusual mixed band structure in which                 
              excitonic transitions are type I (spatially direct) for heavy holes            
              (hh) and type II (spatially indirect) for light holes (lh).  An                
              exceptionally strong nonlinear effect has been observed in the                 
              absorption spectra of these materials at low temperature and the hh            
              exciton absorption is found to be significantly reduced by very                
              weak optical pumping above the band gap.  This non-linearity is of             
              cosiderable interest for possible applications.  A comprehensive               
              study of the effect in QWs and SLs is proposed, using time-resolved            
              transmission spectroscopy on time scales from ps to ms.  Uniaxial              
              stress will be used to modify the relative energy position of the              
              hh- and lh-excitons, and combined optical-infrared pumping to alter            
              trap populations.  The research will have three main objectives:               
              (1) to establish the cause of the non-linearity and to set up a                
              quantitative model of the process; (2) to find the conditions in               
              which the nonlinearity is maximized, establish the optimum material            
              and structure parameters for device applications, and (if feasible)            
              make a working bistable optical switch; and (3) assuming that hole             
              traps in the barrier layer are involved, to use the phenomenon as              
              a probe of the trap states, thus obtaining information about the               
              quality of the barrier material.                                               
              %%%                                                                            
              Modern communications systems use pulses of light travelling in                
              glass fibers to transmit information.  When the optical pulses are             
              manipulated (for instance, in order to send them to a particular               
              destination) they have to be converted into electrical pulses,                 
              amplified and routed, and then converted back to optical form for              
              transmission to their destination.  All such methods depend on the             
              phenomenon of "optical nonlinearity":                                          
              This proposal concerns a newly discovered nonlinear medium:  a thin            
              (10-40 nm) layer of cadmium telluride (commonly called a "quantum              
              well") sandwiched between thicker layers of cadmium zinc telluride.            
              the absorption of this medium has been found, in preliminary                   
              experiments at low temperature, to be strongly affected by a light             
              intensity of a fraction of a watt per square centimeter, an                    
              intensity easily achievable with a conventional light bulb.  This              
              remarkable sensitivity was discovered in the course of a basic                 
              study of cadmium telluride quantum wells, in collaboration with a              
              research group in Grenoble, France.  The purpose of the proposed               
              research is to elucidate the mechanism of this remarkable                      
              sensitivity, to design a medium optimizing the non-linearity, and              
              to build an optical switch using this medium, which should require             
              very low power to operate.
