Title       : Temporal Variation in Deep-Sea Benthic Boundary Layer Communities: Long
               Time-Series Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1996   
File        : a9217334

Award Number: 9217334
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $625739             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Smith ksmith@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long  time-series  studies  have extensively  altered  our  basic              
              understanding of biological processes in the deep ocean.  We have              
              established a long time-series station at an abyssal site in  the              
              eastern N. Pacific (4100 m depth) and, over the past three years,              
              have  been  measuring particulate matter flux while  concurrently              
              monitoring the sea floor with time-lapse photography.   We   have              
              found  a  strong  temporal  relationship  between  the  flux   of              
              particulate  matter entering the benthic boundary layer  and  the              
              arrival  and residence of detrital aggregates on the  sea  floor.              
              The  residence  of  these detrital aggregates spans  a  six-month              
              period  and  coincides with increased abundance and movements  of              
              the  epibenthic megafauna.  Our results to date suggest  coupling              
              exists   between  near-bottom  pelagic  and  benthic   processes.              
              However, the most important questions still remain regarding  how              
              and  on  what  time scales the pelagic and benthic processes  are              
              coupled  in  the  deep  sea, especially in  the  context  of  the              
              interannual  variability we have observed  over  the  past  three              
              years.   We  propose  to study the coupling between  the  pelagic              
              supply  of  organic  matter and its utilization  by  the  benthic              
              community  using  in  situ measurements  of  detrital  aggregates              
              superimposed on a continuing time-series study of monitoring  the              
              benthic  boundary  layer.  Specifically, we  propose  to  address              
              three  questions.   1) What is the source of detrital  aggregates              
              observed  seasonally  on  the sea floor?  2)  How  important  are              
              detrital  aggregates as sites of sediment community activity?  3)              
              How  important  are  detrital aggregates as sited  of  epibenthic              
              megafaunal  activity?  This study will improve our  understanding              
              of the coupling between pelagic and benthic processes and broaden              
              current  perceptions of biogeochemical cycling  over  interannual              
              time scales in the deep ocean.
