Title       : Comparative Study of Vocal Behavior and Perception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1993     
File        : a9217175

Award Number: 9217175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29971              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Farabaugh sf30@bss3.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Vocal learning has evolved independently and is widespread in two              
              distinct groups of birds, songbirds and parrots.  Thus, parrots                
              and songbirds have both independently solved similar neurological              
              and developmental problems related to vocal learning.  Contrast                
              and comparison of vocal learning in songbirds and parrots can                  
              then provide insight into the underlying biological processes of               
              this complex learned behavior.  To best understand these                       
              processes, many different researchers simultaneously study                     
              behavior, development, perception, hearing, and neuroanatomy of a              
              few key species.  The parrot species that is receiving the most                
              study in the laboratory setting is the domesticated Australian                 
              parakeet, the budgerigar; however, little field work has been                  
              done.  Further, it is unknown if the domesticated form, which has              
              received so much study, has diverged from the wild form.                       
                                                                                             
              Dr. Farabaugh will describe the vocal behavior and repertoires of              
              wild budgerigars and will bring back 20 wild budgerigars to the                
              University of Maryland in order to test their hearing and                      
              perception of sound.  From these data, she will be able to                     
              address the function of vocal learning in budgerigars as well as               
              determine to what degree domesticated budgerigars are different                
              from the wild form.  A lack of difference would support the                    
              studies already conducted on captive domesticated budgerigars.                 
              Alternatively, the discovery of differences would open new                     
              avenues of profitable comparative research investigating the                   
              neurological underpinnings of the observed differences.                        
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it will provide basic                       
              behavioral data on the key parrot species for intensive study of               
              vocal learning.  This data base will allow comparison and                      
              contrast not only of wild and domestic budgerigars but also of                 
              parrots and songbirds.  Such comparative studies increase our                  
              understanding of the basic biological processes that underlie                  
              complex learned behavior in all species, including humans.
