Title       : 500MHz NMR for Natural Products and Biopolymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1993     
File        : a9217481

Award Number: 9217481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Koji Nakanishi kn5@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Horne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ann E. McDermott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9126,
Abstract    :
              9217481  Nakanishi  As part of an ongoing maintenance of the Research Facilities
               in the Department of Chemistry at Columbia, this proposal  seeks the purchase
              of a 500 MHz multinuclear NMR  Spectrometer.  In this Department such equipment
              is needed  by several groups.  Nakanishi has elucidated the structures  of over
              160 bioactive compounds, many of them unstable and  available in only microgram
              quantities.  In recent years  most NMR studies belonging to compounds in this
              category  have been performed elsewhere because of inadequate  instrumentation
              in this department.  However, the nature of  almost all the work being
              conducted in his group recently  i.e., in biopolymers and the ultraminuscule
              scale structure  determinations, makes the availability of an on-site high- 
              field NMR instrument absolutely essential.  His group has  focused on the
              development and application of spectroscopic  methods to structural studies;
              the proposed instrument will  finally enable him to do the important NMR work
              here at  Columbia.  We have recently added two young faculty members  who
              specialize in biopolymers, Professors Horne and  McDermott, and the instrument
              will be essential for their  work.  Specifically McDermott's work has concerned
              ligand-  protein interactions with large protein receptors, such as  soluble
              domains from photosynthetic reaction centers, using  both solid state and
              solution NMR.  Existing instrumentation  at Columbia is both inadequate and too
              heavily used for her  to continue the solution state portion of these studies 
              here.  Horne has been very active in the area of triple  helix formation of
              DNA, and is also working in the area of  RNA-protein interactions.  The
              research efforts of Professor  Still, Breslow, Katz and Turro have been
              hampered by the  fact that they have effectively abandoned structural  analyses
              of certain exciting systems only because they are  not well resolved on
              antiquated equipment.  Other members of  the synthetic organic and inorganic
              group, for example,  Gilber t Stork, and others, will also make use of the 
              instrument as research requires.
