Title       : Ab-initio Calculations of Properties of Ordered and Disordered Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1995       
File        : a9217297

Award Number: 9217297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank J. Pinski frank.pinski@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9176,9218,AMPP,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This award is being made through the NSF initiative for                        
              Computational Approaches to Real Materials which was part of the               
              High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative.  This                
              award was rated High Priority by panel review.  Research on the                
              electronic structure and properties of substitutional alloys will              
              be conducted in collaboration with Oak Ridge National Laboratory               
              using the 2048-node Intel PARAGON computer.                                    
                                                                                             
              Recent developments of theory and methodology have progressed to               
              where calculations of formation energies and other physical                    
              properties of solid substitutional alloys give results that are in             
              good agreement with experiment.  The proposed research will extend             
              this theory and develop new algorithms to elucidate the underlying             
              electronic mechanisms in several problems of technological                     
              interest, such as the origins of site selectivity of third alloy               
              additions in binary intermetallic alloys.  Since the required                  
              calculations are presently beyond the limits of current vector                 
              supercomputers, the theory will be implemented on the new                      
              generation of massively parallel supercomputers, and the associated            
              algorithms and codes will be developed.                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              This computational research will focus on calculating the                      
              electronic properties of important classes of metallic alloys.  The            
              calculations are sophisticated ones which are accurate in                      
              comparison with actual measurements.  Due to the complexity of this            
              work, the calculations will be performed on a new generation                   
              massively parallel computer at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.  The             
              necessary computer codes will be developed.                                    
                                                                                             
              This research is funded through a NSF initiative called                        
              Computational Approaches to Real Materials which is part of the                
              High Performance Computing and Communication Initiative.
