Title       : Computerization of Invertebrate Paleontology Collection Records
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1994   
File        : a9217735

Award Number: 9217735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99929              (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. McLean jmclean@nhm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward C. Wilson  (Principal Investigator former)
              LouElla R. Saul  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George L. Kennedy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L A Cty Museum Nat Hist F
	      900 Exposition Boulevard
	      Los Angeles, CA  900074057    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The collection of the Invertebrate Paleontology Section of the                 
              National History Museum of Los Angeles County, ranked sixth in                 
              North America in size and importance by the paleontological                    
              Society, contains about 3.5 million specimens from 26,000                      
              catalogued localities, and more than 8,000 type and figured                    
              specimens cited in about 570 published papers.  The collection                 
              forms an important national paleontological resource, but one from             
              which taxonomic data cannot be quickly retrieved.  To alleviate                
              this situation, the institution investigated a program to                      
              computerize its collection records using relational database                   
              software (Paradox 3.5) running inhouse on a DOS platform.  The                 
              planning phase of computerization was completed in late 1991 and               
              implementation of data entry and report forms, testing of database             
              designs with preliminary data sets, and fine tuning of table and               
              field definitions, data dictionaries, and procedural manuals will              
              soon be completed.  This project will provide one-time assistance              
              for purchase of hardware (computers, printers, mass storage and                
              communication devices) to assist in these acquisitions and funding             
              for a full-time curatorial assistant for two years for data entry              
              and validation of the locality, type specimen, and bibliographic               
              databases that constitute the sectional collection records.                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Collections of this type some as important national resources not              
              only for fundamental research but also for general public                      
              exhibition, educational programs aimed at all sectors of the                   
              population, and as source materials for the testing are validation             
              of models designed to emulate past biological/climatological                   
              histories and make projections for the future.
