Title       : Dissertation Research: Teotihuacan Imperial Relations in the Yautepec Valley,
               Morelos, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1994       
File        : a9408629

Award Number: 9408629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11012              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Smith mesmith@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9408629  Smith    Under the direction of Dr. Michael Smith, Ms. Lisa Cascio will
               collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct  archaeological
              research in the Yautepec Valley of Morelos Mexico  and focus on sites from the
              Classic period when the nearby  Teotihuacan expire reached its maximum extent.
              She, her advisor  Dr Smith, and crew will conduct a pedestrian survey of the
              entire  valley floor and foothills. All sites will be identified and  mapped.
              Surface collections of ceramic and other cultural  materials will be made and
              test pits will be placed in a  representative series of sites. Artifact
              analyses will be  conducted and ceramics identified by type. X-ray florescence
              will  be used to analyze chemical composition and determine sherds of 
              non-local origin. Based on these data, Ms. Cascio will examine  the
              relationship between the Yautepec region and the Teotihuacan  empire of which
              it formed a part.    In prehistoric times, empires which incorporated large 
              geographical areas and diverse peoples under their control  developed in many
              parts of both Old and New Worlds. While  archaeologists have documented this
              phenomenon, relatively little  is understood about how central control was
              established and  maintained. Prior research has indicated that the Yautepec
              Valley  lies at the edge of Teotihuacan control and therefore it provides  an
              excellent context to examine this issue. Based on the  archaeological
              literature, Ms. Cacsio has formulated several  models and the data she collects
              will allow her to evaluate  these.    This research is important for several
              reasons. Very little  archaeological work has been done in this region and the
              results  will be of interest to many archaeologists. The work will shed  new
              light on how complex societies develop and are maintained and  will assist in
              the training of a promising young scientist.  ***
