Title       : SGER: The Interactions of Nitrogen Eutrophication and Fire on Invasive Annuals
               in California Coastal Sage Shrublands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1995     
File        : a9408079

Award Number: 9408079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James K. Martin                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edith B. Allen edith.allen@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Minnich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
              0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1306,9237,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9408079  Allen  Exotic annuals have been invading southern California shrublands
              at increasing rates over the past 40-50 years.  A number of factors may be
              responsible for the invasion, including fore, anthropogenic nitrogen
              deposition, soil disturbance, grazing, and fragmentation.  Of these potential
              causes, N deposition has received no attention, and the effects of frequent 
              fire are just beginning to be realized.  Southern California shrublands are
              subject to aerial N deposition rates as high rates as high as 30 kg/ha/yr, with
              lower rates at a distance from agricultural and urbanized areas.  Many of the
              colonizing annuals are probably nitrophilous, e.g., they have high rates of
              growth with added N.  By contrast, we hypothesize that the native shrubs have
              relatively little response to increased N. Fire alone can explain the increased
              weediness and decrease in shrub cover in some sites, but areas that have not
              been burned in 30-40 years have and increase in exotics.  These include
              primarily annual grasses in the genera Bromus, Hordeum, and Avena.  The native
              vegetation that is most subject to weed invasion is the coastal sage scrub, a
              type that is limited in extent, is threatened by urbanization, and harbors a
              number of sensitive species.  %%%  Our objective is to examine the interaction
              between fire and nitrogen deposition on plant growth.  We request funding
              through the SGER Program to take advantage of the recent fires in California. 
              We have located two sites that were burned in November, one with high and one
              with low N deposition.  We propose to set up a factorial experiment at each
              site, with burned and unburned vs. fertilized and unfertilized plots.  We
              hypothesize that annual grass growth will be increased more than shrub growth
              after N fertilization, and that fire hastens the conversion from native
              shrubland to annual grassland.  This research has important implications for
              the conservation of coastal sage shrub.  A reduction in the fire cycle will be
              important to prevent a rapid conv ersion to weedy annuals, but we may also
              recommend a reduction in anthropogenic N deposition.
