Title       : Optical Probes for Solution-Based Processing of Inorganic Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1996  
File        : a9408780

Award Number: 9408780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $455000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce S. Dunn dunn@seas.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey I. Zink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9146,9165,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9408780  Dunn    This research is concerned with the development of
              optical  diagnostic techniques for solution-based processing of inorganic 
              materials. The overall objective of the research program is to  develop and
              create optical probes and spectroscopic methods for  solution-based processing
              of inorganic solids. The dip coating of  inorganic films from sol-gel
              precursors will be emphasized to  carefully evaluate the optical probe methods
              in terms of their  effectiveness and sensitivity. In addition, the studies will
              be  extended to include a variety of compositions, another  solution-based film
              deposition method (spin coating) and a  different film configuration
              (multilayers). The outcome of the  research will be the science and
              spectroscopy of optical probes  for solution-based processing of materials. The
              proposed  techniques offer the opportunity to use optical signals to 
              characterize processing parameters in real-time. The techniques  are compatible
              with computer-controlled, "intelligent  manufacturing" for materials
              processing.  %%%%  The research program has two complementary goals. The first
              goal  is to develop optical probes and spectroscopic methods to  characterize
              the most important ppocessing parameters which will  include film viscosity,
              drying, stress generation and uniformity.  The second objective is to utilize
              the probes to characterize the  related chemical and structural changes which
              occur during film  evolution. The different probes will be sensitive to such 
              features as film orientation effects, solvent composition  changes, capillary
              pressure and network collapse. The outcome of  the research will be the science
              and spectroscopy of optical  probes for solution-based processing of materials.
              The techniques  discussed in this proposal offer the opportunity to use optical
               signals to characterize processing parameters in real-time. The  techniques
              are compatible with computer-controlled, "intelligent  manufacturing" for
              materials processing.
