Title       : The Role of Transmission in the Dynamics of Infectious Disease
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1995   
File        : a9408178

Award Number: 9408178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347832             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph S. Elkinton elkinton@ent.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Greg Dwyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              0510601   Biology of Pest Organisms               
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Much of our understanding of the population dynamics of host-pathogen
              interactions is based upon mathematical theory. This theory is in turn based
              upon particular assumptions about how the density of host and pathogen
              populations affects the rate at which new infections accrue. Specifically, the
              instantaneous rate of horizontal transmission is assumed to be proportional to
              the product of the densities of healthy and infected hosts, or the densities of
              healthy hosts and the infectious pathogen particles. There is, however, little
              evidence that this assumption is correct. and in fact, alternative models
              typically have very different dynamics. Most such alternatives, however, are
              either ad hoc, or were developed for human diseases, for which experimental
              tests of model assumptions are not ethical. In this research, the PI's will
              explore the conditions under which this basic assumption of the mathematical
              theory of disease is violated. These researchers will use the gypsy
              moth-nuclear polyhedrosis virus (NPV) system as a model system because the
              simplicity of this system makes it ideal for performing ecological experiments.
              The approach builds from earlier work in which the PI's demonstrated that a
              model using estimates of transmission from small-scale field experiments
              provides a reasonable approximation of the dynamics of disease at a large
              scale. Both the small-scale experiments and the model suggest that there is
              significant heterogeneity in transmission with respect to host and pathogen
              density, and that this heterogeneity is essential to understanding the dynamics
              of the gypsy moth-NPV system. The PI's will develop a set of alternative models
              that incorporate this transmission. The plan is to parameterize alternative
              models using small-scale transmission experiments, and test the different
              models using large-scale experimental epidemics.   %%%  The type of
              heterogeneity in disease spread is believed to be of fundamental importance for
              understanding the nature of infectious diseases, but this a spect has been
              rarely studied and is poorly understood. Ultimately, this research will not
              only provide details of the dynamics of disease spread in this particular
              system, but will also explore the foundations of the mathematical theory of
              infectious diseases, in general, bringing together theory and experiment in a
              way that is impossible for most host-pathogen systems.
