Title       : Acquisition of a Mechanical Properties Microprobe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1994      
File        : a9408306

Award Number: 9408306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142750             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Wayne Jones jonesjwa@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary S. Was  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Levi T. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Gibala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This ultra-low load indentation instrument will provide  excellent capability
              for highly spatially resolved, ultralow  load indentation on a wide variety of
              materials, and will  enable a significant enhancement and extension of existing
               NSF-sponsored research aimed at understanding and improving  the mechanical
              and physical properties of advanced materials  and materials systems. There is
              immediate need for this  capability in a large number of university research 
              activities that span a wide spectrum of materials that are  synthesized by a
              variety of advanced techniques. The  commonality of these activities, with
              respect to the  proposed instrumentation acquisition, is that the materials 
              under study either involve extremely small microstructural  scale or are
              synthesized in small quantities or with small  bulk dimensions (e.g. thin
              films, microlaminates and  coatings) that severely limit the use of
              conventional  experimental methods for the study of 
              synthesis/structure/property relationships. Examples  include, ductile phase
              toughening in metal/oxide  microlaminates produced by ion beam deposition, film
               softening effects in intermetallics and refractory metals  and the role of low
              energy ion beam assisted deposition on  the synthesis and properties of carbon
              nitride. Other  studies involve examination of the relationships between 
              mechanical behavior and cooperative molecular relaxations in  polymers to
              fundamental studies of mechanical properties and  microstructure in ordered
              polymers and an investigation of  the influence of damage accumulation
              processes during  fatigue of ceramic matrix composites.
