Title       : Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of Sesquiterpene Cyclase and Squalene
               Synthetase from Tobacco
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1997   
File        : a9408152

Award Number: 9408152
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Chappell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      9408152  Chappell  Isoprenoids are ubiquitous in nature, essential for
              life and  mediate a number of interactions between organisms and their 
              environment.  In addition, plants are a rich source of isoprenoids  important
              for pharmaceutical uses.  Yet, our understanding of the  isoprenoid
              biosynthetic pathway in plants is limited.  Recent  studies indicate that
              tobacco cell suspension cultures are uniquely  suited for detailed
              physiological and biochemical studies of one  important but putative branch
              point in isoprenoid metabolism.  When  fungal elicitors are added to the cell
              cultures, the cultures cease  sterol production and instead synthesize and
              secrete anti-microbial  sesquiterpenoids.  The decline in sterol biosynthesis
              has been  correlated with suppression of squalene synthetase enzyme activity, 
              and the induction of sesquiterpenoid biosynthesis with the  induction of a
              sesquiterpene cyclase.  Because these two enzymes  are positioned at a putative
              branch point in the pathway, the  induction of one enzyme and the suppression
              of the other are  interpreted as an important regulatory mechanism controlling
              carbon  flow and hence, end product formation.  Alternatively,  independently
              regulated arrays of isozymes dedicated to the  production of specific end
              products might be aligned along a  surface or membrane.  Regardless of which
              metabolic organization  might be occurring within a plant cell, squalene
              synthetase and  sesquiterpene cyclase are key enzymes for sterol and
              sesquiterpene  biosynthesis.  The long range goal of this research is to 
              understand all aspects of these two enzymes, from a complete  understanding of
              their enzymology to the fine details of how  expression of the corresponding
              genes are regulated.  The current  objectives are to continue defining the DNA
              sequences and DNA  binding proteins important for controlling the transcription
              rate  of the cyclase and squalene synthetase genes, and to begin an  analysis
              of the cyclase reaction mechanism using a combination of   comparative
              molecular biology and an evaluation of chimeric cyclase  genes expressed in
              bacteria.  Results from these studies will help  elucidate the mechanisms
              regulating isoprenoid metabolism in  plants, and will have important
              ramifications for future  manipulations of this pathway using genetic
              engineering technology.  ***
