Title       : Dynamic Heterogeneity in Optically Perfect Bulk Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9408304

Award Number: 9408304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary D. Patterson gp9a@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Patterson  The molecular dynamics of bulk polymers can be characterized by 
              mechanical processes with a distribution of relaxation rates.  The  measurable
              properties of amorphous polymers are determined by the  coupling of the
              macroscopic variable with these microscopic  processes.  The goal of this
              research is to explain the behavior of  longitudinal sound waves in optically
              perfect bulk polymers in  terms of the longitudinal relaxation processes in the
              material.   The knowledge of the distribution of relaxation rates for the 
              processes which determine the longitudinal modulus will then be  used to
              predict the mechanical properties of these materials.  Many  applications, such
              as optical fibers, require polymeric materials  which scatter only the minimum
              amount of light determined by the  compressibility of the liquid.  A series of
              n-alkyl  methacrylate(n=1,2,4,6) samples which achieve this limit of clarity 
              will be used in the research.  The optical perfection of the  samples will be
              measured by Rayleigh-Brillouin spectroscopy.  The  Rayleigh-Brillouin spectrum
              depends on the frequency of the  longitudinal sound waves responsible for the
              light scattering.   When there are microscopic processes with relaxation rates
              lower  than the sound frequency, the spectrum displays a central peak  whose
              shape is determined by the relaxation strengths and rates  associated with
              these motions.  In the frequency regime important  for mechanical processes
              such as toughness, (106 to 10-2 Hz), the  measurement of dynamic light
              scattering is carried out using photon  correlation spectroscopy.  The
              relaxation function for the  longitudinal density fluctuations which give rise
              to light  scattering will be measured as a function of termperature,  pressure,
              and chemical structure.  The samples will be maintained  in the equilibrium
              liquid state above the glass transition.  The  light scattering data will be
              used to calculate the distribution of  relaxation rates associated with the
              longitudinal modulus.  The  resulti ng distribution will be correlated with the
              chemical  structure of the molecules.  The study of the shape of the 
              distribution as a function of pressure will allow identification of  modes of
              motion that couple weakly to the volume of the liquid.   These processes retain
              their relaxation strength in the glassy  state and are less subject to physical
              aging.  %%%  Typical tough polymeric materials are sufficiently structurally 
              heterogeneous that they are opaque.  One of the most important new 
              applications of polymers is optical fiber.  In order to be useful  in this
              application, the material must be sufficiently optically  homogeneous.  The
              challenge is to produce a material which is  optimized both for optical clarity
              and for mechanical toughness.   The research will employ bulk polymer samples
              that have been  prepared in optically perfect form.  Light scattering
              spectroscopy  is well suited for the study of both the optical and mechanical 
              properties of amorphous polymers.
