Title       : CA2+ - Mediated Signal Transduction in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9408101

Award Number: 9408101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey F. Harper Harper@Scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Harper  9408108                         The long range goal of this research is
              to understand the role of  Ca2+ Dependent Protein Kinases(CDPKs)in plant growth
              and  development. CDPKs are a novel family of protein kinases which are 
              defined by a unique structural arrangement: Within a single  polypeptide, a
              kinase domain is fused to a C-terminal  calmodulin-like regulatory domain. The
              regulatory domain contains  four Ca2+-binding EF-hands, which makes CDPKs a
              primary target  (decoder) of Ca2+ signals. Understanding the process by which
              CDPKs  decode and transduce a Ca2+ signal is the primary focus of the  proposed
              research. The first specific aim addresses the question of  how Ca2+ activates
              a CDPK? The second specific aim complements the  first by investigating the
              mechanisms of autoinhibition and Ca2+  activation in the holo-enzyme. The third
              specific aim is to develop  a tool which will permit the in vivo activity of
              CDPKs to be  monitored using fluorescence ratio imaging on live cells. Finally,
               the fourth specific aim is to identify endogenous substrates for a  specific
              CDPK isoform. Since there appear to be many CDPK isoforms,  this research
              assumes that each may have a different substrate  specificity, and that each
              may have evolved to decode a different  Ca2+ signal. The short-term objective
              of this combined research is  to propose a potential function for one specific
              CDPK, isoform AK1  from Arabidopsis.  %%%  In plants, calcium signals are
              involved in many aspects of growth  and development, including regulation of
              water use, activation of  plant pathogen defenses, and the ability to respond
              to gravity. The  long range goal of the proposed research is to understand how 
              calcium ions are used to communicate information within a cell.  This research
              is being conducted with a model plant system,  Arabidopsis, and will contribute
              to our basic knowledge of cellular  function. It is anticipated that this
              research will be useful in  exploring new approaches to improved agricultural
              crops and   practices. The focus of the proposed research is on the structure 
              and function of a family of novel protein kinases, called CDPKs.  Protein
              kinases regulate many cellular functions by modifying key  enzymes through
              phosphorylation. CDPKs, unlike any other protein  kinase, are directly
              activated by calcium, making them primary  targets of calcium signals.
              Nevertheless, it is not known what  cellular functions are controlled by these
              kinases.  ***
