Title       : Dissertation Research: Indus Tradition Craft Production and The Distribution of
               High Temperature Manufacturing at Harappa, Pakistan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1994       
File        : a9408937

Award Number: 9408937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan M. Kenoyer kenoyer@macc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9408937  Kenoyer    Under the direction of Dr. Jonathan Kenoyer, Ms. Heather
              Miller  will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. Working at the  site
              of Harappa, located in the Indus Valley of Pakistan, she  will conduct a
              surface survey of this large urban center. The  fieldwork consists of two
              parts. First she will note and map the  location of craft activities such as
              smelting, ceramic and shell  production, and stone tool use. She will then
              conduct a proton  gradiometer survey to plot the distribution of underground 
              pyrotechnological indicators. These data taken together will  allow her both to
              reconstruct the organization of craft  activities and to determine the
              relationship between subsurface  and sub-surface materials.    Sites such as
              Harappa are of major archaeological interest  because they attest to the rise
              of a civilization, apparently  independent of those from China and the Near
              East. By the third  millennium BC large urban centers arose in the Indus
              valley,  flourished and then disappeared. It appears that salinization of 
              fragile desert soils played a major role in their demise. The  trajectory of
              development appears different in the Indus than  other regions because, in
              contrast to the latter, it is not clear  that an elite ruling class emerged.
              Archaeologists wish to  understand what factors led to the rise and maintenance
              of this  phenomenon. Through her analysis of craft production, MS Miller  will
              look at one aspect of this issue. Through an examination of  the production
              process and its spatial distribution, MS Miller  hopes to determine the extent
              to which it was subject to  centralized control.    This research is important
              for several reasons. It will shed new  light on an extremely important
              archaeological site. It will  increase our understanding of the processes which
              led to the rise  of complex society and will assist in the training of a
              promising  young scientist.  ***
