Title       : Dissertation Research: Sacrifice in the Southern Andes During the Inka Period
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1994   
File        : a9408490

Award Number: 9408490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6810               (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Isbell huari@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Isbell    Under the direction of Dr. William Isbell, Mr. John Besom will 
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. Early Spanish records  describe
              cultural practices followed by the Inca empire in Peru,  Chile and Argentina.
              They indicate that humans were sacrificed by  the Incas for many different
              reasons and that in some cases  victims were left above ground at high altitude
              sites. A number  of such "burials" and accompanying grave goods have been 
              discovered at both high and low altitude situations. Mr. Besom  will study all
              of these remains and visit museums in the three  relevant countries. His work
              will include examination not only of  the bodies themselves, but also the
              clothing of the victim and  the related grave goods.     Mr. Besom's goal is to
              understand the strategies which were used  by the Inca to establish an empire
              which extended across vast  areas and encompassed many different linguistic and
              ethnic  groups. The Inca empire stands as a monument to human  organizational
              ability given the area involved, the difficulty of  communication across it and
              the fact that the Incas lacked both  written language and wheeled vehicles.
              Ethnographic and historic  documents indicate that religion and the
              manipulation of  religious beliefs provided an important method for political 
              control and that the sacrifice of human victims constituted an  important part
              of this system. Many types of sacrifice were noted  - the function of each
              differed. Through a systematic and  complete study of all known samples, Mr
              Besom hopes to gain  insight into Inca social and political organization.   
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide  data of
              interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light  on how large scale
              empires first arose and were maintained and it  will assist in the training of
              a promising young scientist.
