Title       : RIA: Allocation and Replication for Distributed Database Systems on General
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1994     
File        : a9408392

Award Number: 9408392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57819              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Humenik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,9264,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Research is proposed to investigate how copies of a data object in  a
              distributed database system should be placed on the nodes of a  network, in
              order to maximize data availability and reliability and  reduce communication
              cost.  This work is an extension of work that  has been done by the
              investigator and colleagues in the more  specific cases of ring, tree, and
              hypercube networks.  Although the  general problem cannot be efficiently solved
              for arbitrary  networks, many solvable, open sub-problems remain.  There are
              two  related questions that must be studied.  The first is, "Where  should the
              copies of data objects be placed (i.e., at what sites of  the distributed
              database), in order to maximize the probability of  a successful read-only,
              write-only, or read-write transaction?  A  ring, tree, hypercube, or other
              well-structured network, such as a  toroidal mesh, can be studied to suggest
              solutions to the more  general problem of optimal placement of copies on an
              arbitrary  network.  Another question primary to the solution of the placement 
              problem is, "What is the optimal number of copies of a data item to  maximize
              the probability of a successful transaction or minimize  communication cost?" 
              In fact, these two questions must be studied  together.  This research will
              explore the more general question of  how many copies of a particular data item
              should be placed on the  network and where they should be placed.  The research
              will use  combinatorics, probability theory, linear algebra, and database 
              concepts to study these questions, in order to determine how to  maximize the
              availability of data requested by transactions, where  the objects requested by
              the transactions and the sites at which  the transactions originate are defined
              by two (usually different)  probability distributions.  The two major thrusts
              of this work will  be to utilize the concept of eigenvalues of the adjacency
              matrix of  a graph to study data availability on general networks and to 
              employ the conjecture that well- structured networks (rings,trees,  hypercubes,
              etc.) can be used to suggest heuristics for general  networks.  The primary
              applications of the work proposed are in the  area of information retrieval,
              specifically digital libraries and  remote sensed data and mobile computing. 
              The solution to these  problems will decrease the average time required to
              access  information in a distributed database and increase the probability 
              that a successful transaction occurs when links in the network  fail.
