Title       : Dissertation Research: Cultural Models for Interpersonal Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1994       
File        : a9408218

Award Number: 9408218
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradd Shore antbs@anthro.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0303000   Conflict Resolution                     
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9408218  Shore    This research project involves a student of cultural
              anthropology from Emory University studying the cultural models of
              interpersonal behavior used by Cambodian peasants.  The methods to be used
              include participant observation, surveys of village inhabitants in a small
              community, observation of children's activities and caretaking, analysis of
              records and other archives, and video-taping and audiotaping of interactions. 
              The student will describe and analyze the cultural models which govern
              interpersonal behavior within the family and community where peace generally
              reigns and in other social and political contexts where violent acts are
              common.  The hypothesis to be tested is that Cambodians have well-formed
              cultural models governing rules of interaction in different contexts which can
              be characterized as aggressive" or "peaceful", and that individuals pick and
              choose the governing model depending upon the social context.    This research
              is important because violence is a subject of much concern in today's world. 
              If we are to further our understanding of such phenomena, we must carefully
              examine the different contexts in which aggression does or doe not arise.  This
              research provides a theoretical framework and methodology to analyze violence. 
              By not typologizing people as "violent" or "peaceful", this cultural models
              approach illustrates that people can switch cognitive codes in different
              situations in order to control the amount of violence that occurs.  By
              examining the cultural models that inform Cambodian behavior the student will
              be making a contribution to our understanding of aggression in Southeast Asia
              and in comparable situations in general.
