Title       : RUI: An Early Archaic Occupation on the Northeastern Plains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1994    
File        : a9408735

Award Number: 9408735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29181              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael G. Michlovic   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minnesota St Unv Moorhead
	      11th Street South
	      Moorhead, MN  56560    218/236-2011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              Michlovic    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Michlovic 
              and his colleagues will conduct archaeological excavation at the  Rustad Quarry
              Site which is located in southeastern North Dakota.  The site is situated in an
              active soil quarry and much of it has  been destroyed by quarrying work. The
              portion which remains  intact however, contains a large sample of well
              preserved  cultural materials including stone tools as well as bone - 
              primarily bison. Several hearths are also present and these  suggest the
              possibility of reconstructing specific site specific  behaviors. A date of 7240
              BP (Before Present) has been obtained  and this, together with the nature of
              the lithic material  indicates that the Rustad site was occupied during the
              warm  Altithermal period. Dr. Michlovic and his students will complete 
              excavation of the remaining portion of the site. Specialists will  analyze the
              animal bone to reconstruct hunting and butchering  patterns. The lithic
              material will be analyzed in an attempt to  match rock with source areas. In
              this way group range can be  estimated. The team will also employ a series of
              techniques,  including soil, pollen and phytolith analysis, to reconstruct the 
              prehistoric landscape and environment.    This research is important for
              several reasons. It will increase  our understanding of the prehistory of the
              United States. Very  few rich sites have been found which date to the
              Altithermal and  the results of this work will be of interest to many 
              archaeologists. Altithermal conditions resulted in drought over  much of the
              midwest and it is unclear how hunting and gathering  societies at a simple
              level of technology adapted to such an  environment. The Rustad Quarry data
              should help to address this  question. Dr. Michlovic teaches at an
              undergraduate institution.  Many students are involved in the work and the
              project will  provide a direct, hands-on scientific experience.  ***
