Title       : Structure/Activity Relationship of Pectate Lyase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1996       
File        : a9408999

Award Number: 9408999
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel T. Keen noel.keen@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frances A. Jurnak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9197,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Keen  9408999  The three-dimensional structures of two pectate lyase (Pel) 
              proteins have been determined.  These proteins are highly stable  and are
              extracellularly secreted by the plant pathogenic bacterium,  Erwinia
              chrysanthemi, to function as key virulence factors.  The  Pel structures are
              revolutionary, best described as a 'corkscrew'  structure of parallel b
              strands, not previously observed or even  predicted.  The parallel b-strands
              are arranged in a helical  structure with ca.22 amino acids per helical turn. 
              The function s  of the proteins reside on loops which protrude from the central
               helix.  Since computer algorithms suggest that the parallel b-helix  structure
              may be much more widespread in biology, further  characterization of the
              pectate lyases is lucrative.  Our immediate  objectives are to characterize the
              calcium and substrate binding  sites of the pectate lyases as well as to
              determine amino acid  residues important in their folding and secretion. 
              Considerable  preliminary work has been directed to the development of over- 
              expression systems for pel genes in E.coli and methods for  efficiently
              obtaining oligonucleotide site directed mutations  altering one or several
              specific amino acids.  With structural  refinement nearing completion for PelC
              and PelE as well as the  ongoing development of fluorescence assays to monitor
              calcium and  substrate binding, the investigators are in position to define 
              mechanisms underlying catalysis, secretion and folding.  The  results will, in
              turn, open exciting future avenues.  These include  critical study of the
              pectate lyases as pathogen virulence factors;  detailed work on their
              biological secretion; and use of the  parallel b-helix as a carrier scaffold
              for synthetic antigen and  catalytic peptide domains that may have utility in
              clinical  medicine.  %%%  Pectate lyases are important pathogenicity factors
              released by  several pathogens of plants.  These enzymatically active proteins 
              attack the integrity of the plant cell wall and per mit pathogen  spread in
              plant tissues and result in damage.  As such, these  enzymes are a major
              contributor to the large world-wide loss of  food and fiber to disease
              organisms.  Recently, it was shown that  a pectate lyases from the pathogenic
              bacterium, Erwinia  chrysanthemi, has a novel structure at the atomic level. 
              This  structure, called the parallel beta-helix, is unlike any previously 
              observed structural motif and has important implications on protein  structure.
               The parallel beta-helix structure also has important  ramifications for the
              biological function of pectate lyase in the  degradation of plant cells.  The
              present proposal is to study  several aspects of the biology of pectate lyase
              by changing certain  amino acids.  These changes will be accomplished by
              techniques  involving recombinant DNA technology.  This will permit assessing 
              the impact of the changes on the biological properties of the  pectate lyase
              and should eventually allow understanding of the  precise interaction of the
              enzyme with plant tissues.   ***
