Title       : Specificity of RNA Modification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9408813

Award Number: 9408813
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter M. Holmes holmes@hsc.vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Holmes  9408813  This proposal describes one of the first extensive efforts to 
              understand how a specific RNA molecule is recognized by a protein  and modified
              at a specific position.  This protein, M1G  Methyltransferase which is encoded
              by the trmD gene, introduces a  methyl group from S-adenosyl-methionine into
              the 1 position of  quanine at position 37 for a number of tRNA species.  Here
              we propose to first, determine what tRNA structures are  required enzyme
              recognition.  This will be accomplished by the  synthesis then in vitro
              expression of synthetic tRNA genes to  produce unmodified variant molecules. 
              Methylation of these  substrates should indicate which structures are essential
              for  maximum binding and/or catalytic activity. Binding will be assessed  by a
              zonal electrophoretic method.  A major question to be  addressed here will be
              whether specific base residues or general  tRNA structure be important for
              protein-RNA interaction.  We will explore the nature of complexes formed using
              chemical,  physical, and enzymatic methodologies which may determine the rough 
              conformation of RNA-protein complexes.  For example will protein  interact with
              a large or small portion of the tRNA molecules and  will enzyme interact with
              only one face of the tRNA?  We propose to determine if M1G Transferase can bind
              tRNA like  structures in mRNA encoding that enzyme.  It appears that enzyme 
              production in vivo is somehow limited suggesting an autoregulatory  mechanism. 
              In order to test this, synthetic transcripts from  various sites in the trmD
              operon will be prepared in vitro and  utilized as substrates for enzyme using
              radiolabeled AdoMet.  Finally, we will identify regions of M1G Transferase
              involved in  tRNA binding and recognition.  This will be accomplished by the 
              analysis of selected mutant enzymes which we believe cannot  interact properly
              with tRNA.  %%%  This research is aimed at determining how cellular enzymes
              very  specific RNA molecules in cells than introduce changes in the  structure
              of th ose molecules.  We have focused on one specific  system which involves
              the methylation of a specific tRNA molecules  found in the bacterium E. coli. 
              The enzyme (M1G Transferase)  places a methyl group at a very specific position
              on that tRNA  which is required for the correct function of that RNA molecules
              in  protein synthesis.  Most of the RNA molecules in all cells are  modified in
              various ways in order that they can function correctly  in normal cell growth.
              Ours is one of the first proposals of this  kind aimed at determining how RNA
              is modified and it is likely that  all cells will use mechanisms which may be
              elucidated in this  study.  In order to study this problem we must prepare
              synthetic tRNA which  can be acted upon by the enzyme.  This can be done in the
              test tube  using new technologies for the synthesis of totally synthetic RNA 
              molecules.  We can and will prepare modified forms of tRNA in order  to
              determine what structures in the RNA are important for how the  enzyme
              recognizes the tRNA molecule among many different kinds of  cellular tRNA.  In
              addition we will use chemical and enzymatic  methods to get an idea about what
              the complex between RNA and  protein may look like.  Such knowledge permits us
              to speculate  about the exact mechanisms required for recognition and may
              provide  information of great general value helping us to study how enzymes 
              from many other cells may carry out similar modifications.  Finally, we will
              begin making structural changes in the enzyme in  order to determine what
              protein structures are required for the  recognition and binding of RNA.  The
              proposal outlined here impinges on important questions of  biological
              specificity.  For example, how does RNA correctly  participate in accurate
              protein synthesis which is essential for  life in all cells?  We believe this
              work impinges on many broader  problems about RNA structure and function and
              will be useful in  understanding many cellular events involving RNA.  ***
