Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis of Shoot Apical Meristem Development in Arabidopsis
               Thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1996     
File        : a9408731

Award Number: 9408731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Kathy Barton mkbarton@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Populations of stem cells exist in many organisms.  Their  most significant
              attribute is that they replenish themselves  as well as give rise to many
              terminally differentiated cell  types.  In plants, the meristems or growing
              tips of roots or  shoots are groups of stem cells.  Shoot apical meristems in 
              angiosperm plants are formed during embryogenesis and are  comprised of a small
              number of undifferentiated, dividing  cells.  These cells will give rise to all
              of the above-  ground portions of the plant.  Thus, understanding the 
              developmental biology of shoot apical meristems is  absolutely fundamental to
              understanding plant growth and  development.  How is the shoot apical meristem
              initiated  during embryogenesis?  How are additional meristems  initiated
              postembryonically in the axils of leaves?  How is  a group of undifferentiated,
              dividing cells maintained in  the meristem?  How are the positions of organs
              generated by  the meristem determined?  The long term goal of this study  is to
              answer these questions in molecular detail.  The small  cruciferous plant
              Arabidopsis thaliana has been chosen as an  experimental organism -- its short
              generation time and small  genome size make it especially well suited for
              molecular  genetic analysis.  The focus of this project is the shoot 
              meristemless (STM) locus.  Seedlings homozygous for a loss-  of-function
              mutation in this gene lack a shoot apical  meristem but are otherwise normal. 
              Careful morphological  examination of homozygous stm-1 mutants has shown that
              the  defect lies in their inability to initiate a shoot apical  meristem during
              embryogenesis.  Evidence that the STM gene  corresponds to an Arabidopsis
              homolog of the maize Knotted  gene is presented.  This gene encodes a
              homeodomain  containing protein and therefore probably acts as a 
              transcriptional regulator.  Although homeodomain proteins  have been identified
              in plants previously, this is the first  case in which a loss-of-function
              mutation has been  identified in such a gene and hence  its wild-type function 
              deduced.  To understand how STM promotes shoot apical  meristem formation,
              experiments are proposed that are  designed to shed light on how the STM gene
              is regulated and,  in the long term, to identify genes that STM in turn 
              regulates.
