Title       : Mechanoreceptive and Nociceptive Coding in Spinal Cord Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9408719

Award Number: 9408719
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91                 (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel D. Greenspan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY, Upstate Med Univ
	      155 Elizabeth Blackwell
	      Syracuse, NY  132102334    315/473-4570

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9408719  Greenspan    Somatosensory nerve cells convey information about touch,
              temperature, and noxious (irritating or painful) stimuli.  The cutaneous
              somatosensory system involves the senses for mechanoreception, thermoreception,
              and nociception coming from the skin and surface of the body.  We know far less
              about somatosensory processing than we do about the major senses of sight or
              hearing.  To understand how the brain receives and represents somatosensory
              information, we must know how well the neural components of this system can
              discriminate among the various physical dimensions of stimulation.  The nerve
              fibers coming from the skin, called the primary afferent fibers, generally are
              selectively responsive to only a single modality of these stimuli.  Many of the
              nerve cells within the spinal cord, though, receive input converging from
              different afferent classes, and so respond to multiple types of cutaneous
              stimuli.  This project uses a novel precisely controlled method for stimulation
              to get a new level of quantification of stimulus-response functions.  The
              discrimination capabilities of these neurons then are analyzed in the context
              of signal detection theory.  Comparing the responses of spinal neurons with the
              primary afferents under identical conditions allows the identifying how sensory
              coding transforms signals at this level of the central nervous system. 
              Comparison of the neural activity with psychophysical data gathered using the
              same stimulus parameters allows determining which neuron classes can
              discriminate at levels comparable to human perception.  Results will add a new
              level of sophistication to our knowledge about somatosensory capabilities, and
              also will be important to all neuroscience and to neuroengineering in
              clarifying principles of information coding.
