Title       : Exon-Trap Sequencing Using Transposons in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1996       
File        : a9408042

Award Number: 9408042
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Martienssen martiens@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. Richard McCombie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Venkatesan Sundaresan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9408042  An in vivo gene-trapping technique has been developed in 
              Arabidopsis using the transposable elements Ac and Ds.  Our  modified Ds
              element (DsG) contains a Beta-glucuronidase reporter  gene that is equipped
              with splice acceptor signals to allow multi-  frame gene fusions (an
              "exon-trap").  When this Ds element inserts  into a chromosomal gene, the
              pattern of chromosomal gene expression  is mimiced by the Beta-glucuronidase
              reporter gene.  Because  expression depends on gene fusion, insertions that
              result in  reporter gene expression will also result in gene disruption.  
              Using a novel selection scheme, a collection of 5,000 plants will  be generated
              that will each carry an insertion at a different  location in the genome. 
              Insertions into genes will be identified  by staining the progeny of each plant
              for reporter gene expression:   15-20% of DsG insertions result in reporter
              gene expression, so  that the proposed collection should include insertions
              into 500-  1,000 genes.  We will use this collection to develop an exon-trap 
              sequencing technique to enable the rapid sequencing of a portion of  the
              chromosomal gene identified by each exon-trap tag.  The  chromosomal exon
              corresponding to each insertion will be amplified  by RACE PCR, and its
              sequence determined.  As many of the exons as  possible will be mapped via
              anchored YAC contigs and recombinant  inbred lines.  A database of DsG
              insertion lines will be developed,  each characterized by expression pattern,
              mutant phenotype and map  location, as well as partial exon sequence.  This
              database can be  integrated with existing genomic and cDNA sequence databases. 
              ***  A major goal in the characterization of the Arabidopsis genome is  to
              assign a function to genes identified by cDNA and genomic  sequencing,
              gene-finding algorithms, and map location.  Homology  searches are expected to
              fulfill this goal for those genes that  have similarity to sequences from other
              organisms.  However, a  majority of gene products will remain an onymous in
              these large  collections of sequenced genes.  In the proposed study, a function
               will be assigned to many of these genes by determining their  patterns of
              expression, and by observing the mutant phenotype that  results from gene
              disruption.  This proposal will form the basis  for establishing a large
              database of insertion lines, as other  laboratories use the "starter" lines to
              generate collections of  their own.  This will allow a function to be assigned
              to many of  the genes identified by DNA sequence alone, as well as providing a 
              genetic resource of widespread use.  %%%
