Title       : Regional Vegetation Response to Human Disturbance in Central New England
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9408056

Award Number: 9408056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Foster   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael W. Binford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Taber D. Allison  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9408056  Foster   The response of ecosystems and landscapes to disturbance has
              been a major emphasis of ecological research with most focus on episodic or
              pulse-type disturbances such as fire, wind, or forest cutting. Relatively
              little is known concerning the impact of long-term disturbances that affect
              large areas, such as regional land-use activity. Human activity is a critical
              disturbance process to evaluate because it is ubiquitous. Understanding the
              impact of human activity is important from an ecological perspective because it
              often involves processes and a magnitude of impact that are novel to the
              impacted biological systems.   This research will address the following
              fundamental ecological questions: How does the institution of a novel
              disturbance regime alter vegetation organization in relation to prevailing
              environmental conditions and disturbance processes? At what rate do species
              assemblages reorganize as the intensity of disturbance changes? Following a
              decrease in regional disturbance does the vegetation reorganize according to
              prevailing environmental conditions, and does it revert towards its former
              composition?   The primary data source for this research is a 2000-year
              vegetation and fire history record derived by fine resolution pollen and
              charcoal analysis of a network of 16 lakes in north-central Massachusetts. This
              approach provides a long record of regional vegetation pattern and dynamics,
              disturbance, and environmental relationships prior to European settlement.
              Cultural data, including archaeological surveys and decadal census data, will
              provide information on the pre-European context and indices of regional
              variation in land-use intensity during the historical period.   %%%   This
              approach of using long-term regional data on palaeoecology, archaeology, and
              environment will yield a new understanding to broad-scale human impacts on
              forested landscapes. These results will provide important insights into the
              organization and dynamics of vegetation and will be of general inte rest due to
              regional similarities with the land-use history of other areas. The results
              will be specifically applicable to the understanding, management, and
              conservation of the New England landscape.
