Title       : Nitrogen Regulation of Gene Expression in Bacillus subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9408094

Award Number: 9408094
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan H. Fisher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9183,9198,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Fisher  9408094  In the gram-positive sporulating soil bacterium Bacillus
              subtilis, the synthesis of some permeases and nitrogen degradative enzymes is
              derepressed during nitrogen-limited growth.  These changes in gene expression
              promote logarithmic growth on compounds which are slowly degraded to
              nitrogen-containing metabolic intermediates.  In this project, the regulation
              of the dicistronic nrgAB operon in response to nitrogen availability is being
              studied.  Expression of the nrgAB operon is derepressed over 4,000-fold during
              nitrogen-limited growth.  Nitrogen regulation of nrgAB ( and of all other known
              nitrogen-regulated genes in B. subtilis) expression requires the wild-type
              glutamine synthetase protein, butnot the glutamine synthetase repressor
              protein, GlnR.  Thus, nitrogen regulation in B. subtilis is mediated by a
              unique global regulatory system which is distinct from the Ntr regulatory
              system present in Escherichia coli.  The cis-acting site(s), nrgO, required for
              nitrogen-regulation of nrgAB expression will be identified by deletion and
              mutational analysis.  Two trans-acting gene products are known to be required
              for nitrogen regualation of nrgAB expression.  Mutants deficient in glutamine
              synthetase (glnA) express derepressed levels of nrgAB during growth in the
              presence of excess nitrogen.  The role of the glutamine synthetase protein in
              nitrogen regulation will be studied by isolating mutations which suppress the
              nrgAB derepression in glnA mutants.  This experiment should identify gene
              products which transduce the glutamine synthetase-dependent nitrogen signal to
              the nrgAB regulatory proteins.  Secondly, tnr mutants are unable to derepress
              nrgAB expression during growth on any nitrogen source.  Thus, the tnr gene
              product(s) may mediate nitrogen regulation of nrgAB expression.  DNA
              complementing the trn mutations will be cloned and sequenced to identify the
              trn gene products.  The ability of the Tnr gene products to bind at the nrgO
              site will be examined in gel mobility shift assays .  %%%  An understanding of
              the role of the glutamine synthetase protein in nitrogen regulation in B.
              subtilis should identify novel mechanisms of gene regulation and provide
              insight into the regulation of cellular metabolism in gram-positive bacteria. 
              In addition, these studies should provide genetic tools for the production of
              useful products in Bacillus spp. during fermentation or growth in the soil,
              where nitrogen-containing nutrients are relatively scarce.  ***
