Title       : An Evolutionary Analysis of Biparental Care
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9408148

Award Number: 9408148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117243             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia L. Schwagmeyer plsch@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas W. Mock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                              Being unrelated genetically, monogamous mates have some 
              interests in common, others at odds.  Where costly  biparental care is provided
              to nidicolous young, the sexual  partnership is likely to be a complex mixture
              of cooperation  and selfishness:  each individual may enhance its lifetime 
              reproductive success by getting its partner to supply the  greater investment. 
              Recent ESS models predict that such a  parent should compensate only partially
              for any shortfall by  its mate, yet should become more generous as its own
              future  (its residual reproductive value) diminishes.  Because many  factors
              influence life-history parameters asymmetrically  according to gender, the ESS
              approach leads to novel  predictions regarding the parental division of labor. 
              The  proposed field observations and experiments on house  sparrows will
              explore these dynamics.  Parental labor  required for provisioning the brood
              will be artificially  increased (by slightly encumbering one parent with small 
              lead fishing weights affixed temporarily to the rectrices)  and the
              food-delivery performances of both the taxed parent  and its mate will be
              recorded.  At the same time their daily  energy expenditures will be assessed
              via the doubly-labelled  water technique.  At other nests, the costs of
              parental care  will be artificially decreased (via food supplementations)  and
              the impact on both male and female parents will be  determined.  Because house
              sparrows are remarkably sedentary  and breed multiply within a season, it
              should be possible to  make robust assessments of how increased parental
              exertion  affects both future adult reproductive performance and  current-brood
              recruitment.  The overall goals of the initial  support period are:  (1)  to
              examine the separate costs of  male and female parental care at three levels
              (in terms of  behavior, energy expenditure, and future reproductive  success); 
              (2)  to measure the impact of variable levels of  parental provisioning on
              whole broods of offspring;  (3)  to   tailor ESS models of biparental care so
              as to account for  observed differences between males and females in this 
              particular system;  (4)  to test several key predictions  from current ESS
              models about how parental effort and sex  differences in effort should relate
              to its costs; and  (5)  to assess whether discontinuation of partnerships from
              one  nesting cycle to the next is contingent on disruptions of  the relative
              workloads of each parent.
