Title       : U.S.-South Africa Cooperative Research on Advanced Concepts for Flexible AC
               Transmission Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1994     
File        : a9408833

Award Number: 9408833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frances Li                              
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Rene Spee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,5928,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              INT 94-08833  Spee    This collaborative research grant supplements Grant No.
              ECS-  93-01168  ("Intelligent Control of Complex Nonlinear Systems with 
              Electric Power Application"), which is studying Flexible AC  Transmission
              Systems (FACTS) in an effort also supported by  the Electric Power Research
              Institute and the Bonneville  Power Administration.  The current grant provides
              partial  support for a U.S. researcher, Dr. Rene Spee, of the  Department of
              Electrical and Computer Engineering, Oregon  State University, to spend six
              months at University of  Stellenbosch, South Africa, to investigate a "next 
              generation" FACTS device which utilizes force commutated  power converter
              technology.  Activities proposed include  design, modeling and evaluation of
              this "Unified Power  Controller" with an emphasis on device performance in
              power  systems representative of the western United States and  Southern
              Africa.  The South African partner is Dr. Johan H.  R. Enslin, of the
              Department of Electrical and Electronic  Engineering.  The work at University
              of Stellenbosch is  supported by the South African national utility, ESKOM. 
              The  collaboration includes a six-month stay at Oregon State U.  by the South
              African partner, with partial support from the  South African Foundation for
              Research Development.    This collaboration promises benefits to both
              institutions,  which have ongoing research projects on system and device  level
              control of FACTS, and to the power needs of both  countries.  Devices and
              control strategies not previously  investigated in depth for the western North
              American power  system will be evaluated in a system setting very similar to 
              the US, thus speeding possible application and reducing  development cost.  The
              South African utility is interested  in the potential of FACTS for a number of
              reasons,  including: use in ESKOM's rural electrification program, as  a
              technology for improving quality of supply, and as a  solution for present
              stability problems.  ***
