Title       : Controlled Nucleation and Growth of Molecular Crystals at Molecular Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9408923

Award Number: 9408923
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $615007             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Ward wardx004@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9162,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9408923  Ward    This  research  describes strategies for controlled
              heterogeneous  nucleation   and   growth  of  organic  crystals   at  
              molecular  interfaces,  with  emphasis on the use  of  substrates  based  on 
              specific  crystal faces of molecular crystals, and self-assembled  films 
              prepared from organosulfur and organosilane reagents.  The  proposed  work 
              will demonstrate that enhanced nucleation  rates,  specific  growth
              orientations, and polymorph selectivity  can  be  achieved through the use of
              properly designed substrates. In  the  case  of molecular crystal substrates,
              these characteristics will  be   examined   in   the  context  of 
              ledge-directed   epitaxial  nucleation, in which prenucleation aggregates are
              stabilized  and  oriented by interfacial interaction between two low energy
              planes  of  the  aggregate  and a geometrically similar substrate  ledge. 
              Organosulfur    and   organosilane   films   provide    molecular 
              functionality capable of specifically interacting with functional  groups of
              molecules in the prenucleation aggregate. Atomic  force  microscopy  of 
              dynamic, in situ, crystal  growth  will  also  be  examined.  It  is 
              anticipated that these studies  will  lead  to  greater  understanding  of the
              critical factors  responsible  for  nucleation  and  growth  of organic
              crystals,  and  the  rational  design  of  solid  substrates for controlled 
              crystallization  of  technologically important reagents and materials.  %%% 
              Molecular  crystals,  defined as solids consisting  of  molecular  components 
              assembled  in  the crystalline  state  by  weak,  but  numerous intermolecular
              interactions, exhibit numerous properties  of   fundamental  and  technological
               interest.   These   include  electrical  conductivity, superconductivity  and 
              ferromagnetism,  nonlinear   optical   behavior,  pharmaceutical   activity,  
              and  photographic  sensitizers. The interest in these  materials  also  stems 
              from  the  ability to rationally control  bulk  properties  through  molec ular
               design, a strategy commonly  referred  to  as  "crystal  engineering."  While
              there has been considerable  study  of   the  intermolecular  interactions 
              that  direct  solid-state  packing in molecular crystals, investigations of
              their nucleation  and  growth, particularly at the molecular level, has been
              rather  limited.   This  research  describes  strategies  for  controlled 
              heterogeneous  nucleation  and  growth  of  organic  crystals  at  molecular 
              interfaces,  with emphasis on the  use  of  substrates  based  on  specific 
              crystal  faces of  molecular  crystals,  and  self-assembled films prepared
              from organosulfur and  organosilane  reagents.  The  proposed  work  will 
              demonstrate  that  enhanced  nucleation  rates,  specific growth orientations, 
              and  polymorph  selectivity can be achieved through the use of properly 
              designed  substrates.  ***
