Title       : Japan STA Program: Nucleation and Growth of High Quality Diamond Thin Films for
               Electronic and Optical Uses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1994      
File        : a9408064

Award Number: 9408064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7250               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Dennig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9408064  Dennig    This award supports a 12-month Science and Technology Agency
              of  Japan Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Paul Dennig, Department of  Materials
              Science and Engineering, Stanford University, at the  National Institute for
              Research in Inorganic Materials (NIRIM),  Tsukuba, Japan.  Dr. Dennig will work
              with Dr. Mutsukazu Kamo in  the Advanced Materials Research Center, NIRIM, on a
              research  project entitled, " The Nucleation and Growth of High Quality 
              Diamond Thin Films for Electronic and Optical Use."    The research project
              focuses on the most recent methods of  producing thin polycrystalline diamond
              films.  Since formation of  diamond thin films begins with the nucleation of
              many individual  crystallites on a substrate surface, the researchers will
              explore  the erratic nucleation behavior of diamond crystals.  The team  will
              study nucleation as  a function of electric fields, carbon  bond ration of
              initial carbon layers, substrate materials, gas  phase chemistry and substrate
              temperature.  If nucleation can be  controlled, then morphology and film
              properties can also be  controlled.  Such control over diamond growth onto
              non-diamond  substrates would permit the fabrication of diamond electronic and 
              optical devices of the highest quality.  ***
