Title       : Endogenous Modulation of Catecholamine Release
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1996   
File        : a9408427

Award Number: 9408427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: August Epple   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thomas Jefferson Univ
	      1020 Locust Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19107    215/503-6976

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9408427  Epple    Until about a decade ago, it was believed that morphine and 
              the closely related codeine are only produced by the poppy  plant, and no other
              plant or animal species.  However,  recent research revealed that both opiates
              are actually  produced by a variety of animals, including the human. 
              Particularly high concentrations were found in certain  regions of the central
              nervous system and in an endocrine  organ, the adrenal medulla.  These
              surprising findings  raised the question of the functions of the endogenous 
              opiates, and they also raised the question how these opiates  interact with the
              opioid peptides, totally unrelated  substances which are common in various
              reigons of the  nervous system, and in endocrine glands.  Before the  discovery
              of animal-produced opiates, it was assumed that  the psychological and
              analgesic effects of morphine were due  to actions on organs that normally
              respond to endogenous  opioid peptides.  Now, it has become critical to
              separate  the specific actions of the endogenous opiates and opioids  from each
              other.  Without this information, we will not  clearly understand the basis of
              the therapeutic and abusive  effects of both codeine and morphine.  The issue
              is very  confusing since certain cells produce and release both  opioid
              peptides and opiates, which in turn interact with  additional regulatory
              substances released from the same  cells and from neurons.    Using an ideally
              suited animal model, the chromaffin cells  of the American eel, Dr. Epple's
              NSF-supported research has  shown, inter alia, that codeine and morphine
              interact with  each other in the control of opioid peptide (enkephalin) 
              secretion; and that enkephalin, in turn, controls the  secretion of
              catecholamines (adrenaline and noradrenaline)  which are the actual hormones of
              the chromaffin cells. Thus,  the chromaffin cells use substances that affect
              the cells  themselves ("autocrine secretions")  to control release of  hormones
              which then largely act on distant "target" organs.  In teresingly, these
              actions occur at opiate concentrations  that are far below those needed for
              therapeutic or abusive  effects.    The specific aim of the proposed
              investigations is to  further unravel the complex interactions in the control
              of  catecholamine release, with particular emphasis on the  interaction with
              the innervation.  The expected data should  provide once more "unconventional"
              insights into the self-  regulations of both neurons and endocrine cells, and
              thus  have important implications for both basic research and  therapeutic
              strategies.  ***
