Title       : An Experimental Data Base and Modeling Effort to Describe the Atmospheric
               Gas-Aerosol Mass Transfer of Semi-Volatile Organics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1996       
File        : a9408548

Award Number: 9408548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Kamens kamens@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. McDow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harvey Jeffries  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   The purpose of this research is to improve our understanding  of the
              factors that control the gas to aerosol phase distribution  of semi-volatile
              organic compounds.  Results from this program will  provide modelers with tools
              to predict vaporization and  condensation of semi-volatiles as gas and particle
              concentrations  change with time.  Most of the current efforts to predict
              organic  partitioning have been based on equilibrium theory.  Although these 
              efforts have substantially advanced our understanding of the  partitioning
              process under ideal conditions, there are strong  indications that atmospheric
              equilibrium between the gas and  particle phases may not be established for
              most compounds of  interest over relatively short time scales (minutes to
              hours).       To obtain experimental data to develop and test models of 
              semi-volatile mass transfer between the gas and particle phases,  combustion
              emissions will be aged in a large 190cm3 outdoor Teflon  film environmental
              chamber.  Polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons  (PAHs) will be used as example
              compounds, but the methodology will  be applicable to other organic
              semi-volatile toxics.  Net PAH loss  rates from particles and the gas phase
              will be monitored.  Rates of  PAH mass transfer to the from the particles will
              be estimated using  a new inner particle diffusion model which considers mass
              transfer  in a liquid organic layer surrounding the particle.  Three  different
              types of particles will be used.  They will be generated  from wood, diesel and
              coal combustion to represent particle types  which have different amounts of a
              "liquid phase" surrounding an  inner carbon core.  It is expected that the
              amount and type of  organic material that forms this outer layer of the
              particle will  strongly influence inner organic particle diffusion, enthalpies
              of  desorption from the surface, and ultimately rates of particle semi- 
              volatile uptake and loss.       By changing the concentration of semi-volatile
              vapors and/or  particles in the chamber, an d thereby perturbing the
              equilibrium  between gas and particle phase organic, these researchers will be 
              able to investigate rates of semi-volatile sorption (condensation)  and
              evolution to and from particles.  To radically alter  equilibrium conditions,
              some experiments will be conducted by  passing combustion emissions through a
              large gas stripper/denuder  to remove the gas phase semi-volatile component
              before particles  enter the chamber.   Semi-volatile deuterated PAH will be
              added to  the gas phase to observe rates of mass transfer to the particles.
