Title       : An Assessment of the Role of Natural and Anthropogenic CCN on Droplet Size
               Distributions in Marie Stratus in the North Atlantic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1998  
File        : a9408660

Award Number: 9408660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randolph D. Borys borys@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James G. Hudson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melanie A. Wetzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas H. Lowenthal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      P.O.Box 60220
	      Reno, NV  895060220    702/673-7311

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1309,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                   This pilot field experiment will determine the effects of  variations in
              natural and anthropogenic cloud condensation nuclei  (CCN) on marine stratus
              cloud droplet size distributions in the  Canary Islands.  The hypothesis to be
              tested is that increases in  CCN numbers, caused by transport of anthropogenic
              and natural  aerosols from Europe and Africa, contrasted to the natural marine 
              situation, will cause a systematic shift to smaller droplet sizes.   Although
              previous work has demonstrated that anthropogenic aerosols  have affected cloud
              microphysics, in case studies, such effects  have not been shown to be
              significant climatologically on a global  scale, nor have specific sources of
              CCN been identified in a remote  region.  To justify the assertion that the
              interaction between  pollution aerosols and clouds is altering climate, ie., to
               demonstrate the Twomey Effect, it is necessary to show that a  significant
              portion of the observed variance of the cloud droplet  size distribution under
              background conditions is caused by  pollution-derived CCN.       This
              experiment will be conducted at Tenerife in the Canary  Islands, where wide
              variations in natural and anthropogenic CCN are  expected, where an existing
              AEROCE sampling station is located, in  the region where the ACE-2 (Aerosol
              Characterization Experiment) is  planned.  Marine boundary-layer stratus clouds
              will be sampled near  could base at a ground-based, elevated site.  The droplet
              number  and size distribution will be monitored continuously using a PMS- 
              CSASP-100-HV probe (2 to 95 um dia.), and discrete droplet samples  will be
              collected for detailed chemical analysis.  The cloud-water  chemistry will be
              used as a surrogate for the chemical composition  of the pre-cloud CCN.  The
              relative effects of anthropogenic and  natural sources on variations in droplet
              size distributions will be  identified using receptor modeling.  Aerosol
              chemistry from the  AEROCE Izania Observatory (2600m) will be compared with the
              cloud  chemistry of m arine stratus.
