Title       : Individual-particle Aerosol Experiments in the Marine Troposphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9408704

Award Number: 9408704
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510149             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Buseck pbuseck@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan H. Fink  (Principal Investigator former)
              James R. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   Aerosol particles in the marine boundary layer and free  troposphere impact
              the global solar radiation balance, both  directly through radiation
              backscatter and indirectly as cloud  condensation nuclei.  This project will
              use individual-particle  methods to examine tropospheric processes that affect
              aerosol-  particle size distribution, concentrations, and chemical 
              compositions.  Primary focus will be on the marine boundary layer  and
              stratocumulus clouds that cap that layer in the remote areas of  the South
              Pacific.   Analyses will be performed with automated  electron-beam
              instruments, especially the new scanning electron  microscope.       Methods
              developed by this research group over the past decade  allow the study of large
              numbers of particles by quantitative  determination of composition and
              morphology.  The data from this  research will be used to address current
              issues in atmospheric  aerosol research, including (a) the generation,
              fractionation, and  reaction of marine aerosol particles; (b) production of
              natural,  non-sea-salt sulfate particles; (c) partitioning of aerosol 
              particles between droplets and interstitial air in marine  stratocumulus
              clouds; (d) cloud processing of aerosol particles;  and (e) evolution of
              aerosols during long-range transport in the  marine troposphere.       As a
              ancillary task, the structure and composition of complex  supermicron to
              submicron particles will be investigated a high  spatial resolutions using
              transmission electron microscopy, both by  imaging and by chemical analysis. 
              Transmission electron microscopy  also makes possible the examination of
              reactions involving nitrate  and ammonia in submicron individual particles. 
              The proposed  studies, taken together, will provide fine-scale data about a
              wide  range of particle types that occur in the marine troposphere and  that
              affect radiation backscatter and the microphysical properties  of clouds.
