Title       : Phylogenetics of Epichloe Species and Related Grass Mycosymbionts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1994   
File        : a9408018

Award Number: 9408018
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher L. Schardl   (Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm R. Siegel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9408018  Schardl       Drs. Schardl and Siegel at the University of Kentucky in 
              collaboration with Swiss colleagues are studying a fascinating  group of
              ascomycetous fungi that invade or infect grasses and  sedges, fungi usually
              treated in the genus Epichloe.  The grasses  infected include commercially
              important turf grasses.  The taxonomy  and classification of the fungi is
              complicated by the occurrence of  asexual forms and by a general paucity of
              reliable morphological  characters for distinguishing species.  Yet Epichloe
              strains are  known to inhabit grass plants internally, where they may function 
              either as mutualists or as pathogens.  The mutualistic endophyte  fungi are
              transmitted through the hosts' seeds and they provide  protection from insect
              herbivores and drought.  The pathogenic  Epichloe inhibit seed production by
              the host and are able to  produce infecting spores in large quantities.  The
              investigators  are studying patterns and mechanisms of fungal speciation,
              mating  systems, and hybridization, while also seeking to determine whether 
              the fungi coevolve with their grass hosts.       Primary objectives are (1) to
              use DNA sequence analysis as a  tool for determining phylogenetic relationships
              of Epichloe species  and relatives, both teleomorph and anamorph taxa; (2) to
              determine  the number and pattern of origins of mutualism and pathogenicity in 
              these fungi; and (3) to correlate these patterns with the known  phylogeny of
              the grass hosts.  The possibility of hybridization  between Epichloe strains
              leading to the formation of asexual  "species" will also be examined.
