Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Parallel Algorithms for Surface Water Flows and Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1995      
File        : a9408151

Award Number: 9408151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary F. Wheeler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Clinton N. Dawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Balasubramania Ramaswamy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1038,1317,9189,9216,9263,CVIS,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Wheeler         The investigator and her colleagues study scalable parallel 
              algorithms for the solution of the hydrodynamic flow and transport  equations. 
              The mathematical model is based on the generalized  wave-continuity equation
              for wave height, the non-conservative  form of the momentum equations for
              velocity, and the  advection-diffusion equation for transport.  The numerical 
              solution techniques are based on mixed and Galerkin finite element  methods. 
              For advection processes they study both characteristic  and higher-order
              Godunov methods.  These algorithms are  implemented on parallel platforms,
              including clusters of  workstations and massively parallel systems.  Domain
              decomposition  techniques are used to achieve parallelism.  Once the codes are 
              developed and validated, they are applied to bay and estuarine  modeling and
              modeling of storm surges along the Gulf of Mexico.       The objective of this
              research is to formulate, analyze and  implement accurate and efficient
              parallel algorithms for modeling  flow and transport in surface water
              environments.  The impetus for  this research is the need for state and federal
              agencies and  private industry to understand the effects of tides on coastal 
              regions and offshore structures, and to study the effects of  industrial and
              municipal development on bays and estuaries.  More  specifically, this work has
              applications in several areas,  including 1) calculating tidal ranges and
              surges caused by extreme  storm events such as hurricanes in order to plan
              development in  coastal areas and predict potential hazards from flooding; 2) 
              modeling tidal fluctuations for those interested in capturing  tidal energy for
              commercial purposes; 3) estimating forces on  offshore structures; 4)
              predicting influence of dredging of  intercoastal waterways or constructing
              breakwaters; 5) studying  effects of pollution on bays and estuaries, including
              possible  remediation strategies; and 6) allocating allowable discharges for 
              municipalities in order to meet spec ific water quality objectives.  The
              algorithms developed under this grant improve upon existing  algorithms by
              effectively using massively parallel computers to  increase resolution and
              reduce the computational time for a  simulation.  The code to be developed
              serves as paradigm for a new  generation of software that takes advantage of
              the trend in  high-performance computing toward massively parallel 
              architectures.
