Title       : East/West Consortium: Next Generation Authoring Tools & Instructional
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1997       
File        : a9408607

Award Number: 9408607
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6150000            (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Spohrer SPOHRER@applelink.apple.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Apple Computer Inc
	      20525 Mariani Avenue
	      Cupertino, CA  950146201    408/996-1010

NSF Program : Z722      ARPA-TRP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract       The East-West Consortium is a unique partnership of universities,
              publishers, a computer software and hardware manufacturer, and the government.
              The partnership aim is to develop next generation authoring tools to empower
              non-programmers to develop interactive content, training, and educational
              software. Since there is no single learning architecture that is appropriate
              for all situations, the consortium will develop a suite of tools and make them
              accessible to content and design specialists who are non-programmers.    The
              consortium will build tools that have been pioneered by the university partners
              and by Apple. These include: cognitive tutor authoring tool (Carnegie Mellow
              University), knowledge-based tutor authoring tool (University of Massachusetts
              at Amherst), media-rich CBT authoring tool (Stanford Medical School),
              simulation with critics authoring tool (University of Colorado at Boulder), and
              simulation-based learning authoring tools (Apple). These tools will all be
              cross -platform using Apple-IBM Kaleida s ScriptX standard and be composed of
              many parts that can be integrated to build new hybrid tools using Apple, IBM,
              etc.  Open Doc and SOM/DSOM standard. Apple will drive the use of these
              standards, provide the core tools technology for creating the task specific
              authoring tools, and provide a commercialization path for these efforts. To
              ensure that the development effort is responsive to commercial tool needs, the
              publishers in the consortium, Houghton Mifflin Company and PWS Publishing
              Company) are building next generation interactive content in the areas of
              beginning algebra and simulations for real world problem solving. Partnerships
              with publishers focussed on medical application areas are also in place.
