Title       : Towards a Model of the Biogeochemistry of Continental-Scale River Basins: An
               Amazon Case Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1996   
File        : a9408676

Award Number: 9408676
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1050000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey E. Richey jrichey@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul D. Quay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allan H. Devol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John I. Hedges  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Richey  Research is proposed her to consider the dynamics ogf large-scale
              drainage basins, using the Amazon Rivet system as a test case.  The central
              question to be addressed in this proposal is, How does a large river system
              obtain and subsequently modify its biogeochemical composition?  The question
              and hypothesis will be divided into parts:  (1) How is the biogeochemical stay
              of the river system influenced by the land surfaces?  (2) How are the land
              effects modified during transit through the river system?   The summaty working
              hypothesis is that, "The quantity and composition of dissolved and particulate
              bioactive materials in a parcel of water at any downstreasm node in the river
              system is predictable as the product of a common set of processes which occur
              differentially according to upstream conditions of relative typography, soil
              organic content and texture, water and residence time, and floodplain extent." 
              To test this hypothesis the research objectives are to:  (1) Implement and
              carry out a field sampling program that will efficiently provide samples from
              throughout the basin, including from the mainstem, from transects along major
              tributaries, and into headwater regions of Peru and Bolivia.  Ultrafiltration
              techniques will be used to process water across a spectrum of particle and
              molecular sizes.    (2) Develop a quantitative model based on routing water and
              particulate and dissolved substances through the rivernetwork.  This effort
              will couple the hydrology and chemistry models we have previously developed
              with our new information.  (3) Conduct experiments to determine terrestial
              effects on organic matter composition.  Using a modeling approach, upper bounds
              of fine organic material thwt exist in the fine particle fraction will be
              determined as will the chemical selectivity.  Simulated absorption experiments
              will be the third test for active partioning within the drainage basin.  (4)
              Controls on particulate export will be investigated using measurments and
              modeling of sediment mobil ization and routing.  Isotopic tracers will be used
              to determine the location of material origin.  (5)
