Title       : The Influences of Chemical Microstructure and Pressure on the Mechanisms of
               Crystallization in Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1996     
File        : a9408678

Award Number: 9408678
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Phillips pphillip@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Phillips  There are many variables that influence the physical and mechanical 
              properties of crystalline polymers through the processing and  fabrication
              stages of manufacture.  Four of the most important are  temperature, pressure,
              molecular weight, and chain microstructure.   The long-term objective of this
              research is to understand the ways  in which all four of these variables
              interact in determining the  details of the crystallization process.  Building
              on past work, the  synergistic effects of these variables will be investigated
              for  several carefully chosen systems.  Whereas much of past work has 
              concentrated on cis-polyisoprene, polyethylene, and polypropylene,  the
              proposed research will continue with polypropylene and its  copolymers with
              ethylene.  It will introduce copolymers of nylon-  6,6 as a new group.  This
              latter group will permit a wider range of  copolymer structures to be
              considered; in particular, there will be  available a series of copolymers in
              which there is evidence for the  comonomers being incorporated into the unit
              cell of the  homopolymer.  The research will permit a quantitative comparison
              to  be made of crystallization theories and will enable us to look in  a
              thorough manner at the existing theories of copolymer  crystallization.  The
              research will help us unravel some of the  aforementioned complicated
              synergisms.  In addition we will  continue to investigate the details of the
              formation of the gamma  phase in polypropylene at elevated pressures and the
              conditions  governing its equilibrium with the alpha phase.  It is also 
              expected that this research will extend to the copolymers of  polypropylene. 
              The study of copolymers is one of the few methods  available for the study of
              the critical secondary nucleus in  polymers and many of the results will be
              applied to elucidating  more information on this least explored of the
              important physical  features of crystallization in polymers.  %%%  This
              research, by studying the crystallization behavior of  important po lymers,
              will provide a more thorough understanding of  how morphology influences
              observed bulk properties.
