Title       : Developmentally Regulated Calcium - Binding Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9408635

Award Number: 9408635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chandler M. Fulton fulton@binah.cc.brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9408635  Fulton     Naegleria gruberi  undergoes a developmental transformation 
              from amoebae to flagellates over 100 minutes and may serve as a  paradigm to
              study cell differentiation led us to calcium-  binding proteins. Two
              calmodulins are synthesized during  differentiation and become localized in
              flagellates, one in the  flagella and the other in the flagellate cell body. 
              Characterization of the single-copy intronless gene that  encodes flagellar
              calmodulin (CaM-1) has shown that it cannot  encode flagellate cell-body
              calmodulin (CaM-2). Initial  attempts to isolate the CaM-2 gene led us to
              discover other  differentiation-specific calcium-binding proteins, most notably
               centrin (a.k.a. caltractin). Our proposed research is focused  on centrin and
              CaM-2. Centrin is a ubiquitous, diversely  centriole-associated member of the
              calmodulin superfamily that  has been implicated in Ca2+-mediated,
              ATPindependent  contractility, a third contractile system. Although centrin is 
              clearly a crucial eukaryotic protein, its functions, especially  in relation to
              centrosome and basal body dynamics, are little  understood. In Naegleria,
              centrin is developmentally regulated  and becomes associated with the basal
              bodies when these  organelles form de novo during differentiation. We plan to 
              complete ongoing studies i) of the developmental regulation  (e.g.,
              phosphorylation) of centrin during Naegleria  differentiation and basal-body
              assembly and ii) of remarkable  structures formed by centrin-like proteins in
              certain other  organisms, especially the spasmoneme of vorticellid ciliates. 
              In order to better understand centrin, we plan iii) to seek and  characterize
              proteins that associate with centrin using the  cloned Naegleria centrin gene
              and the two-hybrid system in  yeast and iv) to define by isolation, cloning and
              sequencing a  centrin-related protein that is strongly implicated in 
              contraction, the spasmin of Vorticella. In addition, we plan to  define the
              second differentiation-specific calmodulin, CaM-2,   by cloning its gene(s).
              These studies are of general interest  in relation to two questions 1) What are
              the differences  between the two differentiation-specific calmodulins of 
              Naegleria, especially in relation to whether multiple  calmodulins are a common
              feature among eukaryotes? 2) What is  the structure and function of centrin,
              especially in Naegleria  differentiation, what macromolecular structures does
              it form,  and what is its relation to spasmin? Finally, a portion of our 
              research effort continues to be directed toward obtaining DNA-  mediated
              transformation of Naegleria, which would permit us to  use the power of
              molecular genetics to dissect events during  this otherwise ideal
              differentiation, such as the mechanism by  which flagellar calmodulin (CaM-1)
              becomes localized in  peninsular flagella. %%%  This is a project which focuses
              on a group of protozoa on which very  little work is currently being done, but
              which have evolved a  fascinating interplay of cellular events.   The
              protozoan, Naegleria  gruberi,  undergoes a dramatic shift from a crawling,
              amoeboid state  to a swimming state by the de novo formation of flagella, the
              whip-  like structures which motors many  swimming cells.  The work pursues 
              this switch by concentrating on the new structural proteins which  arise in the
              flagellated state, such as the contractile protein,  centrin.   In addition, by
              understanding the developmental control of  genes which are newly transcribed,
              the switch to a new developmental  pathway can be assessed.  The switch may
              involve the expression of  particular calcium binding proteins, or calmodulins.
               The project  focuses on the characterization of the Naegleria centrin and the 
              different forms of calmodulins.  The association of centrins from  Naegleria
              and another protozoan, Vorticella, with itself and other  proteins is examined.
              The nature of this contractile protein is  explored.  The control of
              differential expression of calmodulins will  be approached by testing the
              efficacy of obtai ning transgenic  protists for these studies.  The protists
              can then be transformed  with different genetic variants of calmodulins and
              their effect on  the development of flagella determined. By examining this
              unique  organism, the diversity of microbes and their multiple ways of coping 
              with their environment will be further illuminated.  ***
