Title       : Variable Selection and Related Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1996       
File        : a9404408

Award Number: 9404408
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward I. George   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research will develop and evaluate variable  selection procedures
              for multiple regression and related  problems.  Both the Bayesian and the
              frequentist points of view  will be considered.  From the Bayesian perspective,
              the focus  will be on stochastic search variable selection methods which use  a
              hierarchical mixture model to guide variable selection.  These  methods will
              include a procedure for fast Bayes variable  selection to handle hundreds of
              variables at once, a procedure  for variable selection in generalized linear
              models, a procedure  for variable selection across exchangeable regressions,
              and a  procedure for performing simultaneous variable selection and  outlier
              removal.  From the frequentist perspective, the focus  will be on a new
              criterion for evaluating selection criteria  called risk inflation.  This
              research will entail the application  and generalization of risk inflation to a
              broad set of model  selection problems which includes generalized linear
              models,  order selection procedures for time series models, and  change-point
              selection for estimation in change-point problems.  Risk inflation will also be
              used to gauge the bias of using  variable selection procedures in conjunction
              with heuristic  search methods.  A new class of variable selection procedures 
              which use adaptive dimensionality penalties will also be  developed.     One of
              the main goals of modern statistical methods is to provide  statistical models
              which relate input variables to outputs of  interest.  For example, such models
              are used to predict and  explain annual crop production in agriculture,
              interest rates in  business and economics, cancer incidence in medicine, and
              crime  rates in sociology.  A key component in building such models is  the
              selection of input variables which contain strong predictive  and explanatory
              information.  This component is especially  important because of the recent
              proliferation of large databases  containing vast numbers of potential input
              variables.  The  propos ed research will provide powerful new methods for
              selecting  such input variables for a wide variety of model building 
              situations.
