Title       : Imitation and Female Mate Choice: Experiments and Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1994    
File        : a9404709

Award Number: 9404709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Barfield                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee Alan Dugatkin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    IBN9404709  Dugatkin    One central question in the study of animal
              behavior is how individuals choose their mates.  Much of the work surrounding
              this question focuses on how females choose their mates, and these studies have
              often assumed that the rules females use to pick mates are under some sort of
              genetic control.  Evidence is now mounting, however, that social and cultural
              factors, such as imitation, may also have considerable effects on a female
              animal's decision with whom to mate.  Some of the strongest evidence for female
              mate copying comes from this laboratory on the guppy, Poecilia reticulata. 
              While this work has demonstrated that female guppies copy each other's choice
              of mates, many of the most fundamental and conceptually intriguing questions on
              imitation and mate choice have yet to be investigated experimentally, in this
              system or any other.  Dr. Dugatkin proposes a series of experiments and
              mathematical models of imitation that examine: 1. the interaction between
              genetic and social/cultural factors (imitation) on female mate choice, 2. the
              development of female mate copying rules as animals grow older, 3. the effects
              of hunger-level on the tendency for females to copy each other's choice of
              mates, 4. the relationship between individual recognition and female mates
              copying, and 5. the effects of cultural evolution on the dynamics of female
              mate choice via a family of mathematical models.    This work will provide some
              of the most detailed information yet available on cultural transmission in
              non-primates, and as such will help pave the way for future work designed to
              unravel the relationship between cultural and innate factors and the evolution
              of social behavior.
