Title       : Algorithmic Analysis and Congestion Control of Connection-Oriented Services in
               Large Scale Communication Networks.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1998   
File        : a9404947

Award Number: 9404947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124671             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hisashi Kobayashi hisashi@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9404947  Kobayashi       Network technologies have been progressing rapidly
              toward  faster and larger networks which are capable of providing  integrated
              services.  These technical developments in turn require  advances in analytic
              methodologies that can be effectively used in  the design and control of future
              networks such as ATM-based B-ISDN,  all-optical networks and wireless
              communication networks.  Emerging  high-speed integrated communication services
              require us to analyze  network systems, in which information loss probabilities
              range from  10**-2 (e.g., call connection loss) to as small as 10**-10 (e.g., 
              ATM cell loss).       In this proposed study we will develop a theoretical
              foundtion  for evaluation and control of connection-oriented services, which 
              in particular will enable us to handle this wide range of loss  probabilities.
              We begin by generalizing  the product form solutions  obtained for loss
              networks with fixed routing.  Our formulation  encompasses a broad range of
              state-dependent call generation  patterns, different types of network services,
              and the whole range  of traffic levels. Using our experience in computational
              algorithms  for closed queueing network models, we will develop new practical 
              methods for estimating loss probabilities in connection-oriented  services.  In
              order to insure the accuracy of approximate formulas,  we will develop 
              appropriate error bounds.  A refinement and a  rigorous validation of the
              reduced load approximation method,  also  referred to as the Erlang's fixed 
              point method in the case of  Poisson arrivals, will be attempted for networks
              with state  dependent arrivals.       In parallel with the above algorithmic
              and asymptotic methods,  we will explore a model of connection-oriented network
              services  based on a multi-dimensional Ornstein-Uhlenbeck  diffusion process. 
              The diffusion process approach will allow  us not only to evaluate  more
              general types of networks (i.e.,  loss/queueing networks not  amenable to
              product form solutions) but  also to obtain  time-dependent, i.e., transient,
              solutions for network behavior.   Finally, we will formulate and  solve network
              control policy  problems such as call admission control and routing decisions. 
              ***
