Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Boundary Conditions for Linear Wave Propagation on
               Unbounded Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1994       
File        : a9404488

Award Number: 9404488
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas B. Meade meade@math.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9404488  Meade    The proposer will develop accurate and efficient numerical 
              solution procedures for problems arising from the scattering of 
              electromagnetic waves by an inhomogeneous body. The natural  domain for these
              problems is unbounded --- the exterior of the  scatterer.  This work will
              identify approximate reformulations of  the problem on a bounded domain which
              can be solved by Galerkin  methods, in particular the finite element method. 
              The general  idea is to truncate the unbounded domain through the selection of 
              an appropriate artificial boundary and a corresponding boundary  condition.  An
              exact boundary condition can be used, but its  non-local temporal and/or
              spatial dependence is an obstacle to  efficient numerical computations.  The
              primary objective of this  project is to find approximate boundary conditions
              which are  defined locally, can be implemented numerically, and yield  accurate
              approximations to the exact solution of the scattering  problem.  A major
              challenge will be to develop the mathematical  tools which can be used to
              balance the competing constraints of  computational complexity and the
              different approximation errors.    When an electromagnetic signal hits an
              obstacle, one portion of  the wave continues into the object while another part
              of the wave  is reflected back into the surrounding medium.  The goal of this 
              project is to devise accurate and efficient numerical algorithms  for
              determining the different components of the electromagnetic  wave.  The
              mathematical statement of this problem involves the  solution of partial
              differential equations on an unbounded  domain.  The fact that the domain is
              infinite complicates the  search for an efficient numerical solution of this
              problem.  The  purpose of this research is to identify approximate 
              reformulations of the problem which can be solved numerically  without
              significantly degrading the quality of the computed  solution.  Initial studies
              will be directed towards the  two-dimensional scalar problem.  The ulti mate
              objective is to be  able to solve the vector-valued problem in
              three-dimensional  space.  The numerical solution will call for the solution of
              a  system of hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of equations.  For this
              reason, the proposer will be developing codes which can  be used on
              high-performance parallel computers.  The results from  this project can also
              be applied in a variety of other  applications, including interface problems in
              elasticity and the  scattering of acoustic, seismic, and water waves.
