Title       : Numerical Analysis & Applications of Orthogonal Expansions on Unbounded Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1995     
File        : a9404599

Award Number: 9404599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob A. Weideman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9215,9263,AMPP,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The investigator and co-workers study the theory, implementation,  and
              applications of spectral methods on unbounded domains.  The  term spectral
              method as used here includes not only the  traditional applications involving
              differential equations, but  also the computation of integral transforms and
              special  functions.  The central theme is the optimization of the accuracy  of
              such expansion methods by judicious parameter selection.  This is accomplished
              either through theoretical asymptotic  analysis, or via numerical algorithms
              where the analytical  approach falls short.  Target applications include
              scattering  problems, the computation of integral transforms, and nonlinear 
              waves.    The first part of the project involves, among other things, the 
              computer solution of certain fundamental problems arising in  quantum
              mechanics.  The second part is devoted to the computation  of integral
              transforms.   These formulas arise ubiquitously in  science, in areas such as
              viscoplasticity, geophysics, and shock  waves in diatomic chains.  In
              industrial applications these  transforms can seldom be worked out by hand and
              efficient  computer codes are required for their computation.  Through the use
              of mathematical analysis the investigator aims to  optimize the efficiency of
              such codes.  The third part of the  project involves the computer simulation of
              waves arising in  areas such as laser optics and water.  The challenge here is
              to  ensure that the computer output is a true reflection of the  actual physics
              of the problem.  The project is expected to have an impact not only in
              numerical  mathematics, but also in various branches of technology and 
              engineering such as high-performance computing, materials  science, and optical
              science and engineering.
