Title       : NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program: Studies of Metal Boride Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1995   
File        : a9404687

Award Number: 9404687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward Murdy                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93423              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Trenary mtrenary@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9404687  Trenary    This award supports the foreign travel expenses  for Dr.
              Michael Trenary, Chemistry Department  at the University of Illinois at
              Chicago, to  spend a year in Japan conducting collaborative  research studies
              on metal boride surfaces with  Professor Chuhei Oshima of the Department of 
              Applied Physics at Waseda University in Tokyo.    Metal borides are intriguing
              materials;  extremely hard, chemically inert and possessing  very high melting
              points. Many also have unique  surface properties making them useful in 
              various applications such as use as an electron  emitting cathode in a variety
              of electron  optical devices. Dr. Oshima is a recognized  leader in the surface
              science of rare-earth  hexaborides. Dr Trenary and his students have  recently
              conducted a scanning tunneling  microscopy study of the atomic structure of a 
              lanthanum hexaboride surface and a  mass spectrometric study of oxide
              evaporation  from the oxidized surface. The experiments to  be conducted at
              Waseda University  consist of studies of adsorption and  dissociation of carbon
              monoxide, water and  hydrogen on the lanthanum hexaboride surface,  and the
              growth and characterization on metal  diboride surfaces of graphite-like
              monolayers  containing boron and carbon atoms.  The principle technique to be
              used will be high  resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy.  This research
              work should result in a long term  collaborative interaction between  the two
              research groups in Tokyo and Chicago.      This award is funded under the
              auspices of the  Center for Global Partnership (CGP) of the  Japan Foundation
              under the NSF-CGP  Science Fellowship Program.  ***
