Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Topology to Problemsin Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1994      
File        : a9404261

Award Number: 9404261
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Hirsch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator examines the interplay between topology and  computation. 
              In particular, issues in robot motion planning and  computation with inexact
              data are studied in depth.  Robots  maneuver about in a configurations space of
              allowed  configurations.  The robot controller must have an internal model  of
              its configuration space.  As the robot learns more about the  external world,
              its configuration space will change.  Often these  changes are of a
              fundamentally topological nature: a new obstacle  appears; a new connection is
              found; a passage is too narrow to  enter.  Before one can design algorithms for
              robot motion, one  must understand these topological changes and the manner of
              their  occurrence.  Algorithms for problems of a topological nature will  also
              be studied.  Problems such as "compute the degree of a map  from one manifold
              to another," or "how many components are there  in the complement of a
              polyhedron?" are of a fundamentally  topological type and of interest in the
              field of computer graphics  and combinatorial geometry.  These problems are
              well understood  from a theoretical and ideal perspective, but in practice
              there  are several difficulties.  Real world data comes with errors.  These
              errors raise such issues as, How do we model data with  errors? How does the
              presence of undetected errors affect the  reliability of the algorithm?  What
              is meant by general position  in the presence of errors?       Both robot
              motion planning and computational geometry with  real world data, and real
              world data comes with errors.  Operating  an exact, digital machine with vague
              and uncertain data in a  fundamental problem in robot control.  The word
              "robot" is used  here very generally.  It could be anything from a parts
              arranger  on an assembly line, to a mobile, self-contained exploratory 
              vehicle.  An understanding of the control issues dealt with in  this project
              would have myriad consequences in any industry using  such robots.  The robots
              would be more reliable, flexible, and  a utonomous.
