Title       : Crystallographic and Other Physical Studies of Flavoenzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a9982727

Award Number: 9982727
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $570000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Karplus karplusp@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to carry out crystallographic studies on the
              flavoenzymes old yellow enzyme (OYE), lactate monooxygenase (LMO),
              ferredoxin:NADP + reductase (FNR) and glutathione reductase (GR).  For OYE, the
              binding mode of NADPH and the structures of key mutants will be determined; for
              LMO, the wild type structure will be solved by MAD phasing and followed up by
              analysis of many existing mutants and catalytically informative complexes; for
              FNR, studies of the NADPH binding mode and specificity will be completed; and
              finally ultrahigh resolution crystal structures will be derived for the S.
              carlbergensis OYE, human GR, and corn root ferredoxin reductase. The
              investigations will give insight into the structure-function relations for each
              of these enzyme systems in particular, and increase our understanding of the
              biochemical regulation of flavin chemistry in general. The ultrahigh resolution
              analyses will provide a quantum leap in the level of structural detail
              available and usher in a new era in our structural understanding of flavins and
              flavoenzymes.

The vitamin riboflavin is important because it becomes built
              into metabolic enzymes that carry out reactions crucial for life. In each
              riboflavin containing enzyme (flavoenzyme), the vitamin has a slightly
              different function that is defined by its protein environment. X-ray
              crystallography will be used to investigate the three-dimensional structures
              and chemical mechanisms of four different flavoenzymes that represent three of
              the most prevalent families of flavoenzymes found in nature. 

