Title       : High Performance Software Components for Scientific Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9982205

Award Number: 9982205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles H. Koelbel                      
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288495             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Lumsdaine   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will advance the state of the art of high performance computing by
              the refinement and application of software component technologies. The project
              will use these technologies to build a high-performance library of generic
              components with the performance and flexibility required for complex scientific
              applications. 

Three technical thrusts will support this approach. The
              researchers will develop and extend generic programming analysis and design
              methodologies to create component taxonomies for scientific computing,
              particularly for denoting higher-level domain abstractions and formally
              specifying their interfaces. Generative optimization will exploit these
              abstractions to automate performance tuning and optimization, thus avoiding the
              traditional loss of computational efficiency from high-level abstractions.
              Finally, library development will create highly parameterized components that
              offer maximum functionality and customizability for areas such as numerical
              linear algebra, multi-dimensional arrays, tensor operations, and stencil
              operations. Through the use of generative techniques, the library will be
              highly optimizable and will offer high performance at a reasonable development
              cost. Through the use of generic programming techniques, the library will
              incorporate parallel processing capabilities.

