Title       : Thermoregulation on the Air-Water Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9982076

Award Number: 9982076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116570             (Estimated)
Investigator: George S. Bakken lsgsb@scifac.indstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana State University
	      200 North Seventh Street
	      Terre Haute, IN  478091202    812/237-3551

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This is a comprehensive study of the effect of cold temperatures, wetting, and
              wind on the thermoregulation of mallard ducklings (Anas platyrhynchos). These
              are probably the most important microclimate factors affecting the 
breeding
              biology of waterfowl. However, their effects on the thermoregulation of newly-
              hatched young are virtually unstudied. 

There are good ecological reasons to
              conduct such studies. Within a day or two of hatching, ducklings must forage on
              their own, typically (but not necessarily) by swimming on the surface in
              pursuit of aquatic organisms. Wetting greatly increases heat loss from animals.
              This increased heat loss may or may not be balanced by the heat 
generated by
              swimming activity. Ducklings have remarkably well-developed thermoregulatory
              abilities by the time they begin feeding on their own, but nevertheless have
              been observed to suffer substantial mortality when swimming long distances,
              exposed to cold, wet, windy weather, or both, within the first week of
              hatching. Cold stress may also make ducklings more susceptible to disease and
              increase the risk of predation by increasing the amount of time spent
              foraging.

There are significant physiological questions to be answered. The
              most intriguing is that ducklings go to the water and swim while downy.
              However, the downy young of most other waterbirds (notably including the
              ubiquitous waterfront gulls and quintessentially aquatic penguins) do not
              venture into the water until they have molted into contour feathers. Studies of
              the effect of swimming and wetting by spray or rain on adult birds indicate
              that the contour feathers have nearly optimal properties for water resistance.
              The few available data on down indicate it is much less resistance to wetting.
              The proposed study has several components. First, the PI will determine whether
              swimming on the surface of the water increases heat loss, and whether the heat
              generated as a byproduct of swimming compensates for heat loss to the water.
              Second, the PI will determine the extent to which wind and rain or spray
              increase heat loss, both by increasing heat transfer through the downy pelt and
              by evaporative cooling driven by the difference between air and body surface
              temperature. In both of these studies, the PI will measure the role of
              hypothermia and heat storage in minimizing the energetic cost of
              thermoregulation. Third, the PI will make direct measurements of the effect of
              wetting and immersion on the thermal conductance of downy insulation. Fourth,
              the PI  will examine whether specialized blood vessels that act as heat
              exchangers to regulate heat loss from the feet and legs work as effectively in
              ducklings as they do in adults. Finally, these data will be used to develop
              computer models predicting energy used for temperature regulation and swimming
              under various weather conditions.
The proposed study will be the most
              comprehensive examination to date of the thermoregulatory consequences of
              swimming and cold, windy, wet weather. The results of this study should aid our
              knowledge of the role of weather and climate in avian population and breeding
              biology generally. It will be of particular value in aiding the development of
              more realistic models of the effect of the highly variable climate of the
              Pothole Prairie region of North America on the waterfowl that breed there.

