Title       : Control of Storage Protein Biosynthesis by mRNA Targeting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a9982483

Award Number: 9982483
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338456             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Okita okita@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The major metabolic activities of plant seeds are directed toward the synthesis
              of carbon (in the form of lipids and starch) and nitrogen (in the form of
              storage proteins) reserves.  Although the biochemical processes responsible for
              the biosynthesis of these macromolecules appear to be independent processes,
              evidence gathered over the years have indicated otherwise.  Carbon and nitrogen
              metabolism are inter-related as evidenced by the almost parallel responses
              exhibited by defined genetic mutants and transgenic plants altered in gene
              expression in one of these two processes.  The mechanisms responsible for this
              coordinated expression of carbon and nitrogen reserves are not known.  This
              grant proposes a series of studies to study one aspect of nitrogen metabolism,
              i.e. the control of storage protein biosynthesis in developing rice endosperm. 
              Rice is an excellent system to study storage protein biosynthesis (and its
              relationship to starch synthesis) in that it is one of the few plants that
              synthesize and accumulate both major classes of storage proteins, prolamines
              and glutelins, the latter an 11S globulin.  Moreover, rice stores these
              proteins in different subcellular compartments.  Prolamines are deposited
              directly as protein intracisternal granules within the endoplasmic reticulum
              (ER) lumen, whereas glutelins are transported through the ER and packaged in a
              protein storage vacuole.  Previous studies from this laboratory have
              demonstrated that the RNAs encoding these two classes of storage proteins are
              not localized in a stochastic fashion on the ER.  Instead, prolamine mRNAs are
              highly enriched on the ER membranes that bound the prolamine protein bodies
              (PBs) whereas glutelin mRNAs predominant on the cisternal ER.  The majority of
              the prolamine PBs is distributed near the plasma membrane in the cortex, a
              region enriched in cytoskeleton.  The localization of prolamine mRNAs to the
              cortical region, a distance of 7-15 um from the nucleus, suggests that the
              prolamine RNA itself, and not the coded protein, is targeted to the prolamine
              PBs.  Indeed, results from ongoing studies on the localization of synthetic
              prolamine RNA transcripts in transgenic rice indicate that these RNAs are
              targeted to the prolamine PBs because they contain specific "zip code" signals.
               To better understand this process, experiments are described that will attempt
              to identify these "zip codes", and to identify and characterize the zip code
              binding proteins, which are responsible for the transport and anchoring of the
              prolamine RNAs to the prolamine PBs.  Efforts will also be made to reconstruct
              prolamine RNA movement in cultured and developing endosperm cells, which will
              provide cellular details on the intracellular highways for RNA movement and
              provide clues on the nature of the molecular motor responsible for RNA
              movement.  A second general goal of the project is to determine whether
              glutelin RNAs also possess "zip codes" that target it to a different ER
              subdomain and to determine the spatial relationship between prolamine and
              glutelin RNA localization in the cell.  Future studies will address the
              intracellular location of RNAs that code for enzymes involved in starch
              biosynthesis.  An integrated approach will be taken to achieve these goals, and
              will incorporate the use of biochemical, cellular, molecular and
              ultrastructural techniques.  This study will provide new information on how
              RNAs and, in turn, proteins are sorted in plant cells and how the ER can
              differentiate into unique domains with specific functions.  Moreover, it will
              lead to new insights into the mechanisms that may control utilization of carbon
              and nitrogen and their conversion into storage reserves.


