Title       : Attention During Smooth Pursuit Eye Movements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a9982019

Award Number: 9982019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Van Donkelaar paulvd@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Humans can very accurately follow moving visual targets using smooth pursuit eye
              movements. The objective of the proposed research is to gain a better
              understanding of the contribution of attention to this process. A new dual-task
              paradigm has been developed for this purpose. Subjects will be asked to follow
              a moving visual target with smooth pursuit eye movements while reacting to the
              appearance of a second peripheral target by pressing a button. Any systematic
              variations in the latency of the button pressing will be inferred to be due to
              alterations in the allocation of attention around the pursuit stimulus. By
              varying the timing of appearance, location, and eccentricity of the peripheral
              target relative to the pursuit stimulus it will be possible to examine how
              attention is distributed during pursuit responses. In addition, by changing the
              speed of the pursuit stimulus itself within this dual-task paradigm it will be
              possible to assess how attentional allocation changes as a function of the
              characteristics of the target being pursued. Finally, by manipulating where
              subjects direct their attention by the use of precues it will be possible to
              assess how perturbing the normal spatial allocation of attention influences
              smooth pursuit output. The overall results should provide a better
              understanding of how attention and smooth pursuit eye movements interact. This
              could prove useful in the design of systems and training of persons for
              situations in which smooth pursuit responses are typically elicited (e.g.
              pilots, assembly line workers). In addition, the paradigm itself could be used
              to understand in more detail the relationship between attentional deficits and
              declines in smooth pursuit output in schizophrenic individuals and children
              with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.



