Title       : Functional Analysis of Even-Skipped Regulatory Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a9982715

Award Number: 9982715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $542055             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin E. Kreitman mkre@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Z. Ludwig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1154,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Research into the structure/function relationship and the evolution of the
              even-skipped stripe two (eve stripe 2) element of Drosophila melanogaster,
              arguably the best characterized of all eukaryotic regulatory elements will be
              continued. Considerable evolutionary change has occurred in the eve stripe 2
              element including changes in functionally important binding sites for
              trans-acting transcription factors. Novel binding sites can be seen to emerge
              de novo and pre-existing sites can be seen to disappear. The length of stripe 2
              element also evolves, thus changing the spacing between transcription factor
              binding sites. Yet despite these structural changes the stripe 2 elements from
              several different species, when placed in D. melanogaster, express a reporter
              gene at identical and indistinguishable times and locations as the native eve
              stripe 2. Thus functional conservation is maintained despite structural change
              in the architecture of the element, a strong indication that stabilizing
              selection is the dominant mode of selection governing this element's evolution.
              However a chimeric eve stripe 2 element composed of the left and right halves
              of two functionally conserved elements does not express correctly and raises
              the possibility that epistatic changes are involved in maintaining functional
              stasis in the native element. The specific aims of this work are:
1. To
              further investigate functional differences in native and chimeric eve stripe 2
              elements by phenotypic analysis in late embryos, larvae and adults using two
              different "rescue" techniques
2. To initiate functional studies of evolved
              differences in bicoid and kruppel binding sites in the melanogaster subgroup
              species to determine if compensatory evolution has also occurred in these
              regulatory loci
3. To quantitate expression levels of a lacZ reporter gene
              when driven by native and chimeric eve stripe 2 elements from different species
              of Drosophila and  to determine the molecular basis of evolved differences in
              those levels 
4. To evaluate the generality of results by conducting
              comparative sequence analysis in other Drosophila species as well as in the
              mosquito and housefly.

The long-term objective of the proposed research is
              to understand cis-regulatory sequence evolution in eukaryotes, including the
              mutational and functional mechanisms by which regulatory evolution occurs and
              the selective and non-selective forces at work. Deciphering the rules governing
              the evolution of regulatory sequence evolution is likely to benefit efforts to
              decode whole genome sequences, including humans and therefore is expected to
              have a major impact on advancing knowledge in experimental and computational
              genomics. It will also serve as fertile training ground in these important new
              areas of biological science. 

