Title       : Regulation of Cell Function by RGS Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2001  
File        : a9982891

Award Number: 9982891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kendall J. Blumer kblumer@cellbio.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               As transducers of sensory stimuli and extracellular signals,  G protein coupled
              receptors and the signaling pathways they activate are important regulators of
              cell function throughout development and adult life. They regulate cell
              differentiation, proliferation, motility and membrane excitability, which have
              key roles in living systems.  A fundamental challenge is to determine how cells
              elaborate specific and temporally regulated responses when challenged with
              stimuli that trigger G protein signaling pathways.  New insights into the
              mechanisms governing the specificity and temporal regulation of G protein
              signaling pathways have been provided by the recent discovery of RGS proteins
              (regulators of G protein signaling), a novel family of more than 20 regulatory
              proteins.  RGS proteins can limit the strength or duration of cellular
              responses by acting as GAPs (GTPase activating proteins) that stimulate the
              ability of G protein alpha subunits to hydrolyze GTP.  Certain RGS family
              members can act as effectors, mediating specific responses triggered by agonist
              stimulation.  Because RGS proteins probably have additional functions, further
              studies of these proteins should yield novel insights into the mechanisms
              whereby G proteins control cell function.

The long term objective of this
              project is to delineate the mechanisms whereby cell function is regulated by
              RGS proteins.  Currently the focus of this project is on RGS2, which is
              expressed in various organs and tissues where it potentially regulates a number
              of G protein dependent signaling pathways.  This project will determine if the
              selectivity of RGS2 toward Gq is an important determinant of biological
              function.  These studies will aid in  our understanding of how signals are
              transmitted and regulated in cells.

