Title       : RUI: Computational Modeling of High Level Cortical Motion Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a9982402

Award Number: 9982402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266563             (Estimated)
Investigator: Constance S. Royden   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A person moving through the world must judge his or her own path of motion and
              the three dimensional layout of the scene and identify moving objects in the
              scene. For example, to reach a desired destination and avoid collisions, a
              driver on a busy street must be able to keep the car in its lane, judge the
              motion of other cars and pedestrians and judge where other objects in the scene
              are located. All of these judgments can be made based on the motion of the
              visual images that are focused on the retina.  Experiments show that people are
              remarkably adept at accomplishing these tasks, which implies that there must be
              neural mechanisms that compute observer motion, scene layout and the presence
              of moving objects.  In this set of studies a computational model of this neural
              processing will be developed in order to investigate the underlying neural
              processes that compute these motion properties.  The model will be based on
              current knowledge of how individual neurons in the Middle Temporal area (MT) of
              the visual cortex respond to visual motion.  The MT area is known to have many
              neurons that respond well to motion.  The purpose of building such a
              computational model is two-fold.  First, it will show how neurons in visual
              cortex may calculate the direction of observer motion and the relative depth of
              surfaces and how they identify and locate moving objects in the scene during
              observer motion.  In addition, the model should generate clear, testable
              predictions about the expected behavior of neurons that use motion in the image
              to compute information about the scene.  These predictions will lead to
              additional experiments that will further extend our knowledge of these
              neurons.
   The computational model will be evaluated by running simulations
              that examine its ability to compute the direction of observer motion, the scene
              layout and the location of moving objects.  The results of the simulations will
              show whether the model performs as well as human observers and whether the
              output of the model replicates the behavior of human observers during
              experimental testing.  Further tests will examine whether the computational
              units in the model behave in the same way as cells in the motion processing
              areas of the visual cortex, such as MT and the Medial Superior Temporal area,
              the part of visual cortex thought to be involved in computing the direction of
              observer motion. The implementation and testing of this model of neural
              processing of visual motion will lead to increased understanding of how the
              brain analyzes the visual world.

