Title       : Evolution of Novel Ontogenies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a9982644

Award Number: 9982644
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudolf A. Raff rraff@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Raff
9982644

The goal of this project is to understand the mechanisms by
              which development evolves, and how developmental processes themselves influence
              or constrain the direction of evolution.  Two species of sea urchins that are
              closely related but have highly different modes of early development will be
              used.   Heliocidaris tuberculata develops in the ancestral indirect mode via a
              feeding larva, whereas Heloicidaris erythrogramma develops directly from embryo
              to juvenile adult.  The project will identify genes that underlie developmental
              differences between the two species, define their expression patterns, and test
              their roles in producing an evolutionarily changed mode of development.  The
              key to understanding the prospective role of gene expression changes in the
              evolution of early development comes from the recent creation of cross-species
              hybrids between the two species.  Despite the different modes of development of
              the parent species, eggs of H. erythrogramma fertilized by H. tuberculata sperm
              develop via novel pathway in which a number of the primitive pluteus features
              are restored by the action of dominant factors derived from the paternal
              genome.  Hybrids will be used to study how new larval features are generated,
              anad to isolate genes that regulate development of larval features.  The
              specific aims are to (1) Determine the direction of cell lineage tracer dyes. 
              Transformations of expression territories will be investigated using
              tissue-specific gene markers, and defined within the context of transformed
              cell lineages.  (2) The expression patterns of genes isolated as candidates for
              the regulators of larval features modified or lost in evolution will be
              determined.  (3) The function of genes implicated in appearance of larval
              features will be tested by over/ectopic expression experiments in the H.
              erythrogramma embryo.  (4) Dominant inhibition of gene expression will also be
              used to study the roles of candidate genes.  Specific phenotypes can be
              predicted, and thus the results of these experiments interpreted.  The results
              of this project will provide an insight into the genic mechanisms that underlie
              evolutionary modifications of developmental processes, and into the role of
              constraints in the evolution of developmental process.
