Title       : Dynamics of Elementary Processes in Solutions of Biopolymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a9982735

Award Number: 9982735
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Schurr schurr@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB 9982735
Schurr, J. M.

The molecular mechanisms of DNA bending, the
              effects of decreasing salt concentration on the structures and thermodynamics
              of supercoiled plasmids, and the effects of the osmotic exclusion agent
              polyethylene glycol (PEG) on supercoiling free energies will be investigated by
              a variety of methods.  Analytical theory, as well as Monte Carlo and Brownian
              Dynamics simulations, will be employed to extract the relevant parameters and
              assist the interpretation of results.  A transition in secondary structure
              caused by  the bending strain in 250-350 bp DNA circles will be investigated by
              measuring both the torsion elastic constants and ethidium binding constants
              (via fluorescence methods) and also the circular dichroism (CD) spectra of ~280
              and ~320 bp circles.  A newly developed transient polarization grating (TPG)
              instrument will be further refined and applied to assess the dynamic bending
              rigidity and equilibrium persistence length of ~175-250 bp linear DNAs. The
              contribution of slowly relaxing fluctuations between differently curved
              secondary structures to the equilibrium flexibility of DNA will be estimated
              from such measurements.  Finally, the translational diffusion coefficients and
              static structure factors of supercoiled plasmids will be measured via dynamic
              and static light scattering (DLS and SLS), and compared with the results of
              Monte Carlo simulations to assess the structures and persistence lengths under
              low salt conditions.  The effects of PEG on the supercoiling free energy will
              be assessed by standard topoisomer analysis methods.  Possible effects of PEG
              on secondary structure will also be studied by fluorescence and CD
              methods.

DNA is bent and also twisted in most or all of its biologically
              important states, including its supercoiled states and its complexes with
              transcriptional activators.  Detailed knowledge of the nature and energetics of
              bending is essential to understand the function and stability of such states.
              In this work, structural transitions induced by the bending of short linear
              DNAs into small circles, and also by the supercoiling of long DNAs at low salt
              concentration, will be studied to illuminate the process wherein bending alters
              the secondary structure of the DNA.  

