Title       : SGER: Intelligent Data Fusion and Model-based Reasoning to Acquire and Transfer
               Knowledge from LTER Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9982954

Award Number: 9982954
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gilbert D. Starks   (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Alm  (Principal Investigator former)
              Stuart H. Rubin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510601   Biology of Pest Organisms               
Program Ref : 9184,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Award Abstract

DBI 9982954; SGER: Intelligent Data Fusion and Model-based
              Reasoning to Acquire and Transfer Knowledge from LTER Sites

The development
              of algorithms and a prototype software system for intelligent mining and fusion
              of ecological data is proposed. The software system, with human guidance, will
              produce a rule-based model that can be used to predict the response of a
              landscape to environmental driving variables, disturbances, or management
              events. The particular event of focus is prescribed burning for dry prairies.
              The tool will help ecologists to acquire knowledge about soils and vegetation
              at one site, for which data are abundant, and transfer the knowledge to another
              site, for which data are scant. 

Although the approach is general, the
              project will be conducted using data from the Cedar Creek Long Term Ecological
              Research (LTER) site in Minnesota (with abundant data) and the Newaygo Prairies
              Research Natural Area (RNA) in Michigan (with scant data). The site in Michigan
              has similar soils and vegetation to that in Minnesota.

The prototype is
              expected to lead to advances in ecological knowledge engineering. Future
              versions should be useful to scientists trying to formulate research questions
              at new research sites where data are scant. Such a tool must accommodate both
              imprecision and lack of data, but at the same time, there is a need for greater
              spatial resolution in ecological research. Therefore, the work will emphasize
              rapid spatial collection of data in a natural language format using fuzzy
              sets.

The proposed software tool will accept as input fuzzy data collected
              at high spatial resolution. In addition, an auxiliary voice recognition
              software/hardware system will be developed to facilitate collection of the
              fuzzy data in the form of natural language. The data will be recorded as fuzzy
              descriptions, like "Andropogon scoparius (crisp variable) is somewhat (fuzzy
              hedge) dominant (fuzzy primary term) in a plot that is heavily (hedge)
              vegetated (primary)." The natural language technique should provide for greater
              spatial resolution and perhaps no loss of precision: There is psychological
              evidence in the literature that response consistency across investigators might
              be more consistent if they are allowed to use natural language rather than
              forcing them to provide a graded, numerical estimate (like percent cover) to
              describe a fuzzy concept.

Using a World Wide Web, client-side (Java) version
              of the rule-based simulator, an attempt will be made to elicit knowledge from
              ecologists working at the Cedar Creek LTER site as well as other experts. The
              experts will be contacted and invited to explore the online, rule-based
              simulation, which will have explanatory capability and will allow for storing
              suggested rule changes in the database. Thus, the simulator will aid
              communication among scientists. The overall result will be a new technique for
              knowledge acquisition and transfer from LTER and other databases.

