Title       : Primary Processes in Bacterial Photosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a9982186

Award Number: 9982186
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $820000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Feher gfeher@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB 9982186
Feher, G.



The primary process of photosynthesis takes place
              in an integral membrane protein-pigment complex called the reaction center.
              Light produces a charge separation and initiates a set of electron transfer
              reactions that result in the reduction of the terminal acceptor, which is a
              ubiquinone (QB). QB becomes doubly reduced and protonated, leaves the reaction
              center and initiates the formation of the proton gradient that provides the
              driving force for ATP formation. The main questions associated with the primary
              processes are associated with electron and proton transfers. The kinetics and
              mechanisms of the electron transfer reaction and the mechanism of protonation
              of the doubly reduced QB, which is buried inside the reaction center and,
              therefore, not accessible to protons from the outside will be investigated.
              Protons reach reduced QB by a charge relay mechanism involving protonatable
              residues and water molecules. The problem is to identify the constituents of
              the proton transfer chain. Site directed mutagenesis and the high resolution
              X-ray structure is used to predict several possible pathways. To determine
              which of these is the most effective, the binding of divalent transition
              metals, which block proton transfer, will be used. By determining the position
              of the cations by X-ray diffraction, the point of entry of protons and hence
              the starting point of the dominant pathway can be identified.

The aim of
              this research is to contribute toward an understanding of the primary processes
              in photosynthesis, i.e., the mechanism of conversion of electromagnetic energy
              into chemical energy. This process is of utmost importance as it provides the
              energy for all life on Earth. The research is focused on the photosynthetic
              processes in purple bacteria (e.g. Rhodobacter sphaeroides). Photosynthetic
              bacteria, because of their relative simplicity provide an excellent model
              system to study photosynthesis. The findings are expected to be of general
              applicability to other biological systems and mechanisms, foremost to green
              plant photosynthesis and to other bioenergetic processes

