Title       : Comparative Study of Adaptive Radiation in Iguanian Lizards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a9982736

Award Number: 9982736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan B. Losos losos@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan Larson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin de Queiroz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9982736
Losos, Larson & deQueiroz

A central goal of biology is to understand
              processes responsible for biodiversity.  Of particular interest are "adaptive
              radiations"-situations in which one ancestral species diversified to produce a
              variety of descendants adapted to use different parts of the environment.  Most
              previous studies of adaptive radiation have emphasized unique features of
              different radiations rather than a search for common patterns.  Because these
              studies differ in type of organism, time scale, method of analysis, and
              characters considered, it is perhaps not surprising that comparisons of these
              studies reveal more differences than similarities. What is needed is a
              comparative study of adaptive radiation among closely related organisms using
              consistent methodology to test the hypothesis that general patterns of adaptive
              radiation exist. Regular patterns in the evolution of Anolis lizards on
              different Caribbean islands suggest that adaptive radiations may evolve in
              similar ways.  Whether other groups of lizards show similar patterns is
              unknown.  
	We propose to study independent radiations of iguanian lizards to
              test hypotheses suggested  by our studies of Caribbean anoles.  The integrative
              and multidisciplinary approaches to the study of adaptive evolution and
              radiation developed in our earlier studies will be extended to mainland anoles,
              Australian agamids, Liolaemus, and Sceloporus. We focus on iguanian lizards
              because they share, at a broad level, similarities in body form, behavior, and
              ecology. Each group is a worthy subject in its own right; in addition, their
              close evolutionary relationship to Caribbean anoles makes them ideal for
              testing hypotheses about adaptive radiation derived from our studies of
              Caribbean anoles.
	For each lizard group, we will derive evolutionary trees
              using data from DNA. Using these trees, we will test the hypotheses that
              evolutionary change in body form is linked to evolutionary change in functional
              capabilities which, in turn, lead to evolutionary change in habitat use and
              behavior. To test these hypotheses, field studies of behavior and ecology will
              be complemented by laboratory studies of morphology and functional
              capabilities.  We will then compare the pattern of evolutionary diversification
              in each lizard group to see if similarities exist or, conversely, whether each
              group has had its own unique evolutionary path.



