Title       : Identification of Functional Amino Acids in the G Protein Alpha-Subunit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9982657

Award Number: 9982657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 1,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Gundersen gundersn@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are vital to a wide variety of
              physiological processes such as vision, hormone response, olfaction, and
              development.  G protein-mediated signal transduction involves a complex network
              of receptors and second messenger pathways, and proper regulation of the
              network is essential for proper response of the system.  A detailed analysis of
              the functional domains of the G protein alpha-subunit has been initiated by
              screening a library of random mutations in the subunit, G alpha2, of the slime
              mold, Dictyostelium.  The function of G alpha2 function is essential for the
              developmental life cycle of this organism.  It regulates three major response
              pathways in the developing cells: cyclic AMP signaling, chemotaxis, and
              differentiation.  The library of the random G alpha2 mutants has been screened
              for defects in the initiation of development using a Dictyostelium cell line,
              MYC2, that otherwise is unable to enter the developmental stage because it
              lacks its own wild-type G alpha2 gene. Several G alpha2 mutations that are
              unable to rescue the developmental phase when transformed into MYC2 have been
              isolated using a series of simple phenotypic screens.  The G alpha2-containing
              plasmids from developmental mutants were recovered and sequenced to identify
              the G alpha2 mutations which result in defective function.  Those mutations
              that have not been previously identified will be examined to determine the
              biochemical defect.  Mutants will be assayed for defects in the regulation of
              adenylyl cyclase, guanylyl cyclase and phospholipase C, the three major
              effectors activated by G alpha2.  Alpha-subunit interactions with its receptor
              and the beta-gamma complex, as well as GTP binding and hydrolysis will also be
              examined.  Placement of the mutations within the context of a three-dimensional
              model based on the alpha-subunit crystal structure of transducin will be used
              to assign functional roles to the mutated amino acid residues. The G alpha2
              sequences that contain multiple mutations (roughly half), will be modified
              through site-directed mutagenesis to isolate the causative mutation.
