Title       : Control of Embryonic Polarity and Translation in C. elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a9982944

Award Number: 9982944
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385578             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Evans tom.evans@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9982944
Evans

In many animal species, polarized cells divide to generate
              daughter cells
that differ in developmental potential.  The mechanisms
              involved are largely
unknown.  In C. elegans embryos, polarized cell division
              causes key mRNAs to
be translated in localized domains, which in turn creates
              differences
between early blastomeres.  The translation of glp-1 mRNA is
              restricted to
anterior cells by regulatory elements in its 3' untranslated
              region (3'
UTR).  GLP-1 protein is a conserved membrane receptor that is
              required for
anterior development. The central hypothesis is that glp-1 mRNA
              is
controlled by a regulatory system that is connected to asymmetric
              cell
division and contributes to embryonic polarity. For this project,
              the
following questions will be addressed. (1) What are the gene products
              that
restrict the translation of glp-1 mRNA to anterior cells of the embryo?  
              A
novel functional screen will be used to clone new genes that control
              GLP-1
localization and early polarity.  (2)What are the roles of these
              gene
products in the control of translation and polarity?  Mutations in
              these
genes will be used to examine their function in early
              embryogenesis.
Antibody and mRNA probes will be used to examine the pathways
              that lead to
localized expression of cell fate regulators in the embryo.  RNA
              binding
assays will be used to determine if new proteins control, or are
              components,
of factors that bind to the glp-1 3' UTR and regulate translation.
              These
experiments will lead to the discovery of the molecular networks
              that
connect cell polarity and cell division to the control of mRNA
              translation.
Because the few known components are conserved between nematodes
              and
mammals, this project will likely uncover fundamental mechanisms of
              mRNA
regulation and cell specification, processes that are critical to
              human
development and health.  In addition, this work may lead to novel
              strategies
to control the expression of genes that influence human disease. 
              Finally,
this work could also lead to new ways of controlling nematode
              parasites
harmful to agriculture or human health.





