Title       : Kinetics of Ion Channels by Atomically Detailed Computer Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2002    
File        : a9982524

Award Number: 9982524
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465742             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ron Elber ron@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9263,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Computing ion permeation through channels directly from atomically detailed
              models is far from trivial due to the time scale limitation of the popular
              Molecular Dynamics approach.  The goal of this work is to use an atomically
              detailed model of the channel to compute its function.  A novel computational
              method, based on a stochastic path formulation, will be used to study the
              channel kinetics on relevant biological time scales. 
The new technique
              extends time scales of simulations by many orders of magnitude. A novel kinetic
              cycle that provides an easier sampling procedure to compute differences in the
              weights of trajectories (and relative rates as a function of different
              voltages, different ions, mutations, etc.) will be employed.

Interiors of
              cells are separated from the rest of the world by membranes that prevent
              uncontrolled entries and exits of solvated molecules. Channels (protein
              molecules that are embedded in the membrane) enable selective permeation that
              is essential for the survival of the cell.   The goal of this research is to
              study ion transport through a channel, using a novel computational technique
              that was developed recently. This new technique makes it possible to compute
              atomically detailed trajectories of ion transport at relevant time scales.
              Computing the experimental observables, with a direct link to biological
              function, will open new opportunities for synergy of theory and experiment and
              will further advance quantitative knowledge of structure-function relationship
              in ion channels. 

This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics and
              Signal Transduction Programs in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
              Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Computational
              Mathematics Program in the Division of  Mathematical Sciences in the
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate. 


