Title       : Purchase of Light Scattering Instrumentation for Research in Polymer Synthesis
               and Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a9982276

Award Number: 9982276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jamal Ghoroghchian jghoroghchian@wcupa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Felix E. Goodson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Chester U of Pennsylv
	      College Ave & High Street
	      West Chester, PA  19383    215/436-1000

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF)
              Program will enable the Department of Chemistry at West Chester University of
              Pennsylvania to purchase a light scattering detector and accessories.  This
              equipment will be used primarily by junior faculty member Felix E. Goodson,
              whose research focuses on polymer synthesis and characterization. 
              Specifically, Dr. Goodson will use the instrumentation to determine the
              molecular weights of the polymers synthesized, and to study the molecular
              weight vs. radius of gyration dependencies.   In one project, he will
              investigate copolymers with alternating rigid and flexible segments and their
              structure-properties relationships.  In another project, he will explore solid
              phase synthesis of novel polymers with precisely defined molecular weights. 
              

The light scattering instrument is a pivotal tool for determining molecular
              weights of polymers and the effect of molecular weight on physical and
              materials properties of interest.  These studies should lead to a greater
              understanding of factors that lead to the optimization of these properties,
              which will in turn improve their technological applications.  The light
              scattering instrumentation will also allow students to gain hands-on experience
              with a fundamental technique of polymer characterization.


