Title       : CAREER: Comparative Biodiversity and Community Ecology of Chemosynthetic
               Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a9982999

Award Number: 9982999
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258023             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cindy L. Van Dover cindy_vandover@wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1690      EDUCATION/HUMAN RESOURCES,OCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1075,1319,9178,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This CAREER Development Plan will focus on integrating undergraduate and
              graduate students into a creative research program focused on several aspects
              of the ecology of deep?sea hydrothermal vents, with opportunities for student
              engagement through every stage of the research effort, from the initial field
              sampling to final preparation of manuscripts. It also will bring research into
              the classroom, through development of research?oriented laboratories and of a
              course on Life in Extreme Environments that features the body of work on
              hydrothermal vents to which the PI is a significant contributor.

The
              investigator will address three fundamental issues in the ecology of
              chemosynthetic communities: 1) Community structure of hydrothermal vents, 2)
              Sulfide as an abiotic control on species composition at vents, and 3)
              Comparative trophic and reproductive studies of mussel bed fauna. These
              research programs will offer abundant opportunities for undergraduate and
              graduate research and they will address specific issues identified as current
              priorities of the NSF?RIDGE Program.

Educational goals of the PI and The
              College of William & Mary will be supported in 3 ways: Research Mentoring ?
              Formal research experience in the field and laboratory will be provided to 4
              undergraduates, 1?2 Master's students and 1 Ph.D. student each year. Curriculum
              Development ? A new lecture course on Life in Extreme Environments will be
              developed for advanced undergraduates and graduate students. Incorporating
              Research into Teaching ? Process?oriented laboratories will be developed to
              replace the more traditional survey approach to invertebrate zoology. The new
              emphasis will be on functional biology and will be based on methods and issues
              found in the very recent literature and which take advantage of specific
              opportunities afforded by proximity to Chesapeake Bay. A research?oriented
              approach for one or two of the labs at the end of the semester will be
              introduced once the new laboratories are established, where students conduct
              experiments they design themselves.

