Title       : Terascale Data Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2001   
File        : a9982297

Award Number: 9982297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 15,  1999   
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $593536             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chandrajit L. Bajaj bajaj@cs.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1595,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Today's computer simulations and experiments often produce huge amounts of data
              that need to be seen and interpreted to explain the underlying phenomena.
              Conventional approaches to this visualization and analysis are likely to fail
              or have limited scope when used in isolation. A comprehensive end-to-end
              framework that integrates the data source, storage, servers, network, and the
              visualization client is critical for delivering scalable performance on a range
              of hardware platforms and datasets. The complete solution makes it possible to
              examine vast amounts of data that were never available before, and achieve true
              understanding of the science that produced the data. In particular, we will
              examine data from subsurface modeling projects (thus understanding the flow of
              groundwater and oil reservoirs) and the ASCI program (thus providing insight
              into advanced physics).

This project will develop a framework for
              interrogative visualization of terascale datasets. The basis of this framework
              is a suite of compressed multiresolution representation and data streaming
              techniques that adapt in an error-controlled manner to available computational
              resources. Used in conjunction with fully threaded visualization servers and
              clients for parallel performance and 1/0 optimizations for out-of-core
              computations at both server and client ends, the system should provide seamless
              scalable performance. This is part of a long-term project at UT Austin to
              develop a comprehensive framework for multi-scale visualization and simulation
              for terascale problems, with a tight coupling between modeling, simulation, and
              visualization. The proposed project deals strictly with progressive
              interrogative visualization of off line terascale datasets. Other funding will
              extend the work to support interrogative steering of terascale physical
              simulations as well. Our primary source of terascale data is from massively
              parallel physical simulations of time dependent phenomena being performed at
              the Center for Subsurface Modeling (CSM) at the University of Texas at Austin
              (UT). To ensure a wider scope and general applicability of our techniques, we
              will also validate them on terascale simulation data sets made available by
              researchers at NASA Ames (simulation of supersonic flows), and by the DOE
              research laboratories (simulation of shock-waves in 
