Title       : Thyroxine and Seasonality in American Tree Sparrows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2001     
File        : a9982281

Award Number: 9982281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred E. Wilson fewilson@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The common observation that thyroidectomy blocks the transition from the
              breeding season to the nonbreeding season has led to the concept that thyroid
              hormone plays a key role in the termination of seasonal reproduction.  Dr.
              Wilson's conceptual model, based on extensive studies on the obligately
              photoperiodic American tree sparrow (Spizella arborea), envisions a more
              pervasive role of thyroid hormone in seasonality and includes thyroid
              hormone-dependent control of gonadal growth and postnuptial molt as well as
              thyroid hormone-dependent control of gonadal regression.  Recent data from his
              laboratory support the hypothesis that thyroxine (is the tissue-active thyroid
              hormone that) acts in the brain to program photostimulated American tree
              sparrows for seasonality.  Thyroxine-dependent programming occurs early during
              photostimulation and resembles an organizational-like process in that thyroxine
              is not later required for expression of seasonality.  Knowing where thyroxine
              acts in the brain is essential for advancing understanding of the physiological
              basis of seasonality.  Using an acute model system, wherein a single injection
              of thyroxine on the first day of photostimulation programs thyrodectomized male
              American tree sparrows for seasonality, coupled with immunocytochemical and
              autoradiographic techniques, he expects to reveal potential "programmable"
              cells.  Revealing such cells will provide a starting point for exploring the
              neural networks and/or glial connections that facilitate thyroxine-dependent
              programming of seasonality and for studying the cellular mechanism of thyroid
              hormone action.
