Title       : CAREER: Robust Controllers for Large-Scale Interconnected Systems: Applications
               to Web Handling Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9982071

Award Number: 9982071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Prabhakar R. Pagilla pagilla@ceat.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1057,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Prabhakar R. Pagilla, Oklahoma State University
9982071
CAREER: Robust
              Controllers for Large-Scale Interconnected Systems: 
	Applications to Web
              Handling Systems

Large-scale interconnected systems appear in a variety of
              engineering applications 
such as large structures, power systems and
              manufacturing processes. Web handling 
systems for web processing lines are
              true examples of large-scale interconnected 
dynamic systems with a large
              number of control and measurement variables. A web is 
any material in
              continuous flexible strip form which is very long compared to its 
width and
              very wide compared to its thickness. Examples include paper, fabrics,
              
adhesive tape, photographic film and strip metals. Modeling and robust
              control of 
large-scale interconnected systems with applications to web
              handling systems is the 
focus of this research. Accurate dynamic models for
              the web and the basic elements of 
web handling systems, such as accumulators
              and dancers, will be developed. Based on 
these models robust decentralized
              controllers will be developed. Significant 
practical problems in web
              processes such as disturbances due to misalignment of 
rollers and improperly
              wound rolls will be studied, and robust control schemes to 
reject these type
              of disturbances will be designed. Research activities are 
integrated closely
              with education plans through common usage of equipment and 
bringing research
              problems into undergraduate and graduate curriculum. The education 
plan
              includes distance learning activities such as teaching courses via
              
two-way-compressed-video and developing short courses for practicing
              engineers. The 
proposed work has significant impact on improving the
              performance of continuous web 
process lines. The theory development focuses
              on fundamental issues and general 
control structures for large-scale systems
              and hence it will be relevant to other 
applications. The proposed distance
              learning activities and short course preparation 
will provide practicing
              engineers to get easy access to university courses.







