Title       : Theoretical Studies of van der Waals Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1999  
File        : a9982134

Award Number: 9982134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Krzysztof Szalewicz szalewic@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Krzysztof Szalewicz of the U. of Delaware is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to further develop and apply symmetry-adapted
              perturbation theory (SAPT) to intermolecular interactions.  The SAPT partitions
              intermolecular potentials into electrostatic, exchange, induction, and
              dispersion terms.  This enables a physical interpretation and connects
              potential energy surfaces to monomer properties.  Applications include spectra
              of small van der Waal complexes, and the thermodynamic and structural
              properties of liquid water and argon.  Modifications of the SAPT methodology,
              including parallelization and localized orbital approximations, will allow its
              extension to larger, biologically relevant systems.

This research is aimed
              at increasing our understanding of intermolecular interactions.  These
              phenomena, although weak compared to the forces bonding molecules internally,
              are nonetheless responsible for an extensive range of chemical and biological
              phenomena, such as hydrogen bonding between DNA base pairs and hydrophobic
              repulsions between water and the surface of proteins.  Although theoretical in
              nature, this research is strongly coupled to experiment through interpretation
              and prediction of thermodynamic and structural properties. 
