Title       : Exploring the Role of Grid-Enabled OpenMP in Adaptive Mesh Calculations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2001     
File        : a9982160

Award Number: 9982160
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard S. Hirsh                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370398             (Estimated)
Investigator: Willy Zwaenepoel willy@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Cox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Advances in computer and network technologies will soon make it possible to
              harness the collective computing power of distributed supercomputer systems as
              a Computational Power Grid (or Grid for short). Grid computing will entail
              coping with unusually high latencies and low bandwidths. To use such a Grid
              effectively as a platform for scientific computing will require new algorithms
              and programming methodologies along with compiler and run-time support to
              simplify the program development process.

The scope of this problem is so
              broad that we believe that effective technologies can best be developed through
              focusing on concrete application domains. This proposal will perform an
              exploratory study to explore the development of compiler and runtime technology
              as well as algorithmic techniques for supporting largescale, parallel,
              structured adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) calculations in Computational Fluid
              Dynamics (CID) on the Grid. The project will be an interdisciplinary study
              consisting of applications scientists from NCSA and computer scientists from
              Rice and University of Houston.

This proposal, therefore, will carry out a
              study to see whether such highly complex AMR applications can be efficiently
              run on the Grid. The course of this work will be exploring several different
              algorithmic strategies for supporting AMR on Grids. This will also entail
              developing innovative compiler technology and language extensions to the OpenMP
              standard that allow it to provide Grid-based support for such AMR applications.
              Lastly, resources (nodes, network connections) in the Grid computational
              environment are often contended. Therefore a Grid-enabled application has to be
              able to speculatively adapt to changing Grid resources. The proposal will build
              up tools that monitor the application's performance on the Grid as well as the
              available Grid resources. Information from these tools will be made available
              to the AMR application through standard interfaces in our OpenMP API so that
              the AMR application can speculatively adapt to changing Grid resources.

