Title       : Marine carbon reservoir effects on radiocarbon ages of human bone from south
               coastal Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a9982152

Award Number: 9982152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Owen owenbruce@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sonoma State University
	      1801 East Cotati Avenue
	      Rohnert Park, CA  949283609    707/664-2156

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With  National Science Foundation support, Dr. Bruce Owen will obtain
              radiocarbon dates on a series of  human skeletons and associated archaeological
              materials excavated in the southern coastal region of Peru. Samples will be
              submitted to the University of Arizona AMS facility. Peru is of interest to
              many archaeologists because the region saw the rise of "pristine"
              civilizations, which developed independently rather than through contact with
              advanced peoples in other parts of the world. Although the Incan empire,
              described and conquered by the Spanish, is best known, it was preceded by
              several others. In coastal Peru the oldest sites date to more than 10,000 years
              in age and it is possible to trace development in time from original small
              hunting and gathering bands to more complex forms of social organization.
              Detailed research of this type however must be grounded in a secure absolute
              chronology and therefore considerable attention has been focussed on dating
              different cultural phases. Because preservation of organic material is
              excellent human skeletal remains are often recovered during excavation and
              small samples can be radiocarbon dated. What Dr. Owen and other scientists have
              noted is an apparent discrepancy between dates derived from human skeletal vs.
              other organic materials. Dates from humans who lived near the coast often
              appear unexpectedly old. It has been hypothesized that the reason for this lies
              in the substantial marine component of the foods people ate. The upwelling
              along the Pacific coast results in water rich in "old carbon" which is
              significantly different from its atmospheric counterpart. When one eats such
              seafood this old carbon is supposedly incorporated into the bone resulting in
              excessively old dates. Dr. Owen wishes to test this hypothesis by dating paired
              samples. In his excavations he has recovered human skeletons in association
              with wool clothing. If one assumes, not unreasonably, that the garments were
              made for the individuals, then both wool and skeletal samples should be the
              same age. If the bone gives consistently earlier radiocarbon dates, then the
              "old carbon" hypothesis will be confirmed. This approach also provides a
              potential technique for determining the degree of marine food in an
              individual's diet. The work is important because it will improve the
              chronological framework for prehistoric research in a crucial geographic area.
