Title       : SICB SYMPOSIUM: New Approaches to the Study of Marine Plant-Animal
               Interactions., to be held at the SICB meeting in Atlanta, Georgia, January 4-8,
               2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1999  
File        : a9982794

Award Number: 9982794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn L. Van Alstyne kathyva@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dianna K. Padilla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9117,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal seeks funds for a symposium on Marine Plant-Animal Interactions to
              be held at the Society for Intregrative and Comparative Biology (SICB) meetings
              in Atlanta, Georgia from January 4-8, 2000.  Plant-animal interactions are
              fundemental importance to all areas and subdisciplines in Ecology.  They have
              been a rich area of study and the focus on many innovative areas of research in
              terrestrial systems.  Although many areas of research that have been used by
              terrestrial scientists are appropriate for marine systems, there are other
              areas of research that are uniquely marine because the marine environment is
              physically different from the terrestrial environment and because
              differenttypes of organisms inhabit it.  Therefore, some questions are more
              amenable or difficult to answer in marine systems than terrestrial systems, and
              often the types of research approaches appropriate to marine systems differ
              from research approaches in    terrestrial systems.                            
                                                                                             
                                                   The PIs goals are to use this symposium to
              provide a platform that will focus attention on new, innovative areas of marine
              plant-animal research that will carry the PIs into the next century.  The PIs
              propose to have researches who have worked from both the prespectives of the
              plants and the animals put forward new ideas and proposed directions for future
              study that are ripe for development.  In addition, the PIs will include areas
              of ecological dynamics, where process based questions are most often studied. 
              The researchers who will contribute to this symposium include a mix of older,
              established scientists whose works are viewed as classic in the field, and
              younger scientist who have already demonstrated the ability to take the field
              into innovative new directions.  This symposium will help to a rejuvenation of
              the field of marine plant-animal interactions and provide a path for new
              research into the next century.
