Title       : Analysis of Chromosome Condensation and Cohesion in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a9982367

Award Number: 9982367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher A. Makaroff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
	As part of studies to better understand the molecular and biochemical
              processes that occur during meiosis, a T-DNA tagged, synaptic mutant of
              Arabidopsis, syn1, has been characterized.  The syn1 mutation disrupts
              chromosome condensation and pairing prior to leptonema of meiosis I and results
              in fragmentation of the chromosomes.  Arabidopsis SYN1 has been isolated and
              found to exhibit similarity to S. pombe RAD21 and RAD21-like proteins, which
              are required for chromosome condensation and sister chromatid cohesion during
              mitosis.  Therefore, Arabidopsis SYN1 is a RAD21-like protein that is required
              for chromosome condensation and sister chromatid cohesion during meiosis. 
              Based on similarity to SYN1, two additional Arabidopsis RAD21 homologues, SYN2
              and SYN3 have recently been isolated and are being characterized.  Experiments
              proposed here are designed to further characterize Arabidopsis SYN1, SYN2 and
              SYN3 and understand how they participate in chromosome condensation and sister
              chromatid cohesion.  It has been demonstrated that syn1 plants are defective in
              chromosome condensation and sister-chromatid cohesion during meiosis; however
              it is not clear what role SYN1 plays in these processes or how the two
              processes are linked.  Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) experiments
              will be conducted to examine chromosome pairing and sister-chromatid cohesion
              during meiosis in syn1 plants.  In addition, the distribution of SYN1 on
              chromosomes will be investigated to determine when and where it is localized
              and if it is involved in cohesion along the chromosome arms, the centromeres or
              both.  Finally altered forms of SYN1 will be introduced into syn1 plants to
              begin to identify regions of the protein that are necessary for function . 
              Based on their sequence, it is very likely that SYN2 and SYN3 play important
              roles in chromosome condensation and/or sister chromatid cohesion; however it
              is not clear if they function during meiosis, mitosis or both.  Also, it is not
              clear if RAD21-like proteins function in a same way during mitosis and meiosis.
               These questions will be addressed through the isolation and characterization
              of lines defective in SYN2 and SYN3.  Expression studies to examine the
              tissue-specificity and timing of expression of the genes as well as
              immunolocalization experiments to examine the distribution of the proteins on
              chromosomes, will be conducted.  The proposed studies will yield new insights
              into the processes of chromosome condensation and sister chromatid cohesion and
              a better understanding of how these two important events are
              linked.

	Meiosis, a highly ordered series of events that results in the
              production of haploid gametes, is essential for eukaryotic sexual reproduction.
               A single round of DNA replication, followed by homologous chromosomes pairing
              and recombination initiates the process, which culminates in two division
              phases, the first a reductive division that segregates homologous chromosomes
              and the second in which sister chromatids are separated.  The establishment of
              sister chromatid cohesion and chromosome condensation are central events during
              both meiosis, and mitosis, which ensure the proper segregation of genetic
              information during cellular division.  While considerable progress has been
              made towards understanding chromosome condensation during mitosis, perhaps one
              of the least understood aspects of eukaryotic chromosome dynamics is the
              mechanism of sister-chromatid cohesion.

