Title       : Oscillatory Calcium Signaling and Secretion in Neuroendocrine Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a9982585

Award Number: 9982585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew C. Charles acharles@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Costantin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hormones are released by cells of the brain in pulsatile patterns  -- these
              patterns are important in determining the action of the hormones on their
              target organs. The brain cells that release hormones show spontaneous
              electrical activity and complex oscillatory increases in the concentration of
              calcium ions (Ca2+). While it is known that intracellular Ca2+ triggers hormone
              release, it is not known how different patterns of Ca2+ signaling in networks
              of cells lead to different patterns of hormone release. This study will use
              simultaneous electrophysiological recording, video imaging of intracellular
              Ca2+ , and measurements of secretion to investigate the mechanisms by which
              different types of cells generate and modulate the cellular signals that
              control hormone release. In 3 different types of neuroendocrine cells, the
              relationship between different patterns of oscillatory Ca2+ signaling and
              secretion will be characterized. The role of a membrane channel activated by
              the cellular messenger cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) in the generation
              of the oscillatory signaling underlying secretion will also be characterized.
              Finally, the role of cell-cell communication via gap junction channels will be
              quantified. 
 In the reproductive system, pulsatile patterns of hormone
              release control a variety of different functions including sexual development
              and maturation, the maintenance of eggs in the ovary, ovulation, and pregnancy.
              The studies in this proposal will provide a dynamic characterization of the
              patterns of cellular signaling that control the release of hormones by networks
              of neuroendocrine cells. Dynamic data including video imaging of cellular
              signaling will be presented over the internet for scientific and educational
              purposes.  








