Title       : Bioluminescence:Molecular Mechanisms and Biochemical Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9982880

Award Number: 9982880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Hastings hastings@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research will focus on the fundamental biochemical mechanisms of light
              emitting systems in marine dinoflagellates (responsible for the
              "phosphorescence of the sea") and terrestrial Diptera (flies), two major and
              evolutionarily independent groups of bioluminescent organisms. The biochemical
              components of the light-emitting reaction of the dinoflagellate Gonyaulax
              polyedra - the luciferase enzyme (LCF), the luciferin substrate (LH2), a unique
              tetrapyrrole, and a luciferin binding protein (LBP)- are sequestered in an
              organelle, the scintillon. LCF consists of three highly conserved and
              contiguous sequences, each of which is catalytically active. The minimum
              peptide size necessary for activity and the location of the active site will be
              determined. Comparison of LCF sequences from other bioluminescent
              dinoflagellates will allow residues conserved for enzyme activity and
              regulation to be identified, and our understanding of the evolution of the
              luciferase gene structure will be increased. Larvae of the web-building,
              carnivorous North American dipteran Platyura fultoni (<15 mm long) have two
              light organs (head and tail) and emit a blue luminescence with an emission peak
              at 460 nm, but the biochemistry of the bioluminescence reaction is not known.
              Oxygen is required, suggesting the involvement of a peroxidic intermediate, as
              in all bioluminescence reactions. A granular secretion ascribed to the
              mitochondria of giant cells located in these organs is reported to be
              associated with the light emission. The study will focus on these unusual
              cytological aspects and on the identification of the biochemical components.
              The web-weaving larvae of an Australian bioluminescent dipteran, Arachnocampa
              flava, present similarities with Platyura despite differences in light organ
              anatomy; the biochemistry of the light emitting reactions of these two diptera
              will be compared. 

An understanding of the basic mechanisms in
              bioluminescence will advance the knowledge of energy metabolism, as well as our
              understanding of processes involving reactive oxygen species, now known to
              serve as cellular messengers as well as agents of cellular damage.  Fundamental
              knowledge of the genes, enzymes and substrates responsible for bioluminescence
              has led to extensive applications, ranging from sensitive visualization of gene
              expression to analytical measurements of drugs and metabolites.  The
              dinoflagellate studies proposed here promise to contribute significant advances
              in enzymology, as well as in molecular evolution.  The biochemistry of the
              dipteran bioluminescence, which the investigator recently began studying, is
              entirely novel, hence rich in promises of new knowledge and  applications. 
              


Specific aims for this project are as follows: 
(a) examine luciferase
              genes from other bioluminescent dinoflagellates so as to gain insight into gene
              evolution and to aid in the determination of amino acid residues involved in
              catalysis;  
(b) define the structural regions required for luciferase
              activity within the individual domains; 
(c)  characterize the biochemical
              components of the bioluminescence reactions of the dipterans Platyura and
              Arachnocampa,  isolate and partially purify luciferin and luciferase; test for
              the ability of the beetle luciferase to react with the dipteran luciferin.    
