Title       : Cell Cycle Regulation by Nutrient Signals in S. cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a9982537

Award Number: 9982537
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297457             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren Heideman wheidema@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1154,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Although yeast grow well on a variety of carbon sources, different nutrients
              produce widely differing growth rates. In order for the cells to maintain the
              proper size at these different growth rates, they must adjust their rate of
              progress through the cell division cycle to match the rate at which they
              accumulate size. These changes in cell cycle length can be largely accounted
              for as changes in the length of time spent in G1. Although progress through G1
              is thought to be regulated by the products of the CLN3 and BCK2 genes, how
              these genes actually regulate the timing of the G1 to S phase transition is
              unclear. Preliminary results show that glucose regulates translation of Cln3
              through the Ras/cAMP signaling pathway, and that glucose also regulates
              transcription of CLN3 through a set of repeated elements in the CLN3 promoter.
              These repeats drive glucose dependent expression of reporter genes, and are
              necessary for proper glucose regulation of CLN3 mRNA and protein levels. The
              repeated elements also bind at least one protein from yeast extracts, and are
              found upstream of a large group of genes that are also regulated by glucose.
              The hypothesis is that Cln3 regulates the length of time that cells spend in
              G1, allowing cells to adjust the cell cycle length to match the rate of
              physical growth in size, will be tested, and the mechanism by which glucose
              regulates CLN3 transcription will be determined. The specific goals of the
              project are to determine the role that CLN3 expression plays in maintaining
              cell size, to identify genes that regulate transcription of CLN3 in response to
              glucose, and to determine how the products of these genes function. The results
              of these experiments will reveal the links between glucose metabolism, G1
              cyclin expression, progress through the cell cycle, and maintenance of constant
              cell size in yeast. Because the glucose responsive elements in the CLN3
              promoter are also found upstream of a large number of glucose sensitive yeast
              genes, glucose regulation of CLN3 transcription may be part of a process that
              regulates a large number of genes in a coordinated fashion. 
