Title       : CAREER: Ultrathin Films of Molecularly Assembled Oligothiophenes - An Integrated
               Approach to Research and Education in Organic Solid State Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a9982010

Award Number: 9982010
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rigoberto C. Advincula   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9982010
Advincula

The overall goal of the program is to integrate research
              on molecularly assembled organic ultrathin film materials with training of
              future materials scientists on a combined 1) organic synthesis, 2) film
              fabrication, 3) surface analysis, and 4) device application approach.  The
              research goal is to develop molecularly organized electro-and optically-active
              oligothiophene (conjugated) ultrathin films suitable for "wet processing" and
              applications as solid state materials.  This is in contrast to current methods
              involving vacuum evaporation and solution crystallization techniques.  New
              oligomer structures, telechelic oligomers, and "precursor" polymers with
              oligothiophene derivatives ( than 5-6 units) will  be synthesized.  The
              ultrathin films will be fabricated using molecular and supramolecular assembly
              techniques to form multilayers on various solid-support substrates. 
              Orientation, aggregation, layer ordering and morphological control is essential
              during film fabrication.  This will be analyzed by combining surface sensitive
              spectroscopic and microscopic analysis methods.  By determining
              structure-property correlations, the intention is to "tailor" the preferred
              order towards several solid state materials applications. 
              Electropolymerization and doping techniques on well ordered ultrathin film
              systems would be used to induce coupling reactions and conductivity for
              incorporation in various electrical and optical device applications. 
              Ultimately, the goal is to establish a research protocol for discovery of new
              organic ultrathin film materials and bridge research and training for a new
              breed of materials scientists.

The exponential growth in handheld devices,
              portable computers, displays, sensors, miniaturized components, requires new
              materials and processes that allow rapid prototyping and manufacturing even
              approaching that of the nanoscale.  Thus, there is a need to direct molecular
              organization in ultrathin films during processing with a rational design of
              polymer materials.  This research program combines these aspects and at the
              same time focuses on training  new breed of materials scientists, capable of
              parallel thinking and skills progression for developing organic solid state
              materials.  While new materials and methodologies can be discovered, the most
              important contribution to society is through a sustained approach in educating
              new scientists and technologists.  To meet this challenge, a number of
              education initiatives are proposed which includes high school students and
              teacher mentoring (K-12), combined with graduate students participation. 
              Opportunities for participation in interdisciplinary institutions and projects
              both here and abroad are also proposed.

