Title       : Determinants for DNA Binding by a Prokaryotic Zinc-Finger Transcription Factor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a9982525

Award Number: 9982525
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail E. Christie CHRISTIE@HSC.VCU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

	Zinc-binding proteins play a major role in nucleic acid metabolism
              and in the regulation of gene expression. Proteins in the bacteriophage P2 Ogr
              family comprise a unique group of prokaryotic zinc-finger transcription
              factors, which bind to an unusual DNA target site upstream of the promoters
              they activate.   This project employs genetic and biochemical approaches to
              investigate the molecular basis of DNA recognition by the P2 Ogr protein and
              the related NucC protein encoded by a cryptic prophage in Serratia marcescens. 
              NucC, which has higher activity in vivo and in vitro, will be used for most of
              the analysis.  Determinants for sequence-specific DNA recognition by NucC will
              be probed by chemical reactivity, SELEX and crosslinking experiments.   A
              combined approach of alanine scanning mutagenesis and isolation of specific
              classes of Ogr and NucC mutants will be used to define residues involved in DNA
              binding,  transcription activation, and protein:protein interactions.  Since
              these phage-encoded activators bear no apparent sequence or structural
              similarity to other known classes of prokaryotic transcription factors,
              elucidation of their mechanism of action will provide new insights into
              positive control as well as a novel mode of DNA recognition.  

	When a virus
              infects a cell, the gene expression machinery of the host cell is altered by
              the virus and viral genes are turned on in a strictly controlled order.  Dr.
              Christie's laboratory uses infection of a bacterial cell by the bacterial virus
              P2 as a model system for studying the activation of mRNA synthesis for specific
              genes by the interaction of  viral proteins with the host transcriptional
              machinery. These studies are designed to provide new insights into protein:DNA
              interactions that play critical roles in the control of gene expression.
              Elucidation of molecular details underlying transcriptional regulation of gene
              expression is central to understanding not only viral infection but the normal
              control of cell growth and differentiation

