Title       : Chirality and Confinement in Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2001    
File        : a9982020

Award Number: 9982020
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Rosenblatt cxr@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at significantly increasing our understanding of ho redued
              symmetry and confinement affect liquid crystalline behavior.  A wide battery of
              experimental tools will be utilized for these studies including static and
              dynamic light scattering, dielectric relaxation, magnetic and electric
              birefringence and other electroceptic measurements, magnetic susceptometry,
              atomic force and scanning tunneling microscopy, and differential scanning
              calorimetry.  A variety of phenomena related to novel molecules, and in
              particular to the synclinic and anticlinic phases will be included in the
              study.  Another area will include a study of liquid crystals in confined
              (porous) geometry's to examine novel electrooptic phenomena for confined chiral
              molecules, the effects of confinement on elasticity, and the roles of
              correlation length and pore size on the nematic-isotropic phase
              transition.
%%%
The impact of this integrated research and education project
              will be significant.  The behavior of complex liquid crystalline phses in
              confined geometry's is of particular interest as the information technologies
              utilizing these materials e.g., for novel display devices, continue to
              emphasize improved resolution and enhanced stability.  Student training in this
              important area will enhance employment opportunities in the job market thereby
              facilitating technology transfer and enhancing the country's technological
              infrastructure.
***
