Title       : Mechanism for Intercellular Movement of Potato Virus X
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a9982552

Award Number: 9982552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269459             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanmarie Verchot verchot@okway.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The triple gene block of PVX is a genetic module that is conserved among members
              of the potex-, carla-, furo-, and hordeivirus families and is required for
              virus transport through plasmodesmata. The PVX triple gene block produces three
              proteins named the 25K, 12K and 8K proteins.  While several properties of these
              proteins have been identified the exact contribution of these proteins to the
              movement process has not been determined yet.  The project is designed to
              identify the specific functions of the PVX proteins, to analyze how they
              interact with each other to promote virus movement, and to determine how they
              interact with the host cell to facilitate virus movement.  Plasmids containing
              the PVX movement protein genes fused to the GFP gene were prepared and used to
              bombard tobacco leaves.  Movement of proteins between cells is viewed by
              fluorescence microscopy.  Plasmids will be bombarded to transgenic tobacco
              expressing the PVX triple gene block proteins to study the effects of viral
              protein-protein interactions on viral protein movement and subcellular
              targetting.  This approach has been quite valuable because it has provided an
              opportunity to view some protein-protein interactions that were not detected
              previously in studies which utilized microinjection to deliver proteins into
              cells.  Secondly, mutational analysis will be conducted using the PVX 25K
              protein to identify domains that function in protein movement and
              protein-protein interactions.  These studies will be combined with innovative
              approaches to analyze virion assembly in vivo and to determine the role of
              virions in cell-to-cell movement.  



