Title       : Protein-Protein Interactions in Photosystem II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a9982395

Award Number: 9982395
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry M. Bricker btbric@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurie K. Frankel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9982395
Bricker
Elucidation of the functional properties and structural
              organization of membrane protein complexes is one of the central objectives of
              current biochemical investigation. Biological membranes are involved in
              virtually every aspect of cellular organization and activity. One of the most
              intriguing aspects of membrane function is its role in the mediation of energy
              transduction in photosynthetic organisms. Light energy, which is the product of
              a most violent physical process, fusion, is transformed into biological energy
              equivalents utilized by the photosynthetic cell. The photosynthetic process
              provides both the carbohydrate which lies at the base of virtually all food
              chains and, as a byproduct, all of the atmospheric oxygen utilized by higher
              organisms. This project investigates the structural interactions between the
              proteins involved in oxygen evolution. An understanding of the structure of the
              oxygen-evolving complex will yield new insights into how this important
              membrane protein complex functions.  Protein-protein interactions among the
              components of the photosystem will be studied using a combination of
              biochemical and molecular tools.  Photosystem II complexes, which are the
              oxygen-evolving site in photosynthesis will be isolated from both higher plant
              chloroplasts and blue-green algae (cyanobacteria).  These will be studied by a
              variety of techniques including site-directed mutagenesis, suppressor analysis,
              chemical modification, fluorescence, and time-resolved oxygen flash yield
              measurements.


