Title       : Structural Studies of 1L-myo-inositol 1-Phosphate Synthase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a9982536

Award Number: 9982536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Geiger geiger@cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Geiger
MCB 9982536


The conversion of glucose 6-phosphate to
              1L-myo-inositol 1-phosphate (MIP) by 1L-myo-inositol 1-phosphate synthase (MIP
              synthase) is the first committed and rate limiting step in the de novo
              biosynthesis of inositol in all eukaryotes.  The importance of inositol
              containing molecules both as membrane components and as critical second
              messenger signal transduction species make the function and regulation of this
              enzyme important for a host of biologically important cellular functions
              including proliferation, neuro-stimulation, secretion and contraction.  MIP
              synthase uses the cofactor NAD not as a co-substrate, as is the case in most
              NAD-utilizing enzymes, but catalytically.  This transformation is thought to
              occur via four distinct steps: an oxidation, enolization, intramolecular aldol
              cyclization, and a reduction, all of which happens in a single active site with
              no dissociation of intermediates.  Since many issues regarding the catalytic
              mechanism of this enzyme are not understood and structural information
              regarding MIP synthase is completely nonexistent, the structure of MIP synthase
              will be determined using single crystal X-ray crystallography.  In addition, to
              fully characterize the structural details of the mechanism, several
              mechanism-based inhibitor-MIP synthase crystal structures will be determined. 
              These structures will fully define the three-dimensional fold of the enzyme and
              fully delineate many of the structural details of this important catalytic
              process.

The major goal of this project is to understand how a single
              enzyme, in this case MIP synthase, can catalyze the transformation of a glucose
              molecule into a completely different structure, an inositol.  This complex
              transformation occurs within a single active site of this enzyme without
              dissociation of any of the many stable intermediates that apparently form
              during the process.  Critical insight into this process will come from the
              determination of atomic resolution structures of MIP synthase bound to several
              molecular inhibitors that structurally mimic the intermediates that form in
              this process.  With these structures it will be possible to map in molecular
              detail the complex mechanism of this process.  Inositols play important
              biological roles in virtually all eukaryotic organisms, from membrane structure
              to intercellular signaling.

