Title       : Composition and Function of a Novel Consortial Endosymbiosis in the Shipworm
               Lyrodus pedicellatus.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9982982

Award Number: 9982982
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271152             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Distel distel@maine.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1156,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Enormous quantities of wood and other woody plant materials
(including leaves,
              bark, shoots, stems and nuts) are produced annually in
the environment.  In
              fact, cellulose, the major component of woody
materials, is thought to be the
              most abundant biological material on earth.
This remarkably strong and
              enduring molecule is a polymer of glucose
(sugar) linked by a type of chemical
              bond that makes it indigestible to
most living organisms.  Therefore, this
              rich source of food energy is
available to only a few animals (e.g., termites
              and ruminants) that can
digest cellulose with the aid of microbes living in
              their guts.
	Surprisingly, some marine animals can also digest wood.  The
              most
important group is the wood-boring clams, commonly known as shipworms. 
              Unlike
termites and ruminants, these animals lack microorganisms in their
              gut.
Instead they harbor enormous numbers of symbiotic bacteria inside the
              cells
of their gills.  These bacteria fall into at least four closely
              related
families based on DNA analyses.  The PIs have proposed that these
              bacteria
produce cellulolytic enzymes that are transported from the gills to
              the
gut.
	The purpose of this investigation is to explore the diversity
              and
distribution of symbiont types in the shipworm gills, to determine if
              each
symbiont type contributes different cellulolytic enzymes, and to
              discover
how the host uses these bacterial products to exploit cellulose as a
              food
source.  These investigations should result in the discovery of
              new
cellulolytic enzymes that may have industrial applications in such areas
              as
paper and textile processing and fuel (ethanol) production via
              biomass
conversion of agricultural wastes.  These efforts will also help the
              PIs to
understand the physiology of symbiotic bacterial infections that
              are
beneficial rather than harmful to their hosts.
