Title       : Interfaces in Organic Thin Film Transistors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2002  
File        : a9982988

Award Number: 9982988
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yongli Gao ygao@pas.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this proposal is achieve fundamental understanding though detailed
              interface analysis of existing and novel organic/inorganic and organic/organic
              structures relevant to the development of organic based thin film
              transistors(OTFT). The approach is to probe in detail the interface properties
              in model OTFT structures/devices. Attention will be focused on electronic
              structures, chemical reactions, interdiffusion, and charge transfer of the
              organic/metal, organic/organic and organic/dielectric interfaces from a
              microscopic or atomic viewpoint. The interface analysis will be coordinated
              with morphological and basic electrical characterization of the OTFTs. The
              objective is to provide a better understanding of the fundamental aspects of
              interface properties of organic semiconductors and to relate this interface
              knowledge to next generation OTFTs. Surface/interface analytical tools include
              x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS), ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy
              (UPS), inverse photoemission spectroscopy (IPES), near edge x-ray absorption
              fine structure (NEXAFS), and low energy electron diffraction (LEED). The
              interface/surface analysis will be supported by structural and electronic
              characterization, including atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning
              capacitance-voltage (SCV), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), and scanning
              tunneling spectroscopy (STS). The analysis will also be supplemented with
              device characterizations, including basic electrical characterization, internal
              photoemission, and electroabsorption. With controlled vapor deposition and in
              situ sputtering in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) environment, the interface will
              be constructed by deposition of a monolayer or sub-monolayer at a time, and the
              electronic, chemical, and morphological structures will be monitored with
              surface/interface analytical tools as the interface is being formed. 
%%%
The
              project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science
              with high technological relevance. Experimental tools are now available to
              allow atomic level observation of elementary surface processes which when
              better understood allow advances in fundamental science and technology. The
              basic knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to
              contribute to improving the perform-ance and stability of advanced devices and
              circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and
              producing improved materials, and materials combinations.  An important feature
              of the program is the integration of research and education through the
              training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant
              area.
***

