Title       : Structural Control of Hg(II) Transfer and Reduction in Mercuric Reductase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a9982576

Award Number: 9982576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Miller smiller@cgl.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9982576
Miller
To provide structural integrity or catalytic activity, proteins
              utilize a number of transition metal ions (e.g., Fe, Cu, Zn). However, all
              heavy metal ions, including these essential ones, are toxic to cells when their
              levels are elevated. To avoid the toxic effects due to adventitious binding and
              chemical reactivity of both nonessential (e.g., Hg, Cd, Ar) and excess
              essential heavy metal ions, living organisms elaborate a variety of metal ion
              trafficking protein systems that control the availability and mobility of their
              cognate metal ions. Many systems include metal-sensing gene transcription
              factors, integral membrane transporters that move the metal ions across
              membranes, metal ion binding proteins that facilitate transfer of the metal
              ions from one site in the cell to another, and occasionally proteins that alter
              the redox state of the metal ion as part of the trafficking mechanism. Except
              for the transcription factors that typically bind the metal ions very tightly,
              the interactions of the metal ions with their cognate trafficking proteins,
              regardless of their function, is more dynamic and context dependent than is
              typically found for metal-utilizing proteins that rely on the presence of bound
              metal ion for their activity. Thus, the structures of metal trafficking
              proteins must be designed to provide selective metal binding sites of higher
              affinity than molecules in the general cellular milieu, but must have features
              for molecular recognition of appropriate protein partners in the trafficking
              system and for facile transfer of the cognate metal ion to those partners.
              Likewise, many of the trafficking proteins will have features that facilitate
              the directional movement of the metal ion through a protein channel. 
In this
              project the structural features of an enzyme that reduces the heavy metal ion
              Hg(II) will be investigated to identify the chemical and physical properties
              embedded in the protein structure that facilitate and direct the transfer of
              the Hg(II) substrate onto the protein and through a ligand exchange pathway to
              a buried active site, and then what properties influence its reduction upon
              arrival. In one part of this project, the structure of the metal ion binding
              domain, expressed as a separate protein, its Hg(II) binding properties, and its
              molecular recognition of and mechanism for transferring Hg(II) to the catalytic
              core will be characterized. In the other part of the project, site-directed
              mutagenesis of specific residues in the catalytic core that lie within the
              proposed Hg(II) ligand exchange binding path and/or the inner binding site will
              be used: (1) to test the effect of altering the flexibility within a critical
              loop of the protein on the rates of transfer of Hg(II) to the active site, (2)
              to test for the presence of proton transfer catalysts, (3) to test for the 
              effects of polarity and charge within the inner active site on the rates of
              Hg(II) transfer to the inner site and the ability of Hg(II) to be reduced upon
              arrival. 



