Title       : Gene, Enzyme and Physiological Characterization of Shrunken-2 Isoalleles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a9982626

Award Number: 9982626
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Curtis Hannah Hannah@gnv.ifas.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Starch comprises one of the major glucose polymers in all living organisms. It
              is essential  for plant life since it provides a  mechanism to store the vast
              amounts of  fixed carbon and, as the  the major component of many important
              seeds, starch provides the important energy source
transferred  from parent to
               progeny.  Animal life is also dependent on starch since animals (including
              humans) rely primarily on the starch-rich cereal seeds for essential calories
              and nutrients. 

Because of the importance of starch to both plant and animal
              life, the Hannah lab has
focused on the enhancement of starch content in
              cereal seeds through genetic manipulation of the rate-limiting enzyme,
              ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGP).  AGP catalyzes the synthesis of 
              ADP-glucose and pyrophosphate from glucose-1-PO4 and ATP.  ADP-glucose then
              serves as the glucose donor for the carbon found in starch. 

The work to be
              performed focuses on the allosteric properties of AGP.  The triose sugar,
              3-phosphoglyceric acid (3-PGA) activates and phosphate inhibits AGP.  Specific
              aims include determination of whether the low level of 3-PGA activation of the 
              maize endosperm AGP reflects  loss of activation potential or an independence
              of 3-PGA for maximum activity.  Other experiments include analysis of hybrid
              AGPs involving the potato tuber small subunit and the maize large subunit to
              identify sites involved in allosteric regulation and catalysis as well as
              determination of  whether the strikingly different levels of activity seen in
              maize and in  E. coli of an allosterically-altered maize AGP variant termed
              Sh2-Rev6 involves differential modification of the inserted amino acids.  Amino
              acid insertions at this position that do not restore activity will be
              identified.  Finally, a large scale mutagenesis project will be initiated to
              identify motifs involved in enzyme assembly, catalysis and allosteric
              regulation.  

	The impressive field performance of Sh2-Rev6 in maize and 
              now in another monocot as well as in a dicot points up the critical importance
              of the regulatory properties of AGP.  The studies to be performed here should
              provide definitive insight into the mechanism of Sh2-Rev6 action as well as
              possibly identify other important variants.  














