Title       : Dynamic Modeling and Design of Distributed Power Systems with Power Factor
               Correction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a9982048

Award Number: 9982048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Issa E. Batarseh batarseh@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              As power switching device technology advances, the drive for designing
              smaller-size and lighter-weight power electronic systems for various industrial
              and aerospace applications will continue to increase.  Moreover, as nonlinear
              load power supplies continue to proliferate power electronic systems, intensive
              research and development efforts will also continue to grow in order to develop
              new Power Factor Correction (PFC) technology to improve power quality and
              efficiency.  This effort will continue especially with government regulations
              become more and more stringent.

The objective of the proposed research is to
              address some of the critical issues in the analysis and. design of distributed
              power supply systems (DPS) with power factor corrections.  Problems and
              challenges of these issues include PFC converter topology, modeling, stability
              of DPS systems, etc.  In this project, we will also investigate new current
              control methods used to stabilize the output and provide equal load current
              sharing in parallel connected systems.  The converters that are investigated
              here can be used in off-line application to improve power factor correction. 
              Active power factor correction technique will be used in this project to
              construct parallel-connected systems and still achieve near unity power factor.
               Unlike the traditional approach, the newly developed family of converters will
              result in further elimination of line current distortion, with near unity power
              factor.  Finally, a working hardware unit will be constructed based on the
              conceptual designs of the power factor correction circuits used in distributed
              power systems.

During the project's two-year period, we will carry out the
              following major tasks: 1) Investigate the conventional modeling techniques and
              their limitations for the applications in ac/dc power factor correction
              converters, 2) develop new modeling methodology for family of ac/dc power
              factor correction converters, focusing on single-stage single-switch
              topologies, 3) carry out small-signal, large-signal analysis and simulation on
              selected single PFC converters by using the developed models, set-up hardware
              platform and perform experimental verification for developed models, 4)
              investigate and compare various parallel schemes with respect to reliability,
              transient and sharing performance and interaction among modules, 5) integrate
              several front-end PFC converters and DC/DC load converters to form distributed
              power system using viable paralleling schemes, and finally, 6) conduct
              comparative study for various simplified system models by simulating the same
              distributed power system to modify and refine simplified model, and perform
              hardware verification for DPS analysis and simulation.

The control concepts
              developed will be illustrated for a module of two-parallel connected ac-dc
              single switch power factor connection converters.  The simulation results show
              that room for improvement is necessary when it comes to system stability and
              system performance.



