Title       : Multiresolution Visualization Tools for Interactive Analysis of Large-Scale
               N-Dimensional Datasets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a9982273

Award Number: 9982273
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 15,  1999   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Breen david@cacr.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan H. Barr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Pool  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Schroder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1595,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Advances in computing technology are making simulation as important to science
              today as theory and experiment have been in the past. Unfortunately this
              success is overwhelming the scientific community by drowning scientists in the
              data produced. Because of storage, network, and graphics bottlenecks, more data
              is produced than can be analyzed or visualized. Valuable information is being
              lost or neglected because of these deficiencies. Additionally, scientists are
              painfully aware of this technological bottleneck, and it affects how they
              conduct their science. It slows the rate of data acquisition, and calculations
              that could generate higher-dimensional data, e.g. vector and tensor, are not
              being performed. The goal of this project is to address the visualization
              bottleneck by developing multiresolution software tools that will facilitate
              understanding of large-scale experimental and simulation datasets. The project
              will then apply these new techniques to data from physics and biology, thus
              providing advances in fluid dynamics and neuroscience. We will do this by close
              interactions with the discipline scientists, including using their feedback to
              improve initial designs of our tools.

The technical approach of the project
              is based on the fact that the graphics workstations available to most
              scientists are incapable of visualizing giga- and tera-scale datasets. It is
              also clear that for the foreseeable future our ability to generate data will
              outpace our ability to render and visualize it. Therefore we must develop
              methods for representing, segmenting and compressing these enormous datasets
              into a form that can be processed on today's graphics computers.
              Multiresolution representations and algorithms are at the core of the methods
              and tools to be developed. A multiresolution approach allows visualization
              techniques to scale to enormous datasets by focusing resources in those regions
              of the dataset most important to the user. For example, multiresolution
              modeling and display techniques will allow a user to view a single dataset at a
              coarse level-of--detail, and easily provide pertinent details only in those
              regions of greatest interest. During analysis, multiresolution methods can
              allocate more computational resources in segments of the data with the greatest
              rates of change or containing specific properties. This project will produce a
              set of multiresolution software tools for processing and visualizing
              large-scale N-dimensional (scalar, vector and tensor) volumetric datasets
              (NDVDs), as well as large-scale triangle meshes. Specifically, tools for
              segmenting and interpolating NDVDs using level-set methods, extracting
              semi-regular meshes directly from volume datasets, compressing triangle meshes,
              and volume rendering NDVDs will be developed. As tools become available they
              will be deployed to scientists at Caltech's Center for Simulation of Dynamic
              Response of Materials (sponsored by DOE), and to scientists at the National
              Center for Microscopy and Imaging Research (UC San Diego).

