Title       : Delivery of Effector Proteins to Plant Cells via the Hrp Type III Protein
               Secretion System of Pseudomonas Syringae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a9982646

Award Number: 9982646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Collmer arc2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1112,1114,1132,1156,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The central event in the parasitism of Pseudomonas syringae and other common
              gram-negative plant pathogens appears to be the Hrp (type III protein secretion
              system)-mediated translocation of 'Avr' effector proteins into plant cells. Avr
              proteins are so named because their presence in a strain renders a pathogen
              avirulent in a potential host that carries a cognate R (resistance) gene. Avr-R
              protein interactions inside plant cells trigger the hypersensitive response
              (HR); a defense-associated programmed cell death. Although Avr proteins may
              betray the parasite to defense surveillance in nonhost or resistant plants,
              they appear collectively required for parasitism in host plants. Thus, an
              understanding of Avr protein delivery mechanisms is key to understanding
              bacterial plant pathogenicity and is likely to yield novel therapies. The
              delivery of Avr proteins requires hrp (HR and pathogenicity) and hrc (HR and
              conserved) genes. hrc genes encode core components that are conserved in all
              type III secretion systems, including those of human pathogenic Yersinia,
              Shigella, and Salmonella, and they appear to direct protein translocation
              across the inner and outer membranes of bacteria. hrp genes encode a harpin
              (HrpZ), a Hrp pilus subunit (HrpA), regulatory proteins, and several proteins
              of unknown function that are postulated to promote full activation of the
              pathway and formation of an extracellular translocation complex upon contact
              with host cells. Identifying Hrp components that contribute to these two
              processes is a particular focus of this proposal. The current evidence for Avr
              protein translocation into plant cells is indirect, and until recently Avr
              proteins have not been observed to be secreted in culture. However, it has now
              been established that a hrp/hrc gene cluster cloned on cosmid pCPP2156 from
              Erwinia chrysanthemi functions in Escherichia coli to secrete well-studied P.
              syringae Avr proteins, such as AvrB, AvrPto, and AvrRpt2. Furthermore, although
              P. syringae does not secrete AvrB in culture, it has been found to secrete
              AvrPto and AvrRpt2 in culture, as based on immunoblot analyses. The secretion
              of AvrPto is particularly robust in E. coli(pCPP2156) and P. syringae
              (regardless of the pathovar or strain in which it is expressed), that has
              supported an exploration of Avr targeting, signals. The Yop effector proteins
              that Yersinia translocates into host cells are targeted to the type III pathway
              by a signal carried in the first 15 codons of Yop mRNA (some Yops also carry
              chaperone-dependent targeting domains). The mRNA targeting signal appears
              universal among the translocated effector proteins of plant and animal
              pathogens, and Y. enterocolitica and E. coli(pCPP2156) secrete AvrB, AvrPto,
              YopE and YopQ interchangeably. As with YopQ, the first 15 codons for AvrPto are
              necessary for secretion of the native protein and are sufficient for targeting
              an Npt reporter protein to the type III pathway. The secretion of both AvrPto
              and AvrPto1-15-Npt by P. syringae in culture provides new molecular phenotypes
              for genetic exploration of Hrp component functions. Of particular interest for
              this project are the different apparent secretion behaviors of AvrB, AvrPto,
              HrpZ (thought to be targeted to the exterior of the plant cell), and HrpA
              (required for the secretion of HrpZ and AvrPto) and the factors controlling Avr
              translocation into plants. The hrp/hrc genes of P. syringae pv. syringae 61,
              cloned on cosmid pHIR11, enable nonpathogenic bacteria, like P. fluorescens and
              E. coli, to elicit an Avr-dependent HR on test plants that carry cognate
              R-genes. This hrp/hrc cluster has been completely sequenced and is at the
              center of a Hrp pathogenicity island flanked by genes encoding additional
              substrates for Hrp secretion. Nonpolar mutations have been constructed in all
              26 of the hrp/hrc genes in the cluster. P. syringae hrp/hrc genes are expressed
              in minimal, but not complex, media and are induced an additional 20-fold by the
              addition of plant cells to the medium. This induction requires living plant
              cells and a functional Hrp secretion system, and it provides a phenotype for
              identifying Hrp components that sense plant cells. The specific objectives of
              this  project are: 1. Identify targeting signals affecting the differential
              secretion behaviors of proteins traveling the Hrp pathway, and develop improved
              assays for detecting Hrp-mediated protein translocation into plant cells. 2.
              Identify all extracellular components of the P. syringae Hrp secretion system,
              the conditions maximizing their production, and the potential interaction of
              these proteins in a supramolecular complex as determined by in vitro
              biochemical assays. 3. Determine the contribution of each component of the Hrp
              system (and proper localization of the component) to a panel of molecular
              phenotypes aimed at dissecting Hrp-mediated Avr protein secretion and
              translocation.
