Title       : Molecular Basis of Self-Incompatibility in Petunia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2002    
File        : a9982659

Award Number: 9982659
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Teh-hui Kao txk3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9982659
PI:  Teh-hui Kao

Petunia inflata possesses gametophytic type
              self-incompatibility which is
controlled by a polymorphic locus, the S-locus.
              Matching of S-alleles
carried by the pollen and pistil results in inhibition
              of pollen tube
growth in the style. A polymorphic gene at the S-locus, termed
              the S-RNase
gene, that controls pistil function in SI has been identified.
              However, the
gene that controls pollen function in SI interactions, termed the
              pollen
S-gene, has not been identified.

The goal of this proposed project
              is to use a functional genomic approach
to identify the pollen S-gene of P.
              inflata. Obj. I is to use 14 cDNA
markers for the S-locus and the S-RNase gene
              as probes to isolate clones
from an S2S2 BAC library already contsructed. Obj.
              II is to construct a BAC
library of the S1S1 genotype and use the same probes
              employed in Obj. I to
isolate positive clones.  Obj. III is to characterize
              all the BAC clones
isolated in Obj. I and II by pulse-field gel
              electrophoresis and
fluorescence in situ hybridization to determine any
              overlap between them,
to order them at the S-locus, and to estimate the size
              of the gaps between
them. Additional clones will be isolated from both BAC
              libraries to cover
as extensively as possible the entire S-locus. Obj. IV is
              to introduce all
the BAC clones separately into P. inflata plants of S1S2
              genotype to
determine whether any of them contains the pollen S-gene. If a BAC
              clone
contains the pollen S2-gene, a quarter of the pollen grains produced by
              a
transgenic plant will carry the pollen S1-allele and the
              pollen
S2-transgene, and they will be compatible with S1S2 pistils due
              to
competitive interaction.  Transgenic plants that have
              become
self-compatible will be studied to identify the transgene that
              is
responsible for the phenotype. The function of the candidate(s) for
              the
pollen S-gene will be further ascertained by loss-of-function
              experiments.

Accomplishment of this proposed research will advance the
              understanding of
an RNase-based self/non-self recognition mechanism. The BAC
              clones isolated
can be used for studying the functions of additional S-locus
              genes, and for
comparative study of the S-locus of two different S-haplotypes,
              S1 and S2.
On the practical side, one can explore the possibility of restoring
              the SI
trait to self-compatible cultivated species to facilitate hybrid
              seed
production.  If successful, this will have a very important
              agronomic
impact.

