Title       : Cognition and Natural Selection: Spatial and Social Cognition in Pinyon Jays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a9982883

Award Number: 9982883
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell P. Balda Russell.Balda@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Keim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan C. Kamil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   In nature, the swiftest, strongest, largest animals succeed as evidenced by
              longer life and more offspring, whereas the slower, weaker, smaller ones often
              are less successful.  Anatomical and physiological traits are part of the
              arsenal that animals employ to enhance survival and reproduction.  Here, we
              suggest that cognitive abilities may also be part of that arsenal. In this
              study we plan to measure traits such as bill length and symmetry of feathers,
              but more importantly, we will measure spatial memory and social cognition in
              young Pinyon Jays. These are appropriate tests because these birds live in
              highly structured, permanent social flocks, and store and recover thousands of
              hidden food items each year using spatial memory to do so. About 60 young birds
              per year will be brought into the laboratory for testing. Each will achieve two
              IQ scores and then will be released back into the native habitat and followed
              to determine how long it lives and how many offspring it produces in its
              lifetime. We plan to follow over 700 birds through their lives. 

     There
              is growing awareness that higher animals are more than instinctive robotic
              creatures or slaves to a program of simple learning. Some animals appear to
              learn about their environment and fellow associates under one set of
              circumstances and then apply this learning in novel situations. Pinyon jays are
              exceptional birds in that they live in a harmonious social unit and are also
              spatial memory experts. The idea that animals use cognitive abilities to
              achieve relatively high levels of biological success has never been tested in a
              wild population of animals to date. Our knowledge and experience with pinyon
              jays will allow us a unique opportunity to explore these exciting questions in
              the wild.    


