Title       : Mechanism of Toxicity and Antiviral Activity of Pokeweed Antiviral Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a9982498

Award Number: 9982498
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $428000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nilgun Tumer Tumer@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Katalin Hudak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Tumer 9982498

Pokeweed antiviral protein (PAP), a 29-kDa ribosome
              inactivating protein (RIP) isolated from Phytolacca americana, catalytically
              removes a specific adenine residue from the highly conserved, surface-exposed
              a-sarcin/ricin loop (S/R) in the large rRNA of eukaryotic and prokaryotic
              ribosomes. Ribosomes depurinated in this manner are unable to bind the EF-2/GTP
              complex and protein synthesis is blocked at the translocation step.  PAP
              displays broad-spectrum antiviral activity against plant and animal viruses. 
              This laboratory recently demonstrated that PAP accesses ribosomes by binding to
              the ribosomal protein L3.   Yeast cells expressing a mutant form of L3 are
              resistant to the cytostatic effects of PAP because PAP cannot interact with the
              mutant L3 in vivo.  These results showed for the first time that a ribosomal
              protein provides a receptor site for a RIP and allows optimal binding to the
              target adenine.  Recent evidence from this laboratory indicates that PAP
              mutants which do not depurinate rRNA inhibit translation of viral RNAs,
              indicating that the antiviral activity of PAP is not solely due to rRNA
              depurination. Translation of capped, but not uncapped RNAs are inhibited by PAP
              and translation inhibition is overcome by increasing concentrations of the cap
              analog, m7GpppG, indicating that PAP recognizes the cap structure. The main
              objective of this project is to investigate the mechanism of the interaction
              between PAP and the cap structure to determine if PAP binds and depurinates
              capped RNAs in vitro and in vivo and whether PAP inhibits viral infection by
              depurinating capped RNAs. 
 

While ribosome inactivating proteins (RIPs)
              have been studied for many years and their enzymatic activity has been
              extensively investigated, very little is known about their substrate
              specificity and how they recognize their substrates in vivo.  This laboratory
              recently demonstrated that PAP accesses yeast ribosomes by binding to ribosomal
              protein L3.  These studies provided new insights towards understanding the
              roles of ribosomal proteins in translation elongation and ribosome structure
              and function.  Preliminary studies indicate that PAP recognizes the cap
              structure on viral and cellular RNAs, providing the first evidence for
              interaction between PAP and substrates other than rRNA.  This research will
              investigate the mechanism of the interaction between PAP and the cap structure
              and the role of this interaction in virus resistance. Analysis of the
              interaction between PAP and the cap structure will bring new insights into this
              unusual mechanism of translation inhibition and virus resistance.  These
              studies may pave the way for the development of more effective agents against
              viral infection in agriculture and medicine.

