Title       : Pollen-pistil Interactions in the Genus Nicotiana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a9982686

Award Number: 9982686
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. McClure mcclureb@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to identify and characterize factors
that
              contribute to S-allele-specific pollen recognition in Nicotiana alata.
In this
              species, the S-locus controls intraspecific compatibility.  Pollen
is rejected
              when the S-allele in the pollen is the same as one of the
S-alleles expressed
              in the pistil.  S-RNases control the specificity of
pollen rejection, but
              other factors contribute to S-allele-specific pollen
recognition in other
              ways.  Our main objective is to identify and
characterize these non-S-RNase
              factors.  
	HT-protein is one such factor that appears to be an
              unstable
component of the stylar extracellular matrix.  Antisense suppression
              of HT
prevents S-allele-specific pollen rejection, but its precise function
              is
unknown.  We propose experiments to determine the abundance of
              HT-protein
during style development, and why it is so unstable.  We have found
              that two
specific stylar proteins bind to S-RNase in vitro.  One is a
              previously
characterized protein, NaTTS, that is implicated in growth of
              compatible
pollen tubes.  The second, designated p11, has not been well
              characterized.
NaTTS and p11 are putative non-S-RNase factors that may be
              implicated in
both pollen rejection and in supporting compatible pollen tube
              growth.  Gel
filtration and protein blot analysis are proposed to determine
              the molecular
weight and composition of NaTTS/S-RNase/p11 complexes.  NaTTS
              and p11 will
be also expressed in bacteria and then used to test for
              interactions in
vitro.  Antisense methods will be used to determine whether
              p11 affects
compatible or incompatible pollinations in vivo.  To identify
              new
non-S-RNase factors, we have generated populations that segregate for
              the
ability to perform S-allele-specific pollen rejection.  cDNA AFLP will
              be
used to screen for new sequences associated with pollen rejection
              phenotype.

	The impact of this research will be to provide a
              better
understanding of the genetic mechanisms for pollen recognition
              and
rejection.  This is of practical significance to biotechnologists who
              wish
to manipulate plant breeding behavior.  



