Title       : Molecular and Genetic Analysis of the Maize indeterminate Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a9982714

Award Number: 9982714
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Colasanti colasant@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In higher plants, the mechanisms that regulate the transition from vegetative to
              reproductive growth are not understood. To address this problem, the function
              of the maize indeterminate gene (id1) is being studied. It is proposed that id1
              is an important regulator of long distance transmissible signal(s) that
              originate in leaves and are transmitted to the shoot apex to cause the
              transition to flowering. Thus, study of id1 provides a unique opportunity to
              characterize the molecular changes in the leaf that result in the propagation
              of long distance flowering signals. In order to understand how id1 regulates
              the floral stimulus and causes the transition to flowering the following
              objectives will be addressed: 1) Investigate the molecular changes associated
              with the floral stimulus by generating a profile of differentially expressed
              genes in immature leaves of id1 mutant and wild-type plants. Both direct and
              indirect targets of id1 will be isolated and characterized. 2) Identify
              important regulatory components and structural domains of the id1 gene by using
              the Ds transposon to create allelic variations at the id1 locus by sequential
              insertions and excisions.

Study of id1 function provides a unique
              opportunity to investigate the molecular components of long distance flowering
              signals. Results from these experiments will shed light on the molecular,
              cellular and biochemical changes that occur in leaves during the transition to
              flowering. Moreover, knowledge about the transition to reproductive growth in
              maize and other agronomically important grasses, such as rice, wheat, barley
              and sugar cane, could give rise to novel methods to control maturity and
              optimize resource utilization in the world's most vital crop species.

