Title       : Functional Expression of a Starch Biosynthetic System in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a9982555

Award Number: 9982555
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325546             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Myers ammyers@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plant starches are the most important calorie source in the human diet and also
              are renewable resources for a wide variety of industrial applications.  The
              chemical structure of the glucose polymers that make up starch is relatively
              simple, however, in an architectural sense, these molecules exhibit several
              hierarchical levels of structural complexity.  The biosynthetic mechanisms
              responsible for producing such a structurally ordered product are largely
              unknown.  These mechanisms are the subject of this research project, which is
              justified owing to the potential to modify starch production in plants for
              practical applications, and also for gathering fundamental biological
              information about the relationship between biosynthetic activity and
              architectural structure of the product.  The enzymes that produce starch have
              been isolated in recent years, and the genes that code for them have been
              cloned. A general observation is that for each enzyme in the process, that is,
              the starch synthases, the starch branching enzymes, and the starch debranching
              enzymes, multiple forms exist.  To try to simplify the system, this research
              project will use genetic engineering techniques to move the starch biosynthetic
              enzymes one at a time from their native environment in maize kernels into yeast
              cells.  The technology allows combination of several maize genes in one yeast
              strain.   The structure of the glucose polymers that are formed by these
              enzymes will then be analyzed.  From these data we may be able to discern the
              specific structural characteristics of starch that are imparted by each enzyme,
              either alone or in specific combinations with other This knowledge is expected
              to be useful for future research directed at exploiting starch as a renewable
              resource.




