Title       : EVITA - A Prototype System for Efficient Visualization and Interrogation of
               Terascale Datasets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2001  
File        : a9982344

Award Number: 9982344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1267500            (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Fowler fowler@ece.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raghu K. Machiraju  (Principal Investigator former)
              Bharat K. Soni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Schroeder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1595,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Large-scale computational simulations of physical phenomena produce data of
              unprecedented size (terabytes and petabytes). Unfortunately, development of
              appropriate data management and visualization techniques has not kept pace with
              the size and complexity of such datasets. For many simulations, the storage of
              the data itself, not to mention seeing and understanding it, is a serious
              problem. This project responds to this by developing a prototype, integrated
              system (EVITA) to facilitate exploration of terascale datasets. This system
              will be concerned with the storage and representation of very large datasets,
              their analysis and manipulation and rendering and presentation of the resulting
              images. This will allow unprecedented access to our CFD data sets, which we
              expect to lead to new fundamental understanding.

The project focuses on
              time-varying datasets from computational fluid dynamic/hydrodynamic and
              oceanographic applications on structured, rectilinear or curvilinear grids;
              however, the EVITA system is applicable as a general visualization environment
              for other terascale datasets with similar underlying structure. Additionally,
              the system is amenable to distributed- or even remote-visualization uses. The
              cornerstone of the EVITA system is a representational scheme that allows ranked
              access to macroscopic features in the dataset. The data and grid are
              transformed using wavelet techniques while a feature-detection algorithm is
              used to identify and rank contextually significant features directly. This
              ranking is used to generate a four-dimensional significance map that
              incorporates application-specific knowledge, which in turn allows an encoding
              with efficient compression and a progressive representation of significant
              features in the data. From this, the EVITA system creates as a preview an
              efficient, "lossy" image of the desired data and lets the user select regions
              of interest (ROls) for further enrichment. These ' Rols are given higher
              priority in the encoded bitstream, and subsequently displayed faster.
              Preliminary results demonstrate the efficacy of this approach. The project
              takes a novel approach to terascale visualization by capitalizing on the
              expertise of a multidisciplinary team to integrate research from several
              disciplines into the EVITA system. This both brings many perspectives to bear
              on the problem, and ensures that our results are practically useful.

