Title       : Regulation of U1 snRNP/5' Splice Site Interactions During pre-mRNA Splicing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2002    
File        : a9982726

Award Number: 9982726
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tien-Hsien Chang chang.108@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
	
Many eukaryotic genes consist of coding sequences (exons) separated
              by intervening sequences (introns) that are removed from precursor RNAs
              (Pre-RNAs) by RNA splicing.  Pre-messenger RNA (Pre-mRNA) splicing takes place
              in the spliceosome, a macromolecular complex composed of a large number of
              proteins and five small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs), U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6.  The
              spliceosome assembles and rearranges in a highly ordered and stepwise manner,
              which, at the molecular level, corresponds to a series of sequential changes of
              RNA-RNA interactions.  Strikingly, many of these interactions are mutually
              exclusive, i.e. the formation of one requires the disruption of another.  For
              example, the 5' splice site (5'SS) is initially recognized by U1 snRNA via
              base-pairing interaction, which is subsequently switched to a mutually
              exclusive base-pairing interaction with U6 snRNA.  "RNA unwindases" (or RNA
              helicases) are thought to govern these RNA rearrangements.  This project
              continues to investigate the function of Prp28p, an RNA unwindase, in nuclear
              pre-mRNA splicing in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  Recently, it
              was discovered that mutations in the U1-C protein, which is important to the
              stable binding of U1 snRNP to 5'SS, can bypass the otherwise essential Prp28p
              in pre-mRNA splicing and that, in such a system, a loss-of-function mutation in
              PRP8 can re-impose the demand of Prp28p.  Considering the potential role of
              Prp28p in RNA unwinding, it was therefore proposed that Prp28p and Prp8p are
              functionally antagonistic to U1-C and that they are likely to work in concert
              to dissociate U1 snRNP from 5'SS.  Remarkably, these conclusions are in good
              agreement with two recent reports regarding the roles of Prp28p and Prp8p in
              controlling the switch of U1 for U6 at 5'SS.  This research thus aims to expand
              and sharpen our current understanding of this control mechanism by exploiting
              the unique bypass suppressor system both genetically and biochemically. 
              Specific aims are: (1) To continue to identify and characterize components
              crucial to the U1 snRNP/5'SS interaction and to map regions in Prp8p involved
              in this interaction; (2) To develop a temperature-dependent in vitro splicing
              system for testing the predictions stemming from the previous genetic work and
              for investigating the functions of Prp28p and Prp8p. 

	Many eukaryotic genes
              consist of coding sequences (exons) separated by intervening sequences
              (introns) that are removed from precursor RNAs (Pre-RNAs) by RNA splicing.  The
              splicing step is often used to produce tissue-specific or developmentally
              regulated protein isoforms.  Further, defective RNA splicing has been
              implicated in several genetic diseases and in the life cycle of a wide variety
              of viruses.  Studies on the mechanism of RNA splicing are therefore of
              fundamental importance to our understanding of eukaryotic gene structure and
              gene expression.  This research focuses on characterizing a critical regulatory
              circuit in pre-mRNA splicing, in which several specific proteins (termed
              Prp28p, Prp8p, U1-C), and possibly others, jointly regulate critical
              interactions within the splicing apparatus. 



