Title       : Structural Inheritance in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2001     
File        : a9982929

Award Number: 9982929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 15,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald C. Hawthorne lockshon@u.washingon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Lockshon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The genome is not the sole determinant of heredity. This was demonstrated
              decades ago in the ciliated protoza and more recently with the discovery of
              prions in mammals and fungi. These are examples of a rare phenomenon or of a
              signifgicant aspect of biology that needs to be more widely explored. The
              molecular mechanism of the prion type of structural inheritance is becoming
              clear, yet cortical inheritance in the ciliates and other phenomena suggest
              that there may be a number of ways that structures act as their own templates
              to transmit heritable information.
	The proposed work will explore the
              molecular basis of a new example of a structurally inherited trait in yeast.
              The two most significant phenotypes of strains bearing this trait, called
              [leu], are a three-fold slower growth rate in the absence of leucine, and the
              failure of a large amount of mitochondrially-targeted protein to be localized
              to the organelle. Several lines of evidence argue that [leu] is not the result
              of a nuclear change. The self-templated inheritance of [leu] also is not due to
              a change in the mitochondrial genome, because rho-minus strains lacking
              mitochondrial DNS can be either [leu] or [LEU]. Additional experiments lend
              support to the hypothesis that [leu] is caused by some alteration of the
              mitochondrial structure itself.
	The goal of the proposed work is to gain
              additional evidence for or against the hypothesis that [leu] has a nuclear
              mechanism of inheritance. If experiments rule out a nuclear role for [leu]
              inheritance, the path is open for additional studies to determine the molecular
              mechanism of [leu] inheritance.

