Title       : Structure and Function of Flagellar Central Pair Microtubule-Associated
               Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a9982062

Award Number: 9982062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205700             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Mitchell mitcheld@upstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY, Upstate Med Univ
	      750 E. Adams Street
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/464-5476

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              


Cilia and flagella are slender cylindrical surface extensions of cells
              that wave or beat rhythmically, thereby either moving the cell through its
              liquid environment , as for example in the case of motile protozoa or sperm
              cells, or moving the liquid environment across the surface of the cell, as for
              example in the case of ciliated epithelia in the respiratory tract.  The
              molecular machinery inside the cilia or flagella is collectively called the
              axoneme, and consists mainly of a highly ordered arrangement of specialized
              structural elements (microtubules) and molecular motors (dyneins) that the
              microtubules to slide lengthwise relative to each other in a highly regulated
              and orderly fashion.  The work that will be performed with support from this
              award is directed toward understanding the mechanisms that regulate the
              microtubule-based motor dynein during motility of eukaryotic cilia and
              flagella. The approach focuses on mutations in a model organism, the
              photosynthetic protist Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, that alter dynein activity by
              disrupting assembly of a regulatory complex, the central pair apparatus. Based
              on many previous studies, projections from the two central pair microtubules
              interact with radial spokes, which in turn transmit regulatory signals to
              doublet microtubule-associated dyneins. A cascade of protein kinases has been
              implicated in this signaling process, but the role of central pair structures
              has not been determined. Although most mutations affecting central pair
              structure completely block motility, a mutation was recently described that
              allows altered motility. This mutation, cpc1, specifically prevents assembly of
              one row of central pair microtubule projections. The experiments that will be
              performed with support from this award will provide new information about the
              structures and functions that are missing in cpc1 flagella.

The motility of
              isolated, reactivated cpc1 flagellar axonemes and the microtubule sliding rate
              of protease treated axonemes will be measured to characterize changes in beat
              frequency, waveform, and sliding velocity. The effects of specific protein
              kinase and protein phosphatase inhibitors on these parameters will be compared
              using cpc1 axonemes, wild type axonemes and axonemes from other central pair
              defective strains. Structures retained in axonemes from cpc1 and another
              central pair defective mutant, pf6, will be characterized by electron
              microscopy. Images from fixed, sectioned material will be compared with images
              from rapidly frozen, etched material to build three-dimensional models of
              central pair structure. This information will clarify possible interactions
              between central pair projections and radial spokes during flagellar motility.
              Molecular approaches will be used to clone the CPC1 gene, starting from
              available insertionally tagged alleles. Sequence of the corresponding cDNA will
              be used to predict the primary and secondary structure of the gene product and
              identify homology with proteins of known function. 

The results from this
              work will provide new insight into how flagellar motility is regulated.

