Title       : Regulation and Metabolic Networking of Leucine Catabolism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a9982892

Award Number: 9982892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eve S. Wurtele mash@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Basil J. Nikolau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              An organism's ability to maintain a balance between anabolism and catabolism is
              crucial to achieving net accumulation of biomolecules.  In addition, this
              metabolic balance must be integrated with the rest of the organism's metabolism
              and remain flexible to respond to a wide variety of developmental and
              environmental signals.  For stationary organisms such as plants, accommodation
              to environmental parameters is particularly critical.  Research on the
              metabolic function of methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (MCCase) indicates that
              plant leucine catabolism is networked with other metabolic and physiological
              processes.  Hence, the study of plant leucine catabolism may offer novel
              insights on how organisms network metabolism to achieve several levels of
              regulation of complex reticulated processes.  This project focuses on the
              regulation of leucine catabolism in Arabidopsis as an example of how complex
              interconnected metabolic pathways are controlled to achieve net
              interconversions of biomolecules.  It has been shown that plants catabolize
              leucine via a mitochondrial pathway that requires the enzyme MCCase.  In
              addition, characterizations of MCCase-deficient genetic stocks indicate that
              leucine catabolism in plants is shared between mitochondria and peroxisomes.
              The aim of this project is to elucidate the signaling and regulatory mechanisms
              that allocate leucine to the mitochondrial versus the peroxisomal catabolic
              pathways, and to determine how these catabolic pathways are networked with
              other metabolic processes.  To do this, three specific hypotheses will be
              tested: Hypothesis 1:  A block in mitochondrial leucine catabolism is
              compensated by global shifts in patterns of gene expression.  Hypothesis 2: 
              MCCase is the point of integration of leucine catabolism and isoprenoid
              metabolism.  Hypothesis 3:  Mitochondrial leucine catabolism is regulated by
              the metabolic status of the organism in part via changes in MCCase gene
              transcription.  
Plants take in simple molecules such as carbon dioxide, and
              water.  Using energy from the sun, these are converted to complex compounds
              such as starch, proteins, fibers, oils and pharmaceuticals.  In addition, these
              complex compounds are constantly broken down to provide energy for growth as
              well as to provide the new compounds needed by each plant cell to respond to an
              ever-changing environment.  The net accumulation of useful biomolecules by the
              plant is thus dependent on the balance between two processes.  The long-term
              goal of this research is to exploit the synergy inherent in a combined genetic
              and biochemical approach that will ultimately reveal how plants maintain such a
              balance.

