Title       : Regulation of Abscisic Acid Biosynthesis and Deactivation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a9982758

Award Number: 9982758
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan A. D. Zeevaart zeevaart@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1168,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abscisic acid (ABA), like other plant growth substances, has multiple
functions
              in plant growth and development. It is involved in such diverse
physiological
              processes as closure of stomata, and seed maturation,
dormancy, and
              germination. ABA also functions in response to environmental
stresses, such as
              drought, cold, heat, and salinity through its ability to
induce expression of
              specific genes whose products ameliorate the effects
of such stresses.
              Biosynthesis of ABA is stimulated during water stress, so
there is a large
              increase in ABA content during drought. Following
rehydration, ABA is rapidly
              degraded to phaseic acid (PA). To understand
the many roles of ABA in plants,
              it is essential to know how its
concentration is regulated at the tissue and
              cellular levels. ABA is
synthesized from epoxy-carotenoids (C40) by oxidative
              cleavage to form
xanthoxin (C15) and C25-apo-aldehydes. Xanthoxin is further
              converted via
ABA-aldehyde to ABA. In previous work, a gene encoding the
              cleavage enzyme,
9-cis-epoxy-carotenoid dioxygenase (NCED), was cloned from
              bean and
avocado. Analysis of expression of this gene at the mRNA and protein
              levels
showed that the cleavage reaction is the limiting step in ABA
              biosynthesis,
being strongly induced in dehydrated bean leaves and ripening
              avocado
fruit. At present, the endogenous carotenoid substrate of the
              cleavage
reaction is not known. Carotenoids are part of the
              pigment-protein
complexes in the thylakoid membranes of the chloroplast. In
              future work,
thylakoid membranes will be fractionated and analyzed to
              determine which
component provides the substrate for the cleavage reaction,
              and to isolate
native cleavage enzyme from dehydrated leaves. The promoter of
              the NCED
gene from bean will be fused to the reporter gene
              encoding
green-fluorescent protein and introduced into Arabidopsis. In
              these
transgenic plants, expression of the cleavage enzyme will be monitored
              at
the organ and cellular levels to determine when and where the
              cleavage
enzyme is expressed. In further work, the gene encoding the cleavage
              enzyme
will be expressed in transgenic plants under the control of a
              constitutive
or inducible promoter to determine whether the ABA level can be
              increased
permanently with a constitutive promoter, or transiently with an
              inducible
promoter. Manipulation of ABA metabolism may produce plants with
              raised ABA
levels that are better adapted than normal plants to grow under
              stressful
conditions. However, ABA causes its own deactivation by inducing
              ABA
8'-hydroxylase activity, which converts ABA to PA. It is
              conceivable,
therefore, that in plants overexpressing NCED, ABA homeostasis
              is
maintained due to ABA deactivation. 



