Title       : Electrophoretic Analysis of Bacterial Cell Wall Peptidoglycan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9982157

Award Number: 9982157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin D. Young   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Peptidoglycan is a rigid net-like structure that forms the outer wall of
              bacteria.  This molecule gives bacteria their shape and protects them from
              destruction from outside forces.  This "cage" that encloses bacterial cells is
              constructed by a family of enzymes, the penicillin binding proteins.  We know a
              great deal about the structure and activities of these enzymes themselves, but
              little is known about how these proteins affect bacterial growth or behavior. 
              One of the major problems in studying the biological functions of peptidoglycan
              is that current analytical techniques are complex  and time-consuming.  To
              address this problem, an electrophoresis procedure is being adapted to analyze
              the chemical composition of peptidoglycan.  This technique, called
              fluorophore-assisted carbohydrate electrophoresis (FACE), is easier, faster,
              and more sensitive than currently available techniques.  The long term goal of
              this project is to explain the structure, synthesis, and remodeling of
              peptidoglycan and to use this information to explain important aspects of
              bacterial metabolism and physiology.  The specific objective  of this project
              is to develop to maturity a simplified, rapid analytical technique that will
              expand the understanding of peptidoglycan structure and its biological
              functions.  The simplicity and speed of FACE should make it possible to survey
              the peptidoglycan composition of the bacterial world and  lead to new insights
              about how peptidoglycan structure contributes to bacterial physiology.
