Title       : Expression and Regulation of Telomerase in Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2000   
File        : a9982499

Award Number: 9982499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287395             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorothy E. Shippen dshippen@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas D. McKnight  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9982499

In this research, genetic and molecular approaches are used to
              elucidate the role of telomerase in genome maintenance and plant development,
              and to define the mechanism(s) that control telomerase expression in
              Arabidopsis thaliana.  Preliminary data from the Shippen and McKnight labs
              indicated that telomerase expression in plants is developmentally controlled
              and tied to reproduction and proliferation. The gene encoding the catalytic
              subunit of telomerase, AtTERT, has been cloned and its expression correlates
              well with enzyme activity.  A plant harboring a T-DNA insertion in the middle
              of this gene has no detectable telomerase activity.  Telomerase null plants are
              viable for at least two generations, but their telomeres are shortening,
              implying they cannot survive indefinitely.  The first objective is to define
              the role of telomerase in plant growth and development.  The AtTERT gene will
              be used as a marker for telomerase activity to gauge the temporal and spatial
              patterns of enzyme expression during growth and development.  The phenotype of
              telomerase null plants will be examined. Terminal restriction fragment analysis
              and cytogenetic studies will be performed with telomerase null plants in
              successive generations to correlate chromosome "uncapping" with phenotypic
              changes.  Finally, experiments will be conducted to uncover alternative
              mechanisms for telomere maintenance in telomerase null mutants.
       
              Telomerase is inactive in most vegetative organs, but becomes reactivated
              during the transition from the vegetative phase to the reproductive phase.  The
              second objective is to identify genes that control the developmental regulation
              of telomerase activity in transgenic activation-tagged lines of Arabidopsis. 
              These lines carry random insertions of a T-DNA element linked to strong
              constitutive enhancers that can override endogenous transcriptional controls
              and activate normally quiescent genes near the site of insertion.  Two mutant
              plants expressing telomerase inappropriately in leaves (tac1 and tac2) have
              been identified among the first 800 activation lines screened.  The tac1 and
              tac2 genes will be cloned and the temporal and spatial expression profiles of
              these genes in normal plants will be compared with AtTERT gene expression to
              ask whether the TAC gene products might specifically activate telomerase or
              play a broader role in regulating gene expression.  Because Arabidopsis is a
              multicellular eukaryote that displays developmentally programmed changes in
              telomerase expression, genetic investigations of the mechanisms involved in
              telomerase activation and repression will not only provide the first
              information about the role of telomerase in plants, but are also likely to
              yield insight into telomerase regulatory mechanisms operating in a broad range
              of higher eukaryotes.


Telomeres are complex nucleoprotein structures that
              cap the ends of linear eukaryotic chromosomes and protect them from end to end
              fusions and degradation.  The primary mechanism for generating and sustaining
              telomeric DNA is through the action of telomerase, an unusual ribonucleoprotein
              with reverse transcriptase activity.  In mammals, telomerase is part of a
              biological clock that determines the capacity for cellular proliferation, as
              its expression is strongly linked to aging and tumorigenesis. 
        Despite
              the fact that the essential functions of telomeres were first elucidated in
              plants by Barbara McClintock almost 60 years ago, relatively little is known
              about the role of telomeres and telomerase in plant growth and development.  In
              this research, genetic and molecular approaches are used to elucidate the role
              of telomerase in genome maintenance and plant development, and to define the
              mechanism(s) that control telomerase expression in Arabidopsis thaliana.  The
              advantages of working with Arabidopsis  are numerous and include a short
              generation time, ease of transformation and a small genome whose entire
              sequence should be completed next year.  Transgenic tools that permit both
              forward and reverse genetic approaches include a collection of T-DNA disruption
              lines and activation-tagged lines, both of which will be used throughout this
              work.

