Title       : Multiresolution- and Topology-Based Visualization of Large Scientific Data Sets
               in Parallel and Distributed Computing Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2000       
File        : a9982251

Award Number: 9982251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $769629             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernd Hamann hamann@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nelson L. Max  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth I. Joy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kwan-Liu Ma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              V. Ralph Algazi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1595,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Our ability to generate scientific data is growing much faster than our ability
              to understand it. The rapid advances in computing and imaging technology allow
              scientists to generate very large data sets for which appropriate means for
              in-depth analysis and understanding do not yet exist. Computational techniques
              allow the simulation of extremely complicated physical phenomena at ever
              increasing spatial and temporal resolutions, but data analysis technology for
              this type of data is still in its infancy. Today, one must choose one of these
              alternatives: One can either ignore a substantial fraction of a massive
              scientific data set and only analyze portions of it, or one can invest a
              significant amount of person-time to analyze and visualize a massive data set
              in great detail. Neither alternative is desirable. This project will develop
              the technology needed to address this issue, and will test the new techniques
              on data from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and NASA Ames Research
              Center.

Technically, the project will take a 5-prong approach to the large
              data visualization problem. First, it will extend existing hierarchical schemes
              - i.e., schemes approximating a data set at multiple resolution levels - to
              time-varying multi-valued/multi-dimensional data. Second, it will improve
              topology-based approaches - i.e., approaches that extract qualitatively
              interesting characteristics (such as zeros, extreme, and discontinuities in
              scalar and vector fields) from large data sets. Third, it will develop parallel
              and distributed algorithms for efficient computation of hierarchical data
              representations, fast extraction of topology, and optimizing compute-intensive
              visualization processes. Fourth, it will devise interactive visualization
              techniques for (immersive) visualization environments that support
              view-dependent and user-specified, adaptive level-of-detail rendering. Fifth,
              it will create a simple metadata database system allow sharing of a user's
              experience, i.e., previously chosen rendering parameters leading to "good
              imagery" or entire rendering processes.

