Title       : Visualization of High Dimensional Data in Comparative Morphology: Applications
               to Higher Primate Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9982351

Award Number: 9982351
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $839780             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Delson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil D. Tyson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Reddy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie F. Marcus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1595,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The visualization and analysis of animal structure in an evolutionary context
              has progressed from simple "eyeballing" to traditional morphometrics
              (multivariate analysis of caliper measurements) and is now entering the new
              regime of geometric morphometrics. In this approach, the three-dimensional (3D)
              coordinates of landmarks and intervening lines or surfaces are obtained with a
              digitizer or from CT or similar scans. Thus, the spatial relationships among
              these points, lines and surfaces are
expressly preserved. These coordinate
              data can be visualized as 2D and 3D images, manipulated, and statistically
              analyzed in high-dimensional shape space.  The researchers will develop a set
              of database, statistical and manipulative tools to allow the rapid
              visualization and comparison of morphology among individuals and populations,
              across sex and age differences, including both extant and extinct samples,
              effectively forming a database of virtual morphology for computerized analysis.
              Reconstruction of damaged fossils from undistorted relatives, morphing of
              ancestral species into visualized descendants, exploration of endocranial
              features, tracing the evolution of brain neurochemical pathways using
              functional images and stereologic data across species, and combined analyses of
              brain and bony skull form are among the goals of this project. The focus will
              be on the skull and brain of the Anthropoidea or "higher" primates (humans,
              apes and monkeys), but the tools and approaches will be useful to a wide
              audience of zoologists and paleontologists. Based at the American Museum of
              Natural History, the team benefits from its vast collections and available
              visualization infrastructure, as well as the unique opportunity to project our
              displays to colleagues and the interested public on the 4-square-meter walls of
              the Reality Room immersion environment and the 21 meter Digital Dome of the
              newly renovated Hayden Planetarium. 


