Title       : Gradients and the Control of Pattern Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a9982535

Award Number: 9982535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Small stephen.small@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Recent experiments suggest that gradients of regulatory molecules are
important
              for establishing the body plans of multicellular animals.
However, little is
              known about the mechanisms whereby target genes respond
to changes in the
              concentration of regulatory molecules.  This application
proposes to study
              these mechanisms in Drosophila, which is ideal for this
purpose because the
              early embryo is a syncytium of nuclei that do not
possess cytoplasmic
              membranes.  This permits the study of transcription
mechanisms directly,
              without complications from cell-cell signaling
processes.  The work will focus
              on four gap genes, hunchback, giant,
Kruppel, and knirps, whose overlapping
              protein gradients form an integrated
system that establishes striped patterns
              of gene expression in middle
regions of the embryo.  This work is driven by
              the hypothesis that these
gradients establish positions of gene expression
              borders by acting as
concentration-dependent repressors.  For each gradient,
              the borders of
several target genes are set at different positions with
              respect to the
source.  This suggests that each target gene responds to a
              different
concentration threshold of repressive activity.  To test this
              hypothesis,
previously characterized enhancers and the yeast FLP-FRT
              recombination
system will be used to ectopically express different levels of
              each gene
outside its normal domain.  These experiments will test whether
              expression
of a given gap gene is sufficient for a particular response, and
              identify
potential new target responses.  The misexpression system will also
              be used
to dissect regions of the gap proteins that are required for
              repression.
Initially, the focus will be on evolutionarily conserved domains
              that have
been previously implicated in repression.  Together these
              experiments will
help clarify the genetic circuitry that controls the
              positioning and
spacing of gene expression boundaries in the early embryo, and
              provide
insights into general mechanisms that control how different target
              genes
respond to different combinations and concentrations of
              regulatory
proteins.  They will also provide a firm foundation for studies
              designed to
unravel the mechanisms that change body plans during
              evolution.




