Title       : Testosterone and Avian Male Reproduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2001        
File        : a9982661

Award Number: 9982661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334050             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia L. Schwagmeyer plsch@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas W. Mock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hubert Schwabl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia G. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   In many socially monogamous bird species, males sometimes engage in
              extra-pair copulations and sire viable offspring.  Conventional wisdom has been
              that all males are continuously ready for such opportunities, but recent field
              studies of reproductive hormones have shown that testosterone (T) fluctuates
              greatly during the nesting cycle, peaking early during courtship/mating, then
              plummeting in tandem with a dramatic behavioral switch to care-giving
              activities (incubating and feeding nestlings).  It has been proposed that males
              may experience reduced interest in or capacity for extra-pair matings when T is
              low, that they may then experience a physiological 'time-out' phase of their
              cycle.  To test this, one sample of male house sparrows will be given
              time-release hormone implants (keeping T-levels high), while another sample
              serves as normal (cycling) controls.  The resulting patterns of extra-pair
              paternity, as revealed by DNA fingerprinting, will allow assessment of what a
              male sacrifices by cycling.  Conversely, the quality of parental care received
              by the nestlings of implanted vs. control males will show what is gained from
              cycling.  Parallel experiments will calibrate the mechanism(s) responsible.


                  This project will improve understanding of the social forces that promote
              and maintain monogamy, a relatively rare mating system in nature.  It focuses
              attention on the costs and benefits available to males for investing heavily in
              one primary brood by evaluating the factors that constrain the pursuit of
              alternative mating partners.
	




