Title       : Structural and Functional Analysis of the Plant Phenylpropanoid Biosynthetic
               Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2002   
File        : a9982586

Award Number: 9982586
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph P. Noel noel@sbl.salk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The goal of this project is to understand the enzymatic mechanisms
              underlying the biosynthesis of plant phenylpropanoids. This research employs a
              comprehensive experimental approach on the molecular level aimed at
              understanding the structural and functional basis for the catalytic properties
              of enzymes involved in phenylpropanoid biosynthetic pathways. The long-term
              objective of this project is to use atomic resolution enzyme structures derived
              from protein x-ray crystallography as starting points for the rational
              manipulation of both the substrate and product specificity of individual
              biosynthetic enzymes and multiple enzymes in biosynthetic pathways. The work
              centers on a branched set of pathways for phenylpropanoid production in
              alfalfa.  In particular, this proposal focuses on the completion of the
              three-dimensional x-ray crystal structures of several enzymes involved in the
              biosynthesis of nodulation inducers  and phytoalexins.  In addition, functional
              experiments on the structurally characterized enzymes will be carried out.  The
              emphasis of these latter experiments will be to uncover the core mechanistic
              principles governing the substrate and product specificity of each enzyme.  The
              current objectives are (1) to expand the structural and functional analysis of
              the plant polyketide synthases, chalcone synthase, (2) stilbene synthase, and
              pyrone synthase; and (3) to solve the x-ray crystallographic structure of the
              enzyme chalcone isomerase followed by additional functional experiments to
              modulate the specificity of these enzymes.  These studies will elucidate the
              enzymatic mechanisms governing phenylpropanoid production in plants.  In
              addition, this experimental strategy employing protein x-ray crystallography,
              site-directed and saturation mutagenesis of single and multiple amino acid
              positions, sequence information gathered from homologous families of
              biosynthetic enzymes, small molecule identification, and kinetic analyses will
              serve as starting points for the rational manipulation of the substrate and
              product specificity of individual biosynthetic enzymes and multiple enzymes in
              biosynthetic pathways.

     Plant phenylpropanoids are a diverse group of
              chemicals synthesized by plants when they are challenged with infectious agents
              such as fungi, bacteria, and viruses.  These complex small molecules also play
              vital roles in the interaction of plants with their surrounding environment.
              This family of natural products includes salicylates, lignans, chlorogenic
              acid, coumarins, stilbenes, and flavonoids.  The flavonoid group encompasses
              isoflavones, pterocarpans, flavones, flavonols, and anthocyanins.  This
              molecular diversity arises due to the action of highly specific biological
              catalysts known as enzymes.  The utility of these compounds in plants varies
              widely and includes roles as structural polymers, defense barriers, defense
              chemicals synthesized in response to microbial, insect, and herbivore
              predation, signaling molecules for nitrogen-fixing rhizobia bacteria,
              UV-protective agents, and pigments.  In addition to their role in plant
              physiology, phenylpropanoids possess a number of properties that have proven
              useful to the pharmaceutical, food, agricultural, and nutritional industries. 
              In particular, a number of plant-derived phenylpropanoids are valuable
              medicinal agents.  Moreover, the regular dietary consumption of
              phenylpropanoid-derived compounds including lignans, stilbenes, and
              isoflavonoids has considerable health benefits.  This project utilizes a
              technique known as protein x-ray crystallography to decipher the three
              dimensional shapes of the vital plant catalysts responsible for creating
              phenylpropanoid small molecules.  This information is then used to understand
              and alter the specificity of these catalysts in order to create even greater
              molecular diversity in these biosynthetic systems.  Modulation of the substrate
              and product specificity of these enzymes will directly impact efforts to
              produce novel compounds of both therapeutic and agricultural interest.

