Title       : LTER - Georgia Land/Ocean Margin Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a9982133

Award Number: 9982133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4199998            (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Hollibaugh   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven C. Pennings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1195,1306,1316,1650,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A Long Term Ecological Research site will be established on the central Georgia
              coast in the vicinity of Sapelo Island. This is a barrier island and marsh
              complex with the Altamaha River, one of the largest and least developed rivers
              on the east coast of the US, as the primary source of fresh water. The linkages
              between local and distant upland areas mediated by water - surface water and
              ground water - delivery to the coastal zone will be investigated. The
              relationship between variability in environmental factors driven by river flow,
              primarily salinity because we can measure it at high frequency, and ecosystem
              processes and structure will be examined. This will accomplished by comparing
              estuary/marsh complexes separated from the Altamaha River by one or two
              lagoonal estuary/marsh complexes that damp and attenuate the river signal. This
              spatial gradient is analogous to the temporal trend in riverine influence
              expected as a result of development in the watershed. A monitoring system will
              be implemented that documents physical and biological variables. The time
              trends and spatial distributions of these variables and of their variance
              structure will be used to address questions about the factors controlling
              distributions, trophic structure, diversity, and biogeochemistry.
An existing
              GIS-based hydrologic model will be modified to incorporate changes in river
              water resulting from changes in land use patterns that can be expected as the
              watershed develops. This model will be linked to ecosystem models and will
              serve as a heuristic and management tool.  Another consequence of coastal
              development is that as river flow decreases, groundwater flow increases and
              becomes nutrified. The effects of ground water discharge from the surficial
              aquifer in relatively pristine (Sapelo Island) will be compared against more
              urbanized (mainland) sites to assess the relative importance of fresh water
              versus nutrients to productivity, structure and biomass turnover rate in
              marshes influenced by groundwater. The effect of marine processes (tides, storm
              surge) on mixing across the fresh/salt interface in the surficial aquifer will
              be investigated.  Additional physical studies will relate the morphology of
              salt marsh - tidal creek channel complexes to tidal current distributions and
              exchange. These findings will be incorporated into a physical model that will
              be coupled to an existing ecosystem model.
This land/ocean margin ecosystem
              lies at the interface between two ecosystems in which distinctly different
              groups of decomposers control organic matter degradation. Fungal decomposers
              largely dominate the terrestrial ecosystem, while bacterial decomposers
              dominate the marine ecosystem. Both groups are important in salt
              marsh-dominated ecosystems. Specific studies will examine, at the level of
              individual cells and hyphae, the relationship bacteria and fungi in the
              consortia that decompose standing dead Spartina and other marsh plants and,
              examine how, or if, this changes along the salinity gradient.

