Title       : Allele Interactions that Heritably Alter Transcription
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a9982447

Award Number: 9982447
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $539692             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicki L. Chandler chandler@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Recently, cis-and trans-acting mutations that affect paramutation have been
              isolated.  One of the trans-acting mutants, mop1-1 has been shown to play a
              central role in paramutation and to also affect transposable element silencing.
               The proposed studies are:  to clone mop1 and determine its role in epigenetic
              regulation; to isolate more cis-acting mutants and to use the existing and
              newly isolated mutants to identify the key sequences required for paramutation;
              to characterize the nature of the cis-acting sequences; and to characterize
              chromatin structural changes that correlate with paramutation.  These
              experiments should provide tests of the chromatin hypothesis and reveal
              important information on mechanisms of epigenetic regulation in
              eukaryotes.

	Paramutation is an interaction between specific alleles that
              leads to a mitotically and meiotically heritable change in transcription. 
              Paramutation provides an excellent system for studying heritability of
              transcription states and allele communication.  The stable, heritable
              inactivation or activation of particular genes is crucial during development of
              multi-cellular organisms to maintain determined gene expression states.
              Paramutation is likely to involve epigenetic gene control, defined as a
              modulation of gene expression achieved by mechanisms superimposed upon that
              conferred by primary DNA sequence.  Recent genetic experiments indicate
              sequences far upstream are required for paramutation, suggesting long-range
              communication is occurring between sequences located > 50 kbp upstream and the
              promoter proximal region.  Genetic evidence also indicates that the two alleles
              communicate with each other.  Based on studies from other eukaryotic systems,
              chromatin structure is likely to be involved in intra-and inter-allele
              communication.  Epigenetic control of gene expression is mediated by the
              chromosomal context of the promoter, by modifications of histones and DNA,
              long-range interactions between distant chromosomal elements, and sub-nuclear
              organization.  Mammalian X-chromosome inactivation, transgene silencing in
              plants and animals, transposable element regulation, genome imprinting,
              silencing of yeast mating-type and telemere-located loci, and position effect
              variegation in Drosophila are examples with underlying epigenetic bases. 
              Information gained from the molecular genetic dissection of an epigenetic
              phenomenon such as paramutation in maize should be very applicable to
              epigenetic gene regulation in many other species that also have large amounts
              of repetitive DNA and high levels of DNA methylation.  An eventual
              understanding of paramutation should reveal how alleles interact in the nucleus
              to influence the regulation of each other, how such heritable transcription
              states are established and how they are maintained through numerous cell
              divisions and transmitted to the next generation.
 

