Title       : Collaborative to Integrate Material Science and Engineering research and
               Education Between Florida A&M University and Carnegie Mellon University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2001    
File        : a9982872

Award Number: 9982872
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1400000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Hamid Garmestani   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter N. Kalu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Justin Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Simone C. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick J. Foreman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida A&M University
	      400 Foote Hilyer Administration
	      Tallahassee, FL  32307    850/599-3531

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The award is to enhance the research and educational collaboration in the area
              of materials science and engineering between Florida Agricultural and
              Mechanical University (FAMU) and Carnegie Mellon University (CMU).   The
              primary contact at CMU is the Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
              at CMU, which has been supported by the National Science Foundation since 1996.
               The award has three objectives:  (1) To strengthen the quality of the
              materials science and engineering (MSE) curriculum at FAMU; (2) to provide more
              opportunities for minority students, who are traditionally underrepresented in
              MSE, to participate in materials science research at FAMU and CMU; and (3) to
              enhance the materials resources at both FAMU and CMU through shared equipment
              and software.  The focus of the activities is the involvement of undergraduate
              students in research.  
%%%
The award is to enhance the research and
              educational collaboration in the area of materials science and engineering
              between Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University (FAMU) and Carnegie
              Mellon University (CMU).   The primary contact at CMU is the Materials Research
              Science and Engineering Center at CMU, which has been supported by the National
              Science Foundation since 1996.  The award has three objectives:  (1) To
              strengthen the quality of the materials science and engineering (MSE)
              curriculum at FAMU; (2) to provide more opportunities for minority students,
              who are traditionally underrepresented in MSE, to participate in materials
              science research at FAMU and CMU; and (3) to enhance the materials resources at
              both FAMU and CMU through shared equipment and software.  The focus of the
              activities is the involvement of undergraduate students in research.  
***

