Title       : Mechanism of Cell Survival Mediated by the B-Raf Kinase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a9982789

Award Number: 9982789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309846             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Erhardt erhardt@bbri.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston Biomed Res Inst
	      64 Grove Street
	      Watertown, MA  024722829    617/926-8040

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Many types of mammalian cells are dependent upon growth factors for survival. 
              In a variety of cell types, growth factors prevent apoptosis by stimulation of
              the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3- kinase)/Akt pathway, which directly
              links growth factor signaling to the central apoptotic pathways by blocking
              both mitochondrial cytochrome c release and apoptotic protease (caspase)
              activation.  Growth factors are also known to regulate programmed cell death by
              activating members of the Raf kinase family, although the mechanism of this
              alternative Raf-dependent survival is not well understood.  Recent studies from
              this laboratory have identified a survival pathway mediated by the B-Raf
              protein kinase.  Although other regulatory steps may also be involved, the
              predominant effect of B-Raf appears to be downstream of cytochrome c release
              from mitochondria, and may be to inhibit the cytosolic activation of caspases. 
              Therefore, investigations are planned to elucidate the mechanism by which B-Raf
              prevents programmed cell death by identifying the relevant downstream targets.
              The studies will include the following specific aims: (1) to investigate the
              effects of B-Raf signaling on phosphorylation and inactivation of caspase-9,
              including, if appropriate, the identification of the kinase that phosphorylates
              caspase-9, (2) to analyze the effects of B-Raf signaling on the caspase-9
              activation complex containing Apaf-1 and its interactions with Bcl-xL, and (3)
              to study the potential role of B-Raf in transcriptional regulation of caspase
              inhibitors acting downstream of cytochrome c, such as members of the IAP and
              heat shock protein families.  As an alternative approach to identify the
              relevant targets of B-Raf signaling, systematic gene expression studies will
              also be undertaken.  The results of these studies will advance the basic
              understanding of signaling involved growth factor-mediated cell survival.
