Title       : Search for Myosin I Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a9982061

Award Number: 9982061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $592000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Barylko barbara.barylko@UTSouthwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas SW Medical Ctr
	      5323 Harry Hines Blvd
	      Dallas, TX  753909105    214/648-5100

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Myosin I-beta is a ubiquitously expressed and relatively abundant member of the
              superfamily of so-called unconventional myosins.  Unlike the 'conventional'
              muscle type myosins (myosin II), these myosins do not form bipolar filaments,
              but rather are believed to interact with specific subcellular targets by virtue
              of their diverse cargo-binding tail domains.  The precise functions of
              unconventional myosins are not yet known, but their importance is evident from
              the recent discoveries that myosin VII is involved in subcellular movements of
              membrane-bound vesicles and that mutations in myosins VI and VII result in
              deafness and visual impairment.  Myosin I-beta is highly enriched in plasma
              membranes, as determined by immunofluorescence microscopy and subcellular
              fractionation.  More specifically, it associates with detergent-insoluble
              glycolipid-rich membranes (DIGs), which are also enriched in growth factor
              receptors, G proteins, and other signaling molecules.  Therefore, it is
              tempting to speculate that myosin I-beta is a motor that translocates these
              membrane 'rafts' along the cortical actin cytoskeleton.  To test this
              possibility it will be important to verify that myosin I-beta actually docks
              with an authentic component of membrane rafts.  Therefore, a major goal of this
              project is to identify, characterize, and localize a myosin I-beta receptor. 
              Whether or not this receptor is located on raft domains, this information will
              greatly help to elucidate the function of myosin I-beta by pointing to the
              cargo to which it is targeted.  Another goal of the project is to determine how
              the interaction of myosin I-beta with membranes is regulated.  Myosin I-beta
              exists in both cytosolic and membrane-bound states.  The hypothesis to be
              tested here is that its association with the membrane is not constitutive, but
              rather is subject to regulation by phosphorylation and calmodulin-binding.  In
              addition, the possibility that membrane-binding and specific targeting to DIGs
              is enhanced by myosin palmitoylation will be examined.  Finally, two approaches
              to interfere with myosin I-beta function in cells will be developed: expression
              of dominant negative forms of either myosin I-beta or its receptor; and
              deletion of the myosin I-beta gene (or the receptor gene) in avian DT40 cells. 
              These tools will allow the testing of the working hypothesis that the myosin is
              involved in membrane protein translocation, and will be useful in determining
              the actual function of myosin I-beta should the hypothesis prove to be
              incorrect.


