Title       : Circadian Rhythms of Gene Expression in Cyanobacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a9982852

Award Number: 9982852
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $361642             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan S. Golden sgolden@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               Abstract:  Golden,  MCB 9982852

An endogenous timekeeping mechanism, called
              the circadian clock, allows organisms from animals to cyanobacteria to regulate
              their physiological processes temporally and to coordinate these with the
              environment. The hallmarks of circadian-controlled processes are that these
              rhythms show a periodicity of approximately 24 h in the absence of
              environmental cues, their phasing can be reset by light/dark signals, and they
              are temperature compensated. These intrinsic properties of circadian clocks
              allow metabolic and behavioral events to be synchronized with the earth's daily
              cycles, acommodating seasonal changes in day length and daily changes in
              temperature. Defining the molecular components and biochemical mechanisms that
              give rise to the properties of circadian clocks is the central goal of
              circadian research in general, and this project specifically. Cyanobacteria are
              the only prokaryotes that have been shown to exhibit circadian rhythms. The
              ease of genetic manipulation in Synechococcus sp. strain PCC 7942 has resulted
              in rapid progress toward understanding the cyanobacterial circadian clock. The
              period, amplitude, and phasing of the cyanobacterial circadian rhythm of gene
              expression can be readily monitored from any Synechococcus promoter by using
              luciferase gene fusions (Vibrio harveyi luxAB, or firefly luc), such that light
              production reports transcription in real time.  Previous research using this
              strategy identified a three-gene locus (kaiA, kaiB, kaiC) that is fundamentally
              important for cyanobacterial circadian rhythms. Mutations in any of the kai
              genes can cause a change in circadian period, and inactivation of any of them
              results in arrhythmia. The ability to generate mutants easily, to grow
              cyanobacteria with a short generation time, and to work with large populations
              of cells has allowed some important questions to be addressed very directly.
              For example, experiments with Synechococcus demonstrated that the circadian
              clock is operative even when cells are doubling much faster than once per day.
              Populations of mixed wild-type and mutant cells were used to show definitively
              that a circadian clock whose intrinsic period closely matches the light/dark
              cycle in the environment improves the fitness of cyanobacterial cells. This
              project has two aims. The first is to test the hypothesis that circadian
              rhythmicity depends on a transcriptional feedback loop involving the kai genes
              as a component of the timekeeping mechanism. This model is consistent with
              proposed mechanisms for the clocks of animals and fungi. However, phenotypes
              from mutants that desynchronize the normal phasing of kaiA and kaiBC suggest
              that the expected model may not be correct. Heterologous promoters will be used
              to bypass the natural transcriptional regulation of the kai genes and the
              strains will be monitored to determine whether timekeeping is still
              operational. The second aim is to understand output pathways that allow the
              circadian clock to orchestrate the timing of gene expression in the organism.
              This will be accomplished by: analysis of cis elements that allow some genes
              (such as purF and opcA) to be expressed in an exceptional phase (expression
              peaking near dawn, unlike most genes in the organism); identification of
              suppressors of known genes that affect the circadian timing of expression from
              subsets of genes; and isolation of new mutants that affect the circadian
              control of promoters such as that of kaiBC, for which no output pathway
              components have yet been identified. These experiments address both the
              mechanism of the clock itself, and the means by which circadian timekeeping is
              conveyed to the biological processes that the clock controls.


