Title       : RUI: Creatine Kinase: Structure/Function Relationships of Conserved Residues by
               Site-Directed Mutagenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9982401

Award Number: 9982401
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192304             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Borders borders@acs.wooster.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul L. Edmiston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Wooster
	      
	      Wooster, OH  44691    216/263-2000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9982401
Borders
Creatine kinase (CK) is a key enzyme in excitable tissues,
              which require large energy fluxes, i.e., skeletal muscle, heart muscle, and
              brain.  CK catalyzes the readily reversible phosphorylation of creatine by ATP
              to produce phosphocreatine and ADP.  The major role of CK in excitable tissues
              is to allow the cells to accommodate rapid-ATP-producing or -ATP-depleting
              activities without significant fluctuation in the narrow [ATP]/[ADP] range that
              is necessary for optimal cell function.  The proposed research would contribute
              to a better understanding of the mechanism of this important enzyme.  The work
              would also contribute to a broader understanding of other fundamental areas of
              enzyme/protein chemistry, including the factors involved in substrate binding,
              catalysis and accompanying transition-state stabilization, subunit-subunit
              association to form oligomeric proteins, and the role of "buried" arginines in
              the stabilization of protein structure. 

CK is a member of a larger family
              of phosphagen kinases (PKs) that use MgATP to reversibly phosphorylate a
              guanidino substrate.  CK is the only PK found in vertebrates, while arginine
              kinase (AK) is the major PK found in invertebrates.  Sequence homology analysis
              of 25 CKs and 12 AKs has identified 71 residues that are fully conserved in all
              PKs, suggesting that these residues play a similar role in all guanidino
              kinases.  Another 19 residues are fully conserved in CK and fully conserved as
              a different residue in AK, suggesting that these residues may play roles in
              differentiating substrate specificity and quaternary structure (AK is a
              monomer, while CK is a homodimer).  This sequence homology analysis, along with
              the examination of the x-ray crystal structures of an AK with a bound
              transition-state analog complex and two different CKs, has been used to propose
              specific roles for the conserved residues.

Site-directed mutagenesis of
              rabbit muscle CK will be used to examine residues involved in: 1) substrate
              binding; 2) catalysis; 3) transition-state stabilization; 4) monomer-monomer
              contacts, with the goal of forming a catalytically-active CK monomer; 5)
              stabilization of the tertiary structure of CK subunits, with the initial focus
              on two buried "structural" arginines; and 6) creatine binding, with the goal of
              altering the guanidino substrate specificity of the enzyme.  Each mutant will
              be characterized by extensive kinetic analysis of the "forward" reaction
              (phosphocreatine formation) and, where desirable, the "reverse" reaction
              (creatine formation).  Circular dichroic spectra and differential scanning
              calorimetry will be used to examine the thermal stability of each mutant, while
              quenching of intrinsic protein fluorescence by added nucleotide will be used to
              determine the nucleotide affinity and diminished transition-state stabilization
              of low-activity mutants.  Finally, the x-ray crystal structures of selected
              mutants will be determined in collaboration with Dr. J. K. Mohana Rao at the
              Frederick Cancer Institute.



