Title       : Feeding on Fear: An Analysis of Food Scares and the Restructuring of
               International Fresh Food Commodity Chains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a9982141

Award Number: 9982141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50780              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susanne E. Freidberg susanne.e.freidberg@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,5914,5928,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent food scares in Europe and the United States show how the
              internationalization and industrialization of the food supply have produced not
              only unprecedented abundance and variety but also a host of new perils.  These
              incidents have forced changes both in government regulations and food industry
              production practices.  How are these changes in turn transforming trade
              relations between the South's food exporters and their markets in the North? 
              This question holds important implications for some of the world's poorest
              countries, such as Burkina Faso. For decades Burkina Faso has been one of
              Africa's largest exporters of French green beans, but continued access to the
              European market is hardly assured.  Many countries now produce high-value fresh
              fruit and vegetable (FFV) crops for export to Europe, and some, such as
              Zimbabwe, have far superior technological and economic resources.  Meanwhile,
              the conditions for access to the food-scared European market have become
              increasingly stringent and exclusionary.  This project will examine how
              changing cultural constructs of quality and risks in food are transforming
              exchange and contract relations along key FFV commodity chains between Africa
              and Europe.  It will draw on the ethnographic methodology as well as the
              contacts established during previous NSF-funded research in Burkina Faso.  The
              project will also involve ethnographic fieldwork in the Rungis International
              Market in France, a pilot study of the FFV sector in Zimbabwe, and library and
              archival research.  The analysis will aim to determine how food safety concerns
              are understood, experienced, and acted upon by people involved in the
              production and distribution of African FFV.
 
This project, as one part of a
              multi-year study of food safety and trade, makes four important contributions. 
              First, by examining the role of popular "food fears" in the restructuring of
              international trade, it demonstrates how cultural constructs of quality, risk,
              and trust both shape and are shaped by the power relations and economic
              geography of the global food system.  Second, this research highlights
              previously unexamined differences within this global system.  By comparing
              export operations in two African sites with quite different social, economic,
              and political histories, it illuminates how international trade patterns are
              shaped by race, class and uneven development.  Third, this research will
              demonstrate how qualitative methods can be used to analyze the relationship
              between nature, culture and political economy not only within a local or
              regional food supply system but also across transcontinental commodity chains. 
              Finally, this research contributes to the broader understanding of how culture
              informs and responds to economic globalization.


