Title       : Mechanistic Chemistry of Transition Metal Oxygen and Oxo Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a9982004

Award Number: 9982004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Espenson espenson@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andreja Bakac  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. James Espenson and Dr. Andreja Bakac of Iowa State University are supported
              by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry program for a
              program of research dealing with the mechanisms of processes in which a single
              oxygen atom (or equivalent fragment) is transferred from one atom to another
              during chemical processes.  Several classes of such reactions will be studied.
              One of these is the catalysis of reductions of perchlorate ion by anions such
              as molybdate. The reactivity of nitric oxide (NO) with superoxo metal complexes
              and metal ions and related reactions will be explored. The research will also
              extend to the transfer of fragments that resemble oxygen (such as sulfur) and
              groups such as NR and CR2 that are isoelectronic with oxygen.

Many chemical
              reactions that are of major practical significance involve movement of an
              oxygen atom originally attached to one molecule to another location, where that
              atom is attached to a quite different molecule. Other chemical entities (sulfur
              atoms, small organic fragments) participate in chemical changes that are quite
              similar, in important respects, to these simple atom-transfer processes. Drs.
              Espenson and Bakac will investigate several systems that hold promise of
              greatly extending understanding of the fundamental principles that govern
              atom-transfer reactions. At least two of these systems are also of major and
              immediate practical interest. Contamination by perchlorate ion is an emerging
              environmental hazard in many parts of the United States. Reduction by atom
              transfer is the best way to destroy perchlorate ion. Nitric oxide (NO) is known
              to be an important signaling agent within biological organisms. The functioning
              of this species is greatly influenced by atom transfer processes. Fundamental
              understanding sought in this research will bear on these and other important
              processes.  



