Title       : CAREER: Incentives and Coordination in Decentralized Technological Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9982446

Award Number: 9982446
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stefanos Zenios stefzen@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Title:
CAREER: Incentives and Coordination in Decentralized
Technological
              Systems

Abstract:

Complex technological systems are prevalent in business
              and society. Typical
examples include supply chains spanning multiple
              independent corporations,
internet trading sites for business-to-business
              commerce, and health care
delivery systems. However, the technological
              complexity of these systems
poses numerous managerial challenges. These
              challenges are further amplified
when management control is decentralized and
              delegated to multiple
independent economic players. Therefore, to effectively
              manage such
decentralized technological systems, one must balance and
              reconcile the
conflicting objectives of the different economic players. The
              purpose of
this project is to develop a conceptual framework that captures
              both the
technological complexity and the decentralized nature of these
              systems, and
to derive concrete insights about their management. The specific
              activities
to be pursued include the development of mathematical and economic
              models,
and the subsequent investigation of systems with special structure
              that
arise in supply chain management and services management. The
              mathematical
formalism will be tested empirically on the US dialysis delivery
              system,
which best exemplifies the managerial challenges that underlie
              decentralized
technological systems. Computer simulation models illustrating
              the main
managerial challenges will also be developed, and used as an
              experiential
teaching devise for MBA students. 


