Title       : Structure and Function of Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetase Ribozyme
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a9982237

Award Number: 9982237
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319329             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hiroaki Suga hsuga@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9982237
Suga 
There is the hypothesis that coded protein synthesis evolved
              from a set of ribozyme catalyzed acyl-transfer reactions, including
              aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase (ARS) ribozymes. This PI has recently succeeded in
              isolating a novel ribozyme capable of synthesizing aminoacyl-tRNA. This
              ribozyme is able to specifically recognize an activated glutaminyl ester and
              aminoacylate a targeted tRNA via a covalent aminoacyl-ribozyme intermediate. We
              refer to this type of ribozymes as ARS ribozymes, and to those specific to
              glutamine as GlnRS ribozymes. Our most recent progress in the evolution of a
              GlnRS ribozyme clone has provided a promising route for the generation of
              highly active and specific ribozymes to selected amino acids. The PI proposes
              to conduct extensive studies on the GlnRS ribozyme to gain insights into its
              structure-function relationship. The studies involve the combination of
              biochemical methods, computer simulation, and X-ray crystallographic approach.
              These studies will reveal not only catalytic mechanism and higher-order
              structure of the ribozyme but also increase our understanding of RNA catalysis
              and structure in general. The outcome of this research may also provide an
              important implication for possible roles of ribozymes in the evolution of the
              genetic translation system that might have occurred in the RNA world.
              Furthermore, this information will be essential in the development of a novel
              and practical catalytic RNA system for the synthesis of non-natural
              aminoacyl-tRNAs. Successful development of such system will drive future
              directions of our long-term goal, a cell-free in vitro translation system
              composed of ARS ribozymes, which facilitates engineering and evolution of
              proteins containing non-natural amino acids. 



