Title       : RUI: Physiological Ecology of Diatom Motility and Adhesion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9982897

Award Number: 9982897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley A. Cohn scohn@condor.depaul.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DePaul University
	      1 East Jackson Boulevard
	      Chicago, IL  606042218    312/341-8000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Cohn
9982897

Diatoms, an abundant and widespread group of golden algae, are
              one of the most important members of virtually all aquatic communities, often
              providing much of the primary production of biomass for other organisms.  With
              diatoms situated at the base of the food chains, it becomes critical to
              understand how diatoms succeed in their environments, and how different
              environmental conditions affect their viability.  This project is designed to
              better understand the way in which diatoms are able to move through their
              environment, and how this movement helps them compete (both with other algae
              and between different diatom species) for limited local resources such as light
              and nutrients.  Because these cells are confined within a hardened glass-like
              cell wall, their movement is thought to be generated by the secretion of
              mucilage through specialized slits in their cell wall, and the subsequent force
              exerted on the adhering mucilage strands.  The PI plans to examine the process
              of diatom movement by: 1) analyzing the number and distribution of direct
              contact sites made by diatoms with the underlying surface as a function of
              changes in the environmental conditions (light, temperature, etc.); 2)
              analyzing the ability of diatoms to adhere to surfaces under different
              environmental conditions in the presence of flowing water; and 3) analyzing the
              effect of environmental conditions on the ability of diatoms to aggregate in
              areas of light.  

The experiments will be carried out at DePaul University,
              a teaching-oriented urban university, with a research team that includes
              several undergraduates. The techniques used in this study, such as
              video-microscopy and interference reflection microscopy, using various filters
              and environmental cell chambers to regulate the light, temperature, water, and
              surface conditions, are relatively easy for students to learn quickly.  This
              project therefore provides an opportunity to not only increase our knowledge of
              how the behavior of diatoms is affected by the environmental conditions, but
              also offer an exciting training opportunity for a number of undergraduate
              students to get involved directly in cellular and environmental research.  

