Title       : Macroevolutionary Trends of Defenses and Counterdefenses in an Ancient
               Plant-Insect Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a9982040

Award Number: 9982040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith X. Becerra becerra@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Pinero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Lawrence Venable  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 5922,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9982040
Becerra
Determining the macroevolutionary importance of plant defenses
              on the association between plants and the insects that eat them is critical to
              understanding the evolution of insect-plant interactions. Yet, until recently,
              this has been a difficult area of investigation because it requires rigorously
              derived evolutionary trees of interacting groups of insects and plant for which
              systematics, biogeography, ecology, and plant defensive traits are well known.
              This research is directed at providing a quantitative assessment of the role of
              plant structure and chemical defenses, host cladogenesis, and host
              biogeographical distributions in directing the evolution of host shifts. In
              this study, the evolutionary trees of the ancient and speciose Blepharida
              (Chrysomelidae) - Bursera (Burseraceae) system will be reconstructed. Also,
              profiles of structural and chemical defenses, as well as maps of geographic
              distributions for the plant species will be obtained to determine their
              relative importance in directing the evolution of these insects on these
              plants. Besides studying the macroevolutionary impact of plant defenses, this
              research will investigate the historical correlation of plant defenses with
              insect counter-defenses. This plant-herbivore system has spectacular defensive
              and counter-defensive traits that are well understood ecologically. Overall,
              this study will advance knowledge by providing a precise evaluation of the
              importance of plant defensive chemicals and defensive morphology in the
              macroevolution of host exploitation. It will be the first study to rigorously
              utilize molecular phylogenies for both insect and plant groups in the study of
              plant-insect coevolution. 

