Title       : Novel Redox Self-Assembling Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2001  
File        : a9982014

Award Number: 9982014
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angel E. Kaifer akaifer@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this renewal award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is
              continuing support for the work of Dr. Angel E. Kaifer at the University of
              Miami.   Dr. Kaifer and his group carry out fundamental investigations on the
              interplay of electron transfer reactions and host-guest molecular recognition. 
               Inserting a host molecule into a guest can change the electrochemical
              potential of the complex; conversely, forming a host-guest complex can change
              the ease with which electrons can be added or removed.   The systems studied
              resemble redox proteins, and the proposed work may provide insights into
              biological electron transfer reactions.   Dr. Kaifer has been very successful
              in attracting minority students to work in his group.

Research during the
              coming period will focus on the synthesis and characterization of novel
              dendrimers with unsymmetrically positioned redox centers, and of cavitand
              building blocks for self-assembling supramolecular structures, including
              hexameric cavitands with large central cavities.   Cavitands are bowl-shaped
              macrocycles obtained from the condensation of resorcinols and aldehydes.   A
              combination of characterization techniques will be used including voltammetry,
              electrospray mass spectroscopy, dynamic laser scattering, and size-exclusion
              chromatography.
