Title       : Circadian Rhythms in Naked Mole-Rats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a9982458

Award Number: 9982458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Goldman bruce.goldman@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to investigate circadian rhythm biology in
              naked mole-rats.  Naked mole-rats are highly social rodents that live in large
              colonies (60-80 individuals).  They are among the most exclusively subterranean
              of mammals; many individuals may never leave their underground burrows. 
              Circadian (daily) rhythms of locomotor activity, body temperature, and
              metabolic rate will be examined to determine whether mole-rats, like more
              'typical' mammals exhibit rhythmic daily variations that are regulated by an
              internal biological clock.  The project will also examine whether mole-rat
              rhythms (and the clock that controls them) are influenced by light, as is the
              case for other organisms.  Finally, the possibility of influence of circadian
              rhythms by social interactions will also be examined in mole-rat colonies. 
              Rhythms of locomotor activity will be studied by continuous monitoring of
              activity of individuals both within a colony setting and when animals are
              isolated from their colonies.  Body temperature variations will be measured by
              use of implanted telemeters, and metabolic rate will be assessed by continuous
              measurements of oxygen consumption.

	In all organisms that have been
              carefully studied, the biological clocks that regulate circadian rhythms are
              synchronized primarily by light cues, but there is evidence that under certain
              circumstances these clocks can also be synchronized by social cues.  Yet, the
              most intensely studied species (rats, mice, hamsters) are relatively
              non-social, and few studies have been performed with social mammals.  Humans
              clearly organize many of their daily activities in relation to social
              interactions, and in its most extreme form this extends to areas such as shift
              work and non-24 hour work schedules in certain situations.  Despite some
              research in these areas---particularly with regard to sleep/wake rhythms, body
              temperature rhythms, and rhythms of hormone secretion---it is not clear how the
              human circadian system is involved in social aspects of human daily rhythms. 
              By examining a mammal recently discovered to have evolved an unusually high
              degree of social organization, it will be possible to assess the potential of
              the mammalian circadian system for functioning in the context of social cues. 
              This will provide valuable cues in the effort to understand the human circadian
              system.  In addition to their extreme sociality, naked mole-rats live in
              burrows where they are very rarely exposed to light and may thus be unable to
              make use of the light:dark cycle for synchronization of biological rhythms. 
              Naked mole-rats are also relatively unique in exhibiting a very low body
              temperature and metabolic rate as compared to other mammals.  Therefore,
              studies of the circadian regulation of metabolism and body temperature in naked
              mole-rats will extend our understanding of the physiology of mammalian
              energetics. 
