Title       : CSF-1R Regulation of Type I PIP5K
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a9982410

Award Number: 9982410
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272109             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan Davis NDavis@lsuhsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LSU Health Scs Cntr-Shreve
	      1501 Kings Highway
	      Shreveport, LA  71130    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Phosphatidylinositols (PtdIns) are membrane lipids that regulate diverse
              cellular processes including cell survival and proliferation, receptor
              internalization, intracellular membrane trafficking, secretion, and remodeling
              of the actin cytoskeleton.  The ability of PtdIns to regulate such diverse
              functions is due to the addition of phosphate groups at specific sites on the
              inositol moiety as catalyzed by a set of specific PtdIns kinases. 
              Understanding the mechanisms that regulate PtdIns signaling therefore hinges
              upon the characterization of these PtdIns kinases. This project will dissect a
              regulatory pathway for one of these kinases, the beta isoform of the murine
              type-I phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase (PIP5K-I beta).  As shown in
              preliminary studies, a truncated and enzymatically inactive form of PIP5K-I
              beta can restore the function in cells of a defective form of growth factor
              receptors, namely colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor.  The working hypothesis
              is that this truncated kinase inhibits the removal of the activated receptor
              from the plasma membrane and interferes with the function of endogenous PIP5K-I
              beta to block receptor degradation. The objective of these studies is to test
              this hypothesis by the following specific aims.  Aim 1 is to demonstrate that a
              block of receptor internalization and degradation, independent of PIP5K
              function, is sufficient to restore the activity of the defective
              colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor, and that the truncated kinase acts by
              binding and sequestering endogenous PIP5K-I beta in biologically inactive
              complexes.  Protein complexes containing either mutant or native forms of the
              kinase will be characterized by protein composition, subcellular distribution
              and enzyme activity.  Aim 2 is to define the contribution of PIP5K-I beta in
              the production of different phosphorylated PtdIns and to define the
              physiological factors that regulate PIP5K-I beta activity and subcellular
              targeting.  Site-specific phosphorylation of PtdIns in cells will be
              characterized after activation of the colony simulating factor-1 receptor, as
              well as after overexpression of mutant kinase forms.  Additionally, the
              regulatory domains of PIP5K-I beta will be determined by alanine-screening
              mutagenesis of the kinase and testing the effects of the altered proteins on
              the PtdIns-dependent activities of the cell.
