Title       : GOALI: Generation, Characterization, and Modeling of Structure and Properties of
               Polymer Blend Nano- and Microparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  2001   
File        : a9982077

Award Number: 9982077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua U. Otaigbe   (Principal Investigator current)
              G. Bruce Klingensmith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9982077
Otaigbe

This GOALI award, jointly supported by the  Div. of
              Materials Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
              Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, is in the area of
              nanoscience.  New dynamic behavior emerges when polymers are confined in a
              small droplet of solution the size of a molecule or in molecular aggregates. 
              Solvent evaporation takes place on a time scale short enough to frustrate phase
              separation, producing dry pure polymer or polymer blend microparticles that are
              homogeneous within molecular dimensions.  This capability allows production of
              spherical polymer alloy microparticles with tunable properties (such as
              refractive index) simply by adjusting the relative weight fractions of the
              polymers in solution.  This research will develop a methodology for generating
              polymer and polymer blend microparticles and for probing the structure,
              morphology, and other characteristics of the polymer micro- and nanoparticles. 
              Using instrumentation developed for probing single fluorescent molecules in
              submicrometer droplets, the proposal will demonstrate that polymer particles of
              nearly arbitrary size and composition can be made with narrow size dispersion. 
              While the focus of this research is on polymeric systems, the microparticle
              generator can be easily adapted to make small organic and inorganic particles
              (and hybrid systems).  A number of optical methodologies such as Fraunhofer
              diffraction, fluorescence, and conventional phase-contrast microscopy will be
              used to probe polymer particles immobilized on two-dimensional subrstrates or
              levitated in space using a three-dimensional quadrupole (Paul) trap.  The
              optical diffraction method will provide a unique look (not possible now with
              conventional methods such as electron-beam microscopy) inside a polymer
              particle in a measurement time schale of a few milliseconds, making it
              attractive to in-line production applications.

The knowledge gained will be
              useful in addressing phase separation, the primary barrier to producing many
              technologically relevant and scientifically interesting homogeneous polymer
              blends from bulk-immiscible components in solution.  Examples of application
              areas of the polymer microparticles include polymer blends or alloys,
              biomaterials for drug delivery systems, electro-optic and luminescent devices,
              polymer powder spray coating, and polymer powder impregnation of inorganic
              fibers in composites and in polymer-supported heterogeneous catalysis.

