Title       : The Interactions of TRAP with RNA to Regulate the trp Genes in Bacilli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a9982652

Award Number: 9982652
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Gollnick gollnick@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Gollnick
The broad, long term goals of this research are to understand the
              mechanisms by which proteins recognize and bind to specific RNAs, and to
              investigate how these interactions regulate gene expression.  The model system
              of study is the TRAP protein (trp RNA-binding Attenuation Protein), an
              RNA-binding protein that regulates expression of the tryptophan biosynthetic
              genes in Bacilli.  TRAP negatively regulates both transcription and translation
              of these genes by binding to specific RNA target sites in a tryptophan
              dependent manner. TRAP controls transcription of the trpEDCFBA operon via an
              attenuation mechanism involving two mutually exclusive RNA secondary structures
              that form in the 5' leader region: a rho-independent transcription terminator
              and an overlapping antiterminator.  In the presence of excess tryptophan, TRAP
              binds to a target in the leader transcript consisting of 11 G/UAG repeats
              separated by 2-3 nonconserved "spacer" residues.  This binding promotes
              formation of the terminator, halting transcription of the operon.  TRAP also
              regulates translation of several trp genes by either altering the RNA secondary
              structure or by directly competing with ribosomes for binding to the mRNA. 
              TRAP contains 11 identical subunits arranged in a symmetrical ring and is
              activated to bind RNA by binding 11 tryptophan molecules in pockets between
              adjacent subunits.  The crystal structure (to 1.9 angstrom resolution) of TRAP
              bound to a 53 base RNA containing 11 GAG repeats separated by AU spacers has
              answered many questions about the interaction TRAP with RNA, however several
              important questions about this unusual protein/RNA interaction remain
              unanswered.  In this project, a combination of crystallography, biochemical and
              genetic approaches will be used to continue analysis of this novel RNA-binding
              gene regulatory protein. This work will provide new information about how
              proteins recognize RNA and how RNA-binding proteins control gene expression.
              The high resolution crystal structure of a TRAP/RNA complex, together with
              thermodynamic studies of the TRAP/RNA interaction makes it an excellent system
              with which to perform further detailed analyses.  Currently, there are few, if
              any other RNA-binding proteins that regulate gene expression that can be
              studied in this detail.  The specific aims of the project are: 1) Understand
              the specificity of the TRAP/RNA interaction including the basis for the
              specificity for G and U in the first position of the G/UAG triplets and the
              effect of 3 spacer nucleotides between the G/UAG repeats.  2) Determine the
              role of hydrophobic and stacking interactions in the TRAP/RNA complex.  3)
              Determine the role of macromolecular hydration in the TRAP/RNA
              interaction.

	

Specific interactions between proteins and RNA molecules
              play crucial roles in regulating gene expression in all organisms.  The
              importance of these interactions has become increasingly clear in recent years.
               The study of RNA-protein interactions is therefore crucial to understand the
              mechanisms that control gene expression.  The broad, long term goals of this
              research are to understand the mechanisms by which proteins recognize and bind
              to specific RNAs, and to investigate how these interactions regulate gene
              expression.  The model system of study is the TRAP protein (trp RNA-binding
              Attenuation Protein), an RNA-binding protein that regulates expression of the
              tryptophan biosynthetic genes in bacteria called Bacilli.	TRAP is a novel
              protein containing 11 identical subunits arranged in a ring and it recognizes
              and binds to RNAs that contain multiple repeats of the sequence GAG or UAG.  In
              this project, a combination of crystallography, biochemical and genetic
              approaches will be used to continue analysis of this novel RNA-binding gene
              regulatory protein. This work will provide new information about how proteins
              recognize RNA and how RNA-binding proteins control gene expression. The high
              resolution crystal structure of a TRAP/RNA complex, together with thermodynamic
              studies of the TRAP/RNA interaction makes it an excellent system with which to
              perform further detailed analyses of  this system. Currently, there are few, if
              any other RNA-binding proteins that regulate gene expression that can be
              studied in this detail.  

