Title       : RUI: The Role of Ret Signaling in Nephric Duct Migration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a9982381

Award Number: 9982381
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264534             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Drawbridge drawbridge@rider.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rider University
	      P O Box 6400
	      Lawrenceville, NJ  086480400    609/896-5000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   In mammals, it has been demonstrated that glial-derived neurotrophic factor
              (GDNF) signaling through Ret, a transmembrane protein tyrosine kinase, is
              required for proper development of the metanephros - the terminal kidney of
              amniote vertebrates.  Our interest in the Ret signaling system was piqued by
              several observations indicating it may also operate at much earlier steps in
              renal development:  Ret and other components of its signaling complex can be
              detected in intermediate mesoderm and in nephric duct (ND) epithelia well
              before formation of the metanephros.  In addition, components of the Ret system
              have been identified in developing excretory systems of fish, frogs and
              salamanders.  These vertebrates don't make a metanephros; their terminal kidney
              is the mesonephros. So, what function might Ret signaling perform during early
              excretory system development?  The observation that both enteric enervation and
              kidney development fail in GDNF or Ret knockout mice, provides an important
              clue.  Both the hindbrain neural crest, which generates the enteric nervous
              system, and the ND, the Ret expressing component of the developing excretory
              system, must migrate to their final destinations in the embryo by following
              guidance information distributed along their respective pathways.  Furthermore,
              our experiments in axolotl embryos have revealed that when neural crest of the
              head is transplanted to the flank of a donor embryo it follows the same
              trajectory a transplanted ND would take.  Thus, the two tissues which require
              Ret function during development - ND and hindbrain neural crest - can also
              interpret the same guidance information on the flank. From these studies, we
              formulated the hypothesis that Ret signaling functions in either promoting or
              guiding ND cell migration.  

     Dr. Drawbridge's  preliminary data reveals
              that components of the Ret signaling system are present on the migrating ND of
              axolotl embryos. Furthermore, we have evidence that ectopic application of GDNF
              in vivo can redirect migration of the axolotl ND.  During the course of this
              project, she will (1) determine the spatio-temporal expression patterns of
              components of the Ret signaling system via in situ hybridization and
              immunocytochemistry; (2) determine whether Ret signaling is sufficient for
              directing ND migration by ectopic placement of GDNF in vivo; and (3) determine
              whether Ret signaling is necessary for ND pathfinding and motility by
              performing antibody inhibition and/or chromophore-assisted laser inactivation
              (CALI) experiments to knockout components of the Ret system during ND
              migration.  These data will provide a rigorous test of the hypothesis that Ret
              signaling functions in ND pathfinding and motility, as well as provide
              information about Ret signaling and evolution of the vertebrate excretory
              system.

 
    
