Title       : The Developmental Basis for Evolutionary Changes in the Larval Biology of
               Brachiopods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2002  
File        : a9982025

Award Number: 9982025
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470652             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Freeman GFREE@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Invertebrate animals in most extant phyla have a complex life history
with
              larval and adult phases that are separated by a metamoprhic
transition.  It is
              thought that a great deal of evolutionary change has
occurred in the context
              of this transition. Phylogenetic studies on
brachiopods indicate that an
              ancestor of two subphyla: Linguliformea and
Craniiformea gave rise to the more
              derived subphylum Rhynchonelliformea.
Extant members of the Linguliformea have
              long lived planktotrophic larvae
that eat and grow in the plankton, while
              extant Craniiformea have short
lived lecithotrophic larvae that do not eat. 
              Both the Linguliformea and
Craniiformea have an excellent fossil record that
              extends back to the Lower
Paleozoic.  By analyzing the apex of the shells of
              these fossils one can
infer when the mantle tissue that laid down the first
              shell was formed.
All of the families in these two subphyla initially had
              planktotrophic
larvae.  The extant members of the Rhynchonelliformea all
              have
lecithotriophic larvae.  Since this subphylum originated from an
              ancestor
with planktotrophic larvae, lecithotrophy is a derived state.  One
              aim of
this proposal is to do a study of fossils in the Rhynchonelliformea
              that
show traces of an embryonic or larval mantle in order to trace
              the
evolution of larval type.  The other aim of this proposal is to
              examine
mantle formation in the context of metamorphosis in extant
              brachiopods. 1)
A comparative survey will be done in order to find out to what
              extent
representatives of extant subphyla use the same signal
              transduction
mechansisms to trigger metamorphosis following exposure to an
              appropriate
external cue. 2) Experiments will be done where larvae are reared
              well past
the normal time of metamorphosis in order to see if
              continuing
developmental events lead to the formation of post-larval
              structures such
as a feeding apparatus, alimentary system and shell in the
              absence of
metamorphosis. 3) There is a candidate gene , brachiopod
              "engrailed" that
may play a role in mantle differentiation.  A comparative
              study will be
done to examine tissue specific expression of this gene in
              representatives
of each subphylum.

