Title       : Functional Analysis of Histone Regulatory Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9982909

Award Number: 9982909
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul D. Kaufman pdkaufman@lbl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1154,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                          	DNA in all organisms exists in large molecules known as
              chromosomes.  In order to fit huge chromosome molecules into cells, the DNA is
              repeatedly wrapped in tight spools around chromatin proteins.  The major type
              of chromatin proteins is the histones. In many organisms, a strong peak of
              histone mRNA and protein synthesis occurs at the G1-S transition of the cell
              cycle, just prior to DNA synthesis.  This ensures that histones are synthesized
              just as they are needed for packaging newly synthesized DNA.  This regulation
              occurs in many organisms, from humans to yeasts; the ease of genetic
              manipulation of yeast makes them an attractive model organism for study.  In
              the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, four Histone Regulator genes (HIR1,
              HIR2, HIR3, and HPC2, referred to collectively as HIR genes) are required to
              repress histone gene transcription outside of the G1-S period.  Progress in
              understanding Hir protein function requires differentiation between their
              direct contribution to chromosome structure and their regulation of histone
              synthesis.  In this project, these roles will be genetically separated by
              creating strains in which histone synthesis is no longer regulated by Hir
              proteins.  A genetic screen to define which genes become essential for
              viability in yeast cells lacking the HIR1 gene will be pursued. 
              Immunoprecipitation, velocity sedimentation and gel filtration experiments will
              test whether Hir proteins are physically associated with each other or with
              histones in yeast cell extracts.  Using epitope-tagged Hir proteins, these
              experiments may also identify novel Hir-associated proteins.  Hir protein
              complexes will be isolated and will be used to test hypotheses generated by
              previous genetic data:  are the Hir proteins a site-specific DNA-binding
              complex?  Do they act as a histone deposition factor?  If the Hir complex is
              indeed found to possess histone deposition activity, subsequent experiments
              will address whether the activity is replication-dependent or synergistic with
              CAF-I activity.  This work will improve our understanding of how cells
              coordinate chromosome formation with cell growth.
