Title       : RUI: Tubulin Folding and Assembly in Chlamydomonas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a9982733

Award Number: 9982733
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247129             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl A. Johnson kjohnson@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9141,9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Eukaryotic cells contain elaborate internal structures called microtubules,
              which are hollow, pipe-like polymers of tubulin proteins involved in the
              determination of the cell's shape, organization, mitotitc and meiotic divisions
              and movement.  The production of new tubulin subunits begins with the
              translation of alpha and beta tubulin-encoding mRNAs, followed by folding of
              the nascent polypeptide chains and formation of alpha-beta dimers. The dimers
              then become part of the pool of free subunits available for microtubule
              assembly.  This translation and dimerization pathway involves special proteins
              called molecular chaperones that assist in the maturation of tubulin subunits. 
              A key participant is a large multimeric complex called CCT (for Chaperonin
              Containing TCP- 1).  CCT has been studied biochemically in a variety of cell
              types and genetically in yeast; however, relatively little is known about how
              the folding pathway is spatially organized within the complex environment of
              the cytoplasm, or how it may play a role in regulating microtubule assembly
              through dimer availability.

In this project, Dr. Johnson will perform
              experiments directed at localizing CCT and other components of the tubulin
              folding pathway in the single-celled green alga Chlamydomonas.  Chlamydomonas
              is an important model organism for the study of a variety of significant
              cellular features, including flagellar motility.  Its pair of long, whip-like
              flagella extend from the apical cytoplasm of each cell and beat in wave-form,
              oar-like strokes to propel the cell though its aqueous environment.  Each
              flagellum is a complex miniature machine containing a bundle of specialized
              microtubules that are animated by also-specialized dynein molecular motors;
              this complex longitudinal array of microtubules and motors is termed an axoneme
              and is characteristic of flagella in general.   These flagella can be
              experimentally removed from the Chlamydomonas cells, and such removal results
              in the triggering of a flagellar regeneration process in which replacement
              structures, each as long as the cell body itself, are produced within 90
              minutes.  This process, which can be conveniently induced in the laboratory,
              involves massive translation of new tubulin proteins within the cell body,
              movement of tubulin dimers into and through the flagellar space and
              polymerization of the dimers into nascent microtubules at the distal (far) end
              of the elongating structure.  It is within this context of spatially separated
              synthesis, transport and assembly that Dr. Johnson will investigate the
              organization of the tubulin folding pathway.  Using a combination of molecular
              and biochemical approaches, Dr. Johnson will characterize genes encoding
              Chlamydomonas CCT subunits and study their expression during flagellar
              regeneration. Specific antibody probes to the subunits will be used to localize
              CCT within the cell using immunofluorescence and immunoEM techniques. These
              experiments will be carried out in a predominantly undergraduate institution
              and will involve extensive participation by undergraduates in the research
              process.  
This investigation offers significant opportunities for novel
              insight into the spatial
organization of tubulin biogenesis in the living
              cell. Because microtubule architectures,
and the processes that cells use to
              create them, are highly conserved in all eukaryotes,
such studies will lead to
              a better understanding of microtubule biology in general. 

