Title       : Bipartite Geminivirus Movement Protein Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a9982622

Award Number: 9982622
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $570000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sondra G. Lazarowitz sgl5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the project is to elucidate how plant virus-encoded movement
              proteins (MPs) act to coordinate replication of the viral genome with its
              directional movement through and between plant cells, and to explore the role
              of MPs in conferring tissue restriction to plant virus infection. Understanding
              virus-host interactions at this level is important for combating viral
              diseases, for only from such knowledge can rational anti-viral strategies be
              developed. Genetic studies show that MPs determine the host range and
              pathogenic properties of plant viruses. Thus, understanding their functions is
              essential for developing strategies to engineer plants that will be resistant
              to a broad range of geminiviruses.
The bipartite geminiviruses squash leaf
              curl virus (SqLCV) and cabbage leaf curl virus (CLCV) encode two MPs, NSP and
              MPB. These act cooperatively to move the viral single strand DNA genome within
              and between cells. NSP is a nuclear shuttle protein that binds viral genomes at
              their site of replication in the nucleus, and moves these between the nucleus
              and the cytoplasm. MPB traps NSP-genome complexes in the cytoplasm and moves
              them along unique endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-derived tubules to and across the
              walls of developing phloem cells. By site-directed mutagenesis, functional
              domains have been identified within each MP. The interactions between NSP and
              MPB are regulated by an activity that is specific to plant cells, and
              mutational studies suggest that this regulation may involve phosphorylation of
              the MPs . Use of the green fluorescent protein (GFP) has further shown that
              SqLCV infection is phloem-limited. To understand the functions of NSP and MPB,
              the signaling pathways through which they act, and the role of MPB in the
              phloem restriction of virus infection, now requires biochemical and genetic
              studies. We also want to understand, and develop new in vivo and in vitro
              approaches to investigate their functions. The specific goals of the project
              are to investigate MPB-ER interactions and their roles in the
              phloem-restriction of virus infection, to investigate the function of AtNSI, an
              Arabidopsis protein of unknown function that interacts with NSP and to identify
              host cell proteins that interact with MPB. These approaches will take advantage
              of different features of cucurbits and Arabidopsis. CLCV expressing free GFP
              and CLCV-SqLCV recombinants will be studied to determine if CLCV infection is
              phloem-restricted in Arabidopsis and the role of MPB in the ability to infect
              Arabidopsis. Fusions of MPB with GFP expressed from tissue-specific promoters
              in transgenic Arabidopsis wll be used to determine the role of MPB in the
              phloem limitation to virus infection and the effects of phloem development on
              virus movement. Determining the subcellular location and tissue-specific and
              temporal expression patterns of AtNSI will provide information on its function.
              Direct binding assays with NSP in vitro and a yeast reverse two-hybrid screen
              will be used to to identify NSP mutants with defects in AtNSI interaction;
              these will be screened by a PCR-based technique. Identifying host proteins that
              interact with MPB will define its function and how it targets to ER, and will
              be accomplished by using the yeast SOS-recruitment system, interaction cloning,
              and co-purification with MPB.

