Title       : MLIAM: NESPOLE! - Negotiating through Spoken Language in E-commerce
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a9982227

Award Number: 9982227
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1499217            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Waibel waibel@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alon Lavie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lori Levin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Frederking  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1399,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project, which will be carried out by a consortium of six partners in the
              US and Europe, aims to remove language barriers and enable the broad general
              public to do business on the internet via an effective cross lingual human to
              human communication facility. Two major obstacles toward this goal will be
              attacked: the domain limitation of speech translation systems, and the use of
              advanced multi-modal interfaces and their  integration with language assistance
              functions. The PI's team will exploit a mixture of strengths in a multi engine
              approach, while also expanding the basic capabilities of the engines to enhance
              their robustness and portability. Prototype systems involving actual service
              providers will be configured and studied in the context of extensive e-commerce
              use. Four  of the partners (CMU, University of Karlsruhe, IRST, CLIPS) are
              scientific institutions who have worked together for many years within the
              Consortium for Speech Translation Advanced Research (C-STAR) and have an
              elaborate and solid base of state-of-the art speech translation technology at
              their disposal. The two commercial partners (APT and AETHRA) will provide
              Web-based and video-conferencing infrastructure along with a user/customer
              business community for extensive and realistic user studies. The prototype
              system (or set of systems) constructed in the course of the project will be
              tested and demonstrated via two showcase applications- one in the more limited
              travel domain, the other in a very broad help-desk scenario in which real users
              will conduct multi-modal and translingual e-commerce transactions. The
              technology resulting from this project will have immediate relevancy to
              numerous and diverse other applications that require natural language
              understanding in multi-modal settings.

I

