Title       : Origin and Evolutionary Diversification of Andromonoecy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a9982489

Award Number: 9982489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela K. Diggle diggle@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9982489
Diggle

One of the most intriguing aspects of plant reproductive and
              evolutionary biology today is the diversity of sexual systems in flowering
              plants.  The majority of flowering plants are hermaphroditic, with each flower
              bearing both male and female parts.  A significant number of flowering plants,
              however, have evolved highly complex sexual systems that involve the production
              of different flower types by the same individual.  Andromonoecy
is a sexual
              system in which plants produce both hermaphrodite and functionally male
              flowers.  Despite over a century of intensive study of the function of
              andromonoecy, the origin of this sexual system remains a mystery.  This study
              addresses the evolutionary origin and diversification of andromonoecy within
              the genus Solanum.  This research will identify the specific features of plants
              and flowers that have been modified during the evolutionary transition from the
              production of only hermaphroditic flowers to andromonoecy and the ability to
              produce both hermaphroditic and male flowers.

This research on the evolution
              and function of plant sexual systems has broad implications for basic and
              applied research in plant biology.  Sexual systems determine patterns of
              mating, and thus the genetic structure of populations.  They are important
              determinants of reproductive output (e.g., fruit production), and may provide
              critical mechanisms for plant response to environmental variation.  The results
              of this research will be particularly important for understanding past
              evolutionary responses to a variable environment and predicting mechanisms of
              response to future environmental change.  In addition, functional andromonoecy
              limits productivity in many species , including perennial fruit crops.  This
              research has the potential to identify developmental processes that can be
              targeted by breeders and geneticists to improve productivity.


