Title       : Phylogenetic and Molecular Evolutionary Investigations of Chloroplast DNA
               Variation in the Campanulaceae sensu stricto
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9982091

Award Number: 9982091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200105             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Jansen jansen@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9982091
Jansen
	Genomic (DNA) data are helping to revolutionize the study of
              taxonomic relationships, classification, and evolutionary affiliations of
              organisms. In addition to DNA sequence data (strings of nucleotides from
              comparable, or homologous, genes), restriction-site data and other kinds of
              gene-order data are also valuable and powerful sources of evidence. Dr. Jansen
              at the University of Texas has been a leader in the development of
              restriction-site and gene-order methods in the analysis of phylogenetic
              relationships of plants. In this project he and a team of colleagues will study
              the plant family Campanulaceae (the bellflower family), where the chloroplast
              genome has the greatest known range of structural or gene-order variants of any
              flowering plant family, including cases of inversion, expansion/contraction of
              the IR region (the Inverted Repeat characteristic of all land plant chloroplast
              genomes), gene transpositions, gene losses, and deletions within large open
              reading frames. Most of these changes are expected to be rare if not unique
              events, at the molecular level, and are thus potentially strong markers of
              sublineages within the family. In many cases, however, the proposed
              rearrangements must be confirmed by direct nucleotide sequencing of end points
              or other "hot spots" to ensure comparison of equivalent changes. The project
              thus combines analyses in the field of molecular evolution with efforts to
              construct a framework phylogeny for the 30-50 genera of Campanulaceae and an
              improved classification of these. 
	Dr. Jansen is working with a network of
              colleagues and collectors around the world to secure samples of all of the
              known genera of the family, and extended samples within the large genera such
              as Campanula and Wahlenbergia. Abundant preliminary data have been gathered, in
              conjunction with former students and other colleagues. DNA sequence data from
              both chloroplast and nuclear genes are being gathered to generate a phylogeny
              independent of the rearrangement evidence, and to integrate with morphological
              characters from traditional taxonomic studies. A recently trained specialist on
              the group, Dr. William Eddie from Scotland, will likely join the laboratory in
              Texas, bringing both data from molecular systematic analyses of the chloroplast
              matK gene and morphological expertise as well. Success in determining the
              sequence of structural events in repatterning the chloroplast genome of
              Campanulaceae will help improve generic classification, provide insight to
              historical biogeography of the family including origins of the numerous island
              endemics, and help in understanding the evolution of floral form and
              pollination.


