Title       : Electronic Structure and Electron Dynamics at Organic-Semiconductor and
               Organic-Metal Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a9982109

Award Number: 9982109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326713             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaoyang Zhu zhu@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses issues relevant to the use of organic materials in a
              range of  molecular electronic devices, and also to present day electronic
              devices such as FETs and LEDs that utilize molecular materials. Two-photon
              photoemission (2PPE) studies on various organic-metal and organic-semiconductor
              (Si) surfaces are aimed at characterizing electronic structure and dynamics at
              such interfaces. Understanding the interfacial electronic structure and
              electron transfer dynamics is considered a critical step. The primary objective
              and approach is to systematically establish the electronic structure and
              electron transfer dynamics at organic-semiconductor and organic-metal
              interfaces using three well controlled model systems. In the first, simple
              aromatic molecules will be adsorbed onto or separated from metal surfaces via
              spacer layers. In the second, aromatic units will be tethered at a particular
              distance to silicon surfaces in self-assembled monolayers (SAMs). In the third
              system, thin crystals of conjugating oligomers, particularly oligothiophenes,
              will be vapor deposited onto metal surfaces. The interfacial electronic
              structure in all these systems will be characterized by two-photon
              photoemission (2PPE) for unoccupied electronic states, in conjunction with
              one-photon photoemission for occupied states. Of particularly importance is
              2PPE, which allows direct probing of the ultrafast electron transfer dynamics
              between unoccupied molecular states and the surface. The experiments on
              electronic structure and electron transfer dynamics will be closely correlated
              with surface chemical and structural characterizations using Fourier-transform
              infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and
              scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). 
%%%  
The project addresses basic
              research issues in a topical area of materials science having high potential
              technological relevance. The studies are expected to improve our fundamental
              understanding of possible future nanodevice/transistor technologies. An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area. 
***  

