Title       : Inhibitory Roles of Layer I Neurons in Rat Barrel Cortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9982184

Award Number: 9982184
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda M. Kennedy                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69614              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer I. Luebke jluebke@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The mammalian cerebral cortex is the vastly complex and enigmatic
neural
              structure responsible for cognitive abilities such as reasoning,
imagining and
              perceiving.  A very useful model system for investigation of
the poorly
              understood cellular mechanisms underlying cortical function is
the rat
              somatosensory cortex, which contains discrete columns or "barrels"
of
              vertically-aligned, input-specific cells that process sensory
information from
              a single whisker.  Barrel cortex has six layers (I-VI),
each comprised of
              cells with characteristic electrophysiological,
morphological and/or
              connectional properties.  The functional integrity of
input-specific barrels
              is dependent upon a balance of inhibitory and
excitatory interactions of local
              inhibitory cells (interneurons) and
excitatory output cells (pyramidal cells)
              between and within layers.  In
recent years, progress has been made in
              detailing the characteristics and
interactions of cells in layers II-VI of
              cerebral cortex, but little is
known of the properties of Layer I (LI) neurons
              and virtually nothing is
known of the role(s) they play in the microcircuitry
              of cortical columns.
This is a very significant gap, because LI is ubiquitous
              throughout the
cerebral cortex, and, unlike other cortical layers, contains a
              cellular
population comprised almost exclusively of inhibitory interneurons. 
              LI
cells are strategically positioned to exert profound inhibitory
              influences
on pyramidal output cells, which receive many intra- and
              extracortical
inputs on their complex processes in LI.  The goal of the
              proposed studies
is to gain an understanding of the role of LI neurons in
              functional columns
of cerebral cortex using the rat barrel cortex as a model
              system.  The
overall hypothesis is that LI interneurons can be grouped into
              distinct
classes that play important roles in maintaining input-specific
              sensory
integration within and between barrels, through distinct inhibitory
              actions
on LII/III pyramidal cells and on other LI neurons.
              Physiological
recordings with intracellular biocytin filling of LI
              interneurons and
LII/III pyramidal cells in in vitro  slices of rat barrel
              cortex will be
employed in experiments designed to test this hypothesis. Data
              from these
studies will yield vital information on the role of distinct
              classes of
interneurons in the cortical circuits responsible for integration
              of
sensory information.


