Title       : CAREER: Intralayer Contact Between Two Dissimilar Inhomogeneous Orthotropic
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a9982023

Award Number: 9982023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Assimina Pelegri pelegri@jove.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the research under this CAREER award is to develop a robust
              methodology to predict dynamic damage evolution in the interfaces of laminated
              composites of dissimilar inhomogeneous orthotropic materials.  The approach is
              to integrate the synergistic effects of contact zone and intralayer kinking in
              an interfacial damage predictive model for inhomogeneous bimaterials.  In
              particular, the objectives are to: 1) investigate the parameters of contact
              zone formation, 2) study the effect of contact zones in the kinking of
              delaminations, 3) assess the connection (if any) and the effect of damage
              accumulation in (1) and (2), and 4) to predict deviation, propagation, or
              arrest of delaminations based on the findings from (1) and (3).  The results
              are expected to lead to a significantly improved quantitative assessment of the
              energy release rate and fracture toughness of a damaged composite structure and
              to better design methods to avoid specific modes of damage.

The educational
              plan has three specific goals: 1) to increase the involvement of women in
              engineering, 2) to increase awareness of opportunities in science and
              engineering of high-school students (Technical Youth Program), and 3) to
              modernize the mechanical engineering laboratory and course curriculum.  In an
              effort to increase the gender diversity, the PI will collaborate with Douglass
              College of Women in initiating high school outreach programs.  During these
              programs students will have the opportunity to visit the Rutgers University
              School of Engineering for hands on demonstrations, small group sessions with
              female scientists and engineers, and interaction with female guest visitors
              from industry.  In the curriculum development plan, the learning process is
              promoted via visualization of concepts and hands-on practice.  A unified
              educational/research approach will be utilized in order to infiltrate the
              knowledge and expertise gained from the conducted research to the classroom. 

