Title       : CAREER: Genetic Engineering Approaches for the in Vivo Study of Plant Metabolism
               of Selenium and Other Oxyanions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a9982432

Award Number: 9982432
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $466337             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Pilon-Smits epsmits@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
	Selenium (Se) and sulfur metabolism in plants are thought to make use of the
              same enzymes. Previous studies by this investigator have shown that
              overexpression of ATP sulfurylase (involved in sulfate reduction) promotes
              selenate reduction and leads to accumulation of organic selenium. The goals of
              this project are to pinpoint more enzymes that are rate-controlling for Se
              fluxes in plants, and to clarify any involvement of the sulfate assimilation
              enzymes in uptake and reduction of the related elements tellurium, molybdenum,
              and tungsten.
	Selenocysteine appears to be a control point for Se allocation
              into proteins (toxic), into volatile forms, or into various accumulated forms. 
              By overexpression of two enzymes, two different Se "sinks" will be created: one
              as low-toxic, insoluble elemental Se, the other as low-toxic volatile Se. The
              effects of these new Se sinks on the Se fluxes in the plant will be tested by
              measuring the forms of Se accumulated by the transgenic plants, and by
              measuring their Se tolerance, accumulation and volatilization. To study the
              effect of simultaneous overexpression of two enzymes in the pathway, different
              transgenics will be crossed and the Se fluxes in the double-transgenics
              studied.
	The other objective of this project is to test the hypothesis that
              the sulfate assimilation pathway is also involved in uptake and reduction of
              tellurate, molybdate, and tungstate. To this end, available transgenic Indian
              mustard plants (Brassica juncea) that overexpress enzymes involved in uptake
              and reduction of sulfate/selenate will be analyzed for tolerance and
              accumulation of tellurium, molybdenum and tungsten, and for the accumulated
              forms of these elements.
	The new information generated by these studies may
              be employed for the genetic manipulation of plants with altered metabolic
              properties, e.g. with enhanced or reduced trace element accumulation. This is
              of significance since these elements are of environmental and/or medical
              importance, as pollutants, micronutrients, etc.
	An essential part of this
              CAREER project will be the development of a graduate course on environmental
              cleanup using plants (phytoremediation) and a senior-level plant physiology
              course. These courses will be designed to make optimal use of multimedia and
              on-line resources.

