Title       : Rab7 and Accessory Protein Function in Late Endocytosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a9982161

Award Number: 9982161
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $695000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angela Wandinger-Ness wness@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U New Mexico Hlth Sci Ctr
	      HSSB - 102
	      Albuquerque, NM  871315041    505/272-6264

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
This project is a continuation of studies initiated with support from NSF
              CAREER Award MCB9507206.  The overall objective is to investigate the molecular
              mechanisms underlying late endocytic membrane transport. Endocytosis is the
              process whereby eukaryotic cells internalize materials from their environment
              and transfer them to appropriate intracellular compartments.  Endocytosis
              allows cells to sample their environment, to receive specific signals from
              other cells, and to remove materials from the environment.  The process
              involves the involution of a portion of the plasma membrane of the cell
              surrounding the material to be internalized, followed by a pinching-off of this
              membrane to form the endosome.  The endosome then moves from the periphery of
              the cell to the interior, where it may fuse with other membrane-enclosed
              compartments, such as lysosomes, to deliver its cargo.  Detailed analyses of
              endosome morphology and numerous studies tracing the movement of molecules
              along both the exo- and endocytic pathways have engendered a great appreciation
              for the complexity of both the organelles and the pathways, which includes the
              function of effector proteins such as G-proteins. In particular, the small
              G-protein, rab7, has formed the focal point for ongoing studies in this
              laboratory because of its unique localization to the late endosome and its
              demonstrated importance in regulating late endocytic membrane transport. During
              the previous CAREER award several key observations were made that are relevant
              to the current project. First, rab7 was shown to be uniquely required for
              transport from early to late endosomes and to have no function in subsequent
              transport from late endosomes to lysosomes. Therefore, rab7 is an ideal
              'molecular handle' for further dissection of this important transport step. As
              proof of principle, several rab7 interacting partners, likely to be further
              components of the transport machinery, have already been identified by genetic
              and biochemical means. Most notably, rab7 was shown to interact with a
              phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase whose activity was critical for transport from
              early to late endosomes. An additional requirement for a phosphatidyl inositol
              3-kinase activity in transport from late endosomes to lysosomes was also
              observed, consistent with the idea that rab proteins serve as specific
              activators of more general downstream effectors controlling membrane fusion.
              Second, a clarification of the pathways interconnecting the Golgi and endosomes
              was achieved. The information gained about the routes whereby newly synthesized
              lysosomal proteins and internalized molecules flux to and through the endocytic
              pathway is relevant to the proposed studies on endosome dynamics. Third,
              rab7-positive endosomes (visualized with green fluorescent protein-rab7
              chimeras) were found to translocate along microtubules implicating microtubule
              motors as components of the transport machinery. The reagents, technologies and
              aggregate experience gained through CAREER award funding place the laboratory
              in a unique position to conduct the current project. Three specific aims are
              proposed that will further clarify the protein components regulating late
              endocytic membrane transport.  These are: 1, examination of the role of the
              vps34 phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase, which was observed to interact with rab7
              in a rab7-conformation-dependent manner, in endocytic transport; 2, analysis of
              the functions of two novel rab7-interacting proteins, previously identified in
              a yeast two-hybrid assay, using an established in vitro transport assay based
              on sequential cleavage of VSV G protein; and 3, monitoring of endosome dynamics
              in real time using green fluorescent protein-rab7 chimeras.  Completion of this
              project will advance knowledge of how molecules flux through endosomes and what
              regulates these processes. Such information serves as a paradigm for the
              molecular mechanisms underlying all membrane transport processes, including
              those involved in virus entry, antigen processing and presentation, and
              lysosomal function.

