Title       : Reproductive Biology in Shrimp
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2000     
File        : a9982466

Award Number: 9982466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195013             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond T. Bauer rtbauer@usl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana at Lafay
	      104 University Circle
	      Lafayette, LA  705032701    337/482-6203

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A marine shrimp, Lysmata wurdemanni, has a unique reproductive system among
              decapod crustaceans (shrimps, crabs, lobsters).  As in protandric shrimps, most
              individuals function first as a male and then change to female when they are
              larger and older. However, unlike other gender-changers, the capacity to
              produce male gametes and fertilize as a male is retained during the female
              -phase, i.e., the "females" are simultaneous hermaphrodites. This is a unique
              system in which to test hypotheses on the proximate and ultimate factors
              explaining sequential hermaphroditism, not only in Lysmata spp. but also in
              other protandric shrimps. One set of objectives is to determine why, in terms
              of reproductive costs and benefits, an individual makes the gender change and
              why male reproductive function is retained in the female phase. With this
              species, such costs and benefits can be measured and compared within the same
              individual. The other important goal of the project is to determine if gender
              change is environmentally controlled, i.e., mediated by the population and
              social structure in which an individual occurs.

Research on sequential
              hermaphroditism in fishes has revealed much about the factors involved in its
              control and evolution. In decapod shrimps, there has been little testing of
              theory about hermaphroditism. Using Lysmata wurdemanni as a model system, the
              proposed research will take a crucial first step in testing questions on
              environmental gender determination in shrimps and on the evolution of unusual
              hermaphroditic systems in the genus Lysmata. The research will contribute to an
              explanation of how and why sequential and simultaneous hermaphroditism have
              evolved in some decapod crustaceans but not in many other closely-related
              taxa.

