Title       : RUI: Taste of Monosodium Glutamate and Sweet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a9982913

Award Number: 9982913
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene R. Delay edelay@regis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Regis University
	      3333 Regis Blvd
	      Denver, CO  802211099    303/458-4100

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Monosodium glutamate (MSG) is found in many high protein foods such as meat and
              fish and it is often added to food to enhance the taste of food. However, we do
              not understand how our taste receptors detect the taste of MSG. One way we can
              study these processes is to compare the behavioral responses of rats to MSG
              with their responses to other taste stimuli. For
example, rats normally prefer
              the taste of MSG but if they experience gastric distress after ingesting MSG,
              these rats will avoid MSG and anything that tastes like MSG. This is called
              conditioned taste aversion (CTA).
	The proposed research is designed to test
              this hypothesis. We first need to determine whether the taste of MSG with
              amiloride mimics taste qualities of other sweet substances. There are at least
              two mechanisms that taste receptors use to detect sweet substances, one for
              natural sugars such as sucrose and another for artificial sweeteners such as
              saccharin. The first experiments will use CTA and behavioral discrimination
              procedures to determine if rats perceive the taste of MSG with amiloride as
              similar to sweet substances other than sucrose (natural sugars and artificial
              sweeteners).
	These experiments will help determine whether the taste of
              glutamate is similar to either natural sugars, artificial sweeteners, or to
              both. If the taste of MSG with amiloride is similar to
sweet stimuli then
              these taste stimuli may be coded by cells in the same areas of the nervous
              system. To test this hypothesis, another experiment will use a cell marker
              method to identify cells in the brain stem (solitary nucleus) activated by MSG
              and those sweet stimuli that taste most like
glutamate in the first
              experiments. The degree to which the location of cells activated by these
              stimuli overlap with each other may indicate the degree to which the neurons
              involved in coding of these taste stimuli interact within the gustatory system
              of the brain stem The information
learned from these experiments will help us
              understand why MSG increases the palatability of some foods and may be used to
              help people, such as the elderly or diabetics, who need dietary regulation.

