Title       : The Interaction of Cardiac Shunting and Metabolic Rate: Triggering
               Hypometabolism During Diving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2001  
File        : a9982671

Award Number: 9982671
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315163             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Hicks JHICKS@UCI.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Comparative biologists have known for more than 150 years that the anatomy of
              the reptilian heart results in the potential for cardiac shunts (mixing of
              oxygen poor and oxygen rich blood).  Cardiac shunts can be defined as
              right-to-left (R-L oxygen poor blood bypasses the lung) or left-to-right (L-R
              oxygen rich blood recirculates through the lung).  In several reptiles an R-L
              cardiac shunt can develop during diving resulting in a rapid reduction of the
              blood oxygen levels.  The physiological benefits of this type of cardiovascular
              regulation have remained elusive and speculative.  The proposed research by Dr.
              Hicks will investigate the hypothesis that reductions in blood oxygen levels,
              resulting from the development of a R-L cardiac shunt, triggers a reduction in
              metabolism.  The reduction in metabolism is referred to as a "hypometabolic
              state" and can have several physiological benefits, particularly during
              prolonged diving.  The proposed research will test the generality of the
              hypothesis by investigating the effects of cardiac shunting on metabolism in
              the freshwater turtle, Trachemys scripta, American Alligator, Alligator
              mississippiensis and green iguana, Iguana iguana.  These species possess
              several characters that make them good experimental models that include; 1) all
              exhibit diving behavior, either voluntarily or during escape behavior, 2) all
              species are readily available and 3) they are large enough to support the
              required physiological instrumentation.  The proposed research will
              experimentally test a potential physiological function that results from the
              unique cardiovascular "design" of reptiles and will provide insights into the
              functional consequences of retaining the capacity for cardiac shunting.

