Title       : Fitness consequences of extra-pair fertilizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9982540

Award Number: 9982540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210035             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerram L. Brown JLB81@cnsvax.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia G. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A handicap to understanding how natural selection acts on mating choices by
              females has been the lack of information on the genetic parents of their young.
               We ask what genetic benefits, if any, females gain from mating with a male
              that is not the social mate.  The term for this rather common behavior is
              extra-pair copulation (EPC).  One hypothesis is that EPC offspring are
              genetically superior to other offspring.  If so, then EPC offspring should be
              superior in survival to those of the social mate. Using DNA markers for a jay
              that lives in Arizona, we identify both genetic parents of each nestling in
              many broods. We then compare the survival and reproduction of EPC and nonEPC
              offspring from these broods.  A second hypothesis to explain EPC is that
              females make mistakes that lead to inbreeding, with reduced survival of inbred
              offspring.  A female's risk of complete failure for such reasons or male
              infertility can be reduced by mating with more than one male. We test the
              hypothesis that genetic similarity between mother and father assessed using
              genetic fingerprinting is associated with reduced survival and reproduction in
              offspring of the more similar parents.  Survival and reproduction of each
              offspring are observed under natural conditions. By testing two popular
              hypotheses that explain female choice of males this research advances our
              understanding of the operation of how mating behavior and mating choice evolve.
              Our research also can help to understand the genetic risks encountered by some
              endangered species.


