Title       : Mechanism of Peptide Amidation: Structural and Kinetic Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a9982945

Award Number: 9982945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530000             (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Mario Amzel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sean T. Prigge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Amzel
MCB 9982945


Many bioactive peptides must be amidated at their
              carboxy terminus to exhibit full activity.  Surprisingly, the amides are not
              generated by a transamination reaction.  Instead, the hormones are synthesized
              from glycine-extended intermediates that are transformed into active amidated
              hormones by oxidative cleavage of the glycine N-Ca bond.  In higher organisms,
              the bifunctional enzyme peptidylglycine a-amidating monooxygenase (PAM)
              catalyzes this reaction.  The PAM gene encodes two domains (PHM and PAL) that
              when separated, either through cleavage or through independent expression,
              retain their individual enzymatic activities.  Together they catalyze the two
              sequential reactions that produce amidated peptide: a-hydroxylation of the
              glycine (PHM) and excision of the Ca-N bond to give a-amidated peptide product
              and glyoxylate (PAL).  PHM contains two redox active copper atoms that, after
              reduction by ascorbate, catalyze the reduction of molecular oxygen for the
              hydroxylation of glycine-extended substrates.  PAL is zinc containing lyase
              that cleaves the Ca-N bond after hydroxylation of the Ca. This project will use
              of x-ray diffraction and kinetic techniques to address questions about the
              origin of the broad substrate specificity of PHM and PAL, identify residues
              critical for PHM and PAL activity, and propose enzymatic mechanisms for both
              enzymes. 

Peptide amidation is a fundamental biological process.  Amidated
              peptides have been found in the signaling systems of species ranging from
              Aplysia to humans.  The biosynthetic path used for this reaction allows the
              organism to strictly regulate the production of these peptides.  Understanding
              the chemistry of this reaction, especially that of the first step, will not
              only contribute to the field of peptide amidation, but will also provide an
              outstanding paradigm for understanding long range electron transfers and the
              prevention of production of deleterious oxygen species.

