Title       : Evolution of a Baculovirus Envelope Fusion Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a9982436

Award Number: 9982436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $381371             (Estimated)
Investigator: George F. Rohrmann rohrmanng@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Margot N. Pearson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Baculoviruses are members of a large family of viruses that are pathogenic for
              insects.  They are notable for their current and potential usefulness in a
              number of applications.  For example, they are widely employed as vectors for
              the over-expression of proteins for both  research and commercial purposes, and
              are also being investigated for their applicability to insect control programs.
              Thus, it is important to further our understanding of the biology of these
              viruses.  

This project is based on the unexpected discovery that the
              baculoviridae appear to be divided into two major groups based on their
              envelope fusion proteins. Since viral envelope fusion proteins play major roles
              in the infection cycle, they can be critically important components of the
              virion.  For example, they may be involved in targeting the virion to specific
              receptors on the cell surface and can be directly involved in viral penetration
              into the host cell by inducing fusion of the viral and host cell membrane. In
              addition, they are often involved in virion assembly and the exit of the virus
              from the cell.

One of these baculovirus groups (exemplified by Autographa
              californica multinucleocapsid nucleopolyhedrovirus [AcMNPV]) employs GP64 as
              its budded virion envelope fusion protein, whereas the other group (exemplified
              by Lymantria dispar MNPV [LdMNPV]) lacks homologs of gp64, but encodes a
              different envelope fusion protein (called Ld130 in LdMNPV).   Surprisingly, a
              homolog of the LdMNPV envelope fusion protein is found in AcMNPV (orf23) and
              its close relatives.   Preliminary data indicates that these proteins localize
              to membranes in infected cells. However, in contrast to Ld130, they do not
              appear to induce membrane fusion. This suggests that they may have lost their
              envelope fusion function, but are perhaps retained by the virus because they
              have other critical roles.  

The objectives of this project are to examine
              the role of the LdMNPV protein (Ld130) in envelope fusion, and to characterize
              its structure, expression, and localization in infected cells. The roles it
              plays in virion assembly and exit will also be investigated. Similar
              experiments will be conducted to determine the role that its homolog (Acorf23)
              plays in the AcMNPV infection cycle and to investigate its possible interaction
              with GP64 and with other virion proteins. 
It is likely that the homologs of
              Ld130 found in AcMNPV and its close relatives play an important role in the
              infectious cycle. They could be involved in viral attachment either by
              themselves or as co-attachment factors with GP64. In addition, if the homologs
              of Ld130 are membrane components as predicted, they could play a critical role
              in the interaction of the modified cell membrane and the nucleocapsid, thereby
              permitting assembly of the mature budded virus. Therefore, elucidating the role
              of this important family of baculovirus proteins will shed light on a number of
              processes critical to the biological success and utility of these
              viruses.










