Title       : Adaptation of Seed Oil to Germination Temperature in Helianthus annuus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a9982564

Award Number: 9982564
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Randal Linder rlinder@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              For many species of plants, seed oils perform the essential function of
              providing energy and carbon to germinating seeds before photosynthesis begins. 
              Since the timing and rate of germination have been shown to strongly affect the
              fitness of many species of plants, the composition of seed oils could be under
              strong selection insofar as they affect these characters.  One very striking
              and consistent pattern in seed oil composition is that plants growing at higher
              latitudes have lower proportions of saturated oil in their seeds than plants
              growing at lower latitudes.  The pattern holds whether one looks among species
              or within species that have broad latitudinal ranges.  Based on biochemical,
              physiological, energetic, and ecological lines of evidence, it is hypothesized
              that germination temperature is the primary selective agent on the proportion
              of saturated oil in seeds.  Seeds with a lower proportion of saturated oil that
              germinate at cooler temperatures are predicted to have better germination
              performance than seeds higher in saturated oils.  This performance advantage
              should lead to improved competitiveness and higher fitness.  At warmer
              germination temperatures, relative fitnesses of seeds with high and low
              proportions of saturated oil should reverse.  Since germination temperature
              decreases at higher latitudes, this hypothesis could account for the
              latitudinal gradient in the proportion of saturated oil in seeds.  

The
              experiments in this proposal will test whether the performance, competitiveness
              and fitness of seeds with different proportions of saturated oils are affected
              by germination temperature as predicted.  Specially bred high and low
              saturated-oil lines of a wild sunflower, Helianthus annuus, will be used to
              test the predictions.  The results of the experiments will help us understand
              the evolutionary significance of a nearly ubiquitous pattern in seed oil
              composition, and it will more generally help us understand why seed-oil
              compositions vary to such a great extent.  The results may also have
              agricultural implications because they will suggest where plants with desired
              proportions of saturated and unsaturated seed oils occur and possibly how to
              breed seeds that are better adapted to the zones where they are planted. 
              Finally, the work proposed here will be the foundation for future work testing
              whether the patterns and processes in Helianthus seed oils hold more generally
              and whether the genetic bases of saturated oil proportions are consistent.  

