Title       : Role of Epoxide Hydrolase in Endocrine Regulation in Insects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a9982445

Award Number: 9982445
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244470             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Roe michael_roe@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell J. Linderman  (Principal Investigator former)
              David A. Shultz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The insect juvenile hormones (JHs) are methyl esters of farnesoic acid C10,11
              epoxide (JH III), and analogous compounds.  JH is an important regulatory
              factor in embryogenesis, larval and adult development, metamorphosis,
              reproduction, and metabolism in insects.  Evidence indicates that the primary
              pathways of JH degradation lead to loss of endocrine function.  The two primary
              metabolic pathways of JH degradation in insects are ester hydrolysis by JH
              esterase and epoxide hydration by an epoxide hydrolase (EH).  While the
              development of specific inhibitors of JH esterase has been instrumental in
              demonstrating a biological role for this enzyme in insects, significantly less
              information is available on the role of JH epoxide hydrolase (JH-EH).  In this
              proposal, we plan to extend our knowledge of the role of JH-EH in endocrine
              regulation in insects.  The use of techniques in molecular biology to
              biosynthesize the enzyme will allow for comprehensive study of the protein, and
              the design of novel compounds which will act as JH-EH inhibitors will allow for
              evaluation of the inhibition of enzyme action on development in the cabbage
              looper (Trichoplusia ni).  The basic knowledge of EH structure, mechanism of
              action, and modes of inhibition gained in this study will provide a more
              comprehensive understanding of insect JH-EH which may ultimately lead to new
              methods for insect control.
