Title       : Molecular Analysis of the Drosophila Hybrid Male Rescue Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a9982687

Award Number: 9982687
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331097             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Barbash dabarbash@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles H. Langley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	Hybrids between different species of animals and plants often suffer from
              reduced fitness.  It is commonly accepted that this fitness reduction results
              from deleterious interactions between genes that have diverged in each species,
              but very few examples of such genetic divergence have been reported.  Testing
              this model requires the ability to identify, characterize and manipulate the
              genes that cause hybrid breakdown.  The cross of Drosophila melanogaster
              females to D. simulans, mauritiana and sechellia males is a well studied
              example of hybrid breakdown, with the hybrid sons of this cross being fully
              lethal.  The D. melanogaster Hybrid male rescue (Hmr) mutation suppresses this
              lethality and is therefore a prime candidate for identifying a hybrid lethality
              gene.  The Hmr rescue mutation was recently shown to suppress the lethality of
              hybrid females that occurs at high temperature, and further genetic analysis
              has shown that the wild type D. melanogaster Hmr gene does in fact cause hybrid
              lethality.  These findings offer new opportunities for exploring the molecular
              basis of hybrid lethality.  A complete physical map of the Hmr region has been
              made by deletion mapping and chromosome walking, which will be used for the
              proposed cloning for Hmr.  Once identified, the Hmr locus will be compared in
              D. melanogaster and its related species to determine whether Hmr has diverged
              functionally in the melanogaster species complex.  The mechanism of hybrid
              lethality will also be explored by investigating specific eye and wing defects
              that occur in semi-viable female hybrids.  Finally, molecular and genetic
              screens will be used to search for additional genes that are involved in hybrid
              lethality.  These proposed experiments provide the means to identify and to
              study the molecular evolution of a network of genes that causes hybrid
              breakdown in Drosophila.


A coherent understanding of the process of
              species formation has long proven elusive, but progress on numerous fronts
              suggests that real advances are currently possible. Species are most commonly
              defined as groups that do not interbreed with other groups. Understanding the
              genetic basis of reproductive isolation is therefore an essential step towards
              understanding speciation.



