Title       : Mechanism of DNA Transfer from Agrobacterium to Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9982804

Award Number: 9982804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anath Das anath@cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1112,1132,1156,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to elucidate the mechanism of T-DNA transfer from
              bacteria to plants. Agrobacterium tumefaciens infects plants and stably
              transfers a segment (T-DNA) of its tumor inducing (Ti-) plasmid DNA into the
              plant nuclear genome.  DNA transfer requires the virulence (vir) genes of the
              Ti-plasmid.  The vir gene products catalyze processing of the Ti-plasmid to
              generate a transfer intermediate, a single stranded T-strand DNA.  The T-strand
              DNA presumably travels through a membrane pore composed
primarily of the VirB
              proteins.  In addition to the T-DNA two proteins, VirE2 and VirF, are
              transferred to plants.  For translocation the transport pore must recognize the
              substrates.  The recognition may involve
direct interaction of the substrate
              or it may be mediated by another protein.  VirD4 is hypothesized to mediate the
              recognition process.  This research will test this hypothesis and will
              determine the role of VirD4 in DNA transfer.  Immunoelectron microscopy will be
              used to study whether VirD4 and the DNA transfer apparatus are proximal to each
              other in the bacterial cell.  Functional domains of VirD4 will be identified by
              mutagenesis methods.  Random mutations will be introduced in virD4 and
              mutations that fail to complement or poorly complement a mutation in virD4 will
              be isolated and characterized.  The effect of a mutation on virD4 function will
              be investigated.  VirD4 contains a nucleotide binding motif sequence.  The role
              of ATP utilization in VirD4 function, if any, will be investigated by in vivo
              and in vitro methods.  Recognition of a substrate by the transport pore is
              hypothesized to involve interactions among the various components. These
              studies will identify these interactions and elucidate the mechanism of
              substrate recognition. Genetic and biochemical methods will be used for these
              studies.  Both pathogenic and non-pathogenic bacteria use a similar mechanism
              for macromolecule export.  The T-DNA transport system is the first member of
              the type IV transport system. A similar mechanism is used by E. coli for
              plasmid transfer by conjugation, for example.  An understanding of the
              Agrobacterium substrate recognition mechanism will have a major impact on
              understanding many biological processes. 



