Title       : Regulation and Functions of the Arabidopsis XET Gene Family
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a9982654

Award Number: 9982654
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $590001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Braam braam@bioc.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The cell wall is a fundamental structure of plant cells that controls cellular
              shape, size and integrity and also plays a role in signal transduction.  The
              enzymes that modify wall polysaccharides are likely to regulate wall structure
              and thus play critical roles in plant morphogenesis and physiology.  The
              xyloglucan endotransglycosylases (XETs) are capable of modifying a major
              component of the cell wall and yet the physiological functions of these enzymes
              are not understood.  Plants harbor gene families that encode XETs and
              XET-related proteins; the complexity and conservation of these enzymes indicate
              that these enzymes likely carry out critically important roles in plant cell
              biology.

	The following questions will be answered through the proposed
              studies:

1.	How complex is the Arabidopsis XET family, and what are the
              unique and shared features of XET   primary structures?
2.	What are the
              physiological consequences of the loss of single and multiple XETs?
3.	When
              and where are the XETs expressed, and what are the patterns and movements of
              the proteins?
4.	How are the XETs similar and/or distinct in biochemical
              activities and what structural features may be important for enzymatic
              function?

	Because of the presence of a gene family, dissection of the
              functions of XETs will require a broad-based, integrative approach.  The XET
              and XET-related genes of Arabidopsis will be identified and classified based on
              primary structure.  Mutations within XET genes will be sought and mutant
              phenotypes characterized with respect to growth, development and overall
              fitness, in addition to wall properties and ability to adapt to diverse
              environments.  Expression patterns and induction behaviors of the XETs  will be
              elucidated.  Reporter gene fusions will enable determination of tissue, organ,
              cell and developmental specificity of expression.  In addition, reporters will
              be used to define the localization and potential movements of the proteins. 
              Enzymes will be produced with a heterologous expression system, and properties,
              such as substrate preferences and reaction conditions, will be assessed and
              compared among the different isozymes.
	Through this work, the regulation and
              functions of the complex XET gene family of Arabidopsis will be elucidated. 
              Completion of these experiments will provide insight into how cell walls are
              formed, maintained and modified, and how these properties impact the overall
              fitness, development and physiology of plants.




