Title       : A Sociolinguistic Study of Potential Bidialectalism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2001       
File        : a9982647

Award Number: 9982647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57261              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk Hazen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the possibility of bidialectalism through
              sociolinguistic analysis of second dialect acquisition. Sociolinguistics has
              studied bilingualism, providing important revisions to models of the language
              faculty; however, bidialectalism has avoided empirical sociolinguistic
              investigation. Style-shifting is well researched in sociolinguistics, and
              bidialectalism has been much discussed in education and speech pathology
              circles, but no linguistic study has taken up the question of when
              style-shifting may end and bidialectalism begin, what the principles governing
              bidialectalism might be, or if bidialectalism is even humanly possible. In an
              empirical investigation, this project aims to assess dialect acquisition to
              determine the boundaries of bidialectalism and its implications for the
              language faculty. In this project, twenty speakers from a southern dialect
              region introduced into a northern dialect area will be interviewed to gather
              data on real-time changes in their idiolects. The project focuses on how and if
              the speakers organize their production of dialect features as discrete sets or
              whether their dialect features blend in production. 

Qualitative-descriptive
              and quantitative-variationist analytical models are applied to the emerging
              data, and the objective analysis of language variation is implemented by the
              analysis of data obtained from subjective speaker identification tasks. In
              addition, data gathered in a variety of speech situations will be utilized in
              the examination of intraspeaker variation in the dialect acquisition process.
              This project provides important insights about how the language faculty
              functions in targeting a second dialect, the locus of sociolinguistic variation
              in the language faculty, and the linguistic and social boundaries of
              bidialectalism.
