Title       : Cation-Binding Sites of the Na,K- and H,K-ATPases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  2001  
File        : a9982901

Award Number: 9982901
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337193             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor G. Blanco   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Mercer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63130    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9982901
Blanco
The Na,K- and H,K-ATPases belong to a family of ion-motive
              ATPases known as P-type ATPases.  Using the energy from the hydrolysis of ATP,
              these enzymes are responsible for the active transport of extracellular K+ in
              exchange for intracellular Na+ or H+.  The Na,K-ATPase is critical in
              maintaining the osmotic balance of the cell, the resting membrane potential of
              most tissues, and the excitable properties of muscle and nerve cells.  In
              addition, the enzyme plays a primary role in driving the reabsorption of Na+
              and water in many epithelia.  The H,K-ATPase is essential for the secretion of
              acid by the stomach and kidney.  Structurally, these ion pumps are heterodimers
              composed of a catalytic a and a glycosylated b subunit.  For the Na,K-ATPase
              various isozymes with distinct functions have been described in different
              tissues and species.  The Na,K- and H,K-ATPases display a high degree of
              homology in structure and share similar biochemical reaction mechanisms. 
              Despite the progress made in characterizing the structure and function of these
              ion transporters, uncertainties remain as to the sites of cation-binding and to
              the structural basis of ion selectivity and cation affinity.  The aim of the
              present research project is to identify the amino acids involved in the cation
              specificity of the Na,K-ATPase and H,K-ATPase.  This will be accomplished by
              exchanging amino acids that are not shared between the a  subunits of the Na,K-
              and H,K-ATPase and evaluating the effect that the replacements have on the
              binding of Na+ or H+.  These results will provide important information on the
              structural basis underlying the function of the ion-motive ATPases.  In
              addition, the experiments proposed will be fundamental for further studies of
              the residues responsible for the differences in cation affinity of the
              Na,K-ATPase a isoforms.  


 

