Title       : Paleoecological Analysis of Oceanic N2 Fixing Cyanobacteria Using a Molecular
               Biological Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1999 
File        : a9982721

Award Number: 9982721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64451              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas G. Capone capone@wrigley.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,9117,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Capone  9982721

Current evidence suggests that N2 fixation by marine
              planktonic cyanobacteria may be a key factor controlling variations in oceanic
              productivity and, therefore, of C02 sequestration over paleoecological time
              scales. However, methods are currently lacking to evaluate directly whether or
              how N2 fixation has covaried with oceanic productivity over such time scales. 
              Much of our knowledge of paleoecological trends to date derives from the
              geochemical analysis of material sedimented to the sea floor from planktonic
              populations in overlying waters.  DNA in cells falling out of the water column
              can be preserved in sedimentary deposits over geologically significant (I K-> I
              OOK years) time scales and may therefore provide a more direct record of the
              identity of water column populations and their metabolic potentials. The genes
              of the nitrogenase (N2 fixing) enzyme system have been well characterized for a
              wide variety of prokaryotes. The investigator has developed methods to
              efficiently extract and amplify DNA from surficial marine sediments.
              Cyanobacterial DNA can be recovered from current aquatic sediments and nifH
              sequences isolated, identified, and distinguished from the nifH sequences of
              other physiological types of N2 fixers.

The PI will explore the ability to
              use this  approach to analyze and reconstruct paleoecological trends in N2
              fixing cyanobacteria by extracting DNA from deeper sediment horizons underlying
              areas known to harbor N2 fixing cyanobacteria in the water column. Living
              cyanobacteria would not be expected in these horizons and should represent
              material earlier laid down in the sediments. As a test of this proposition, the
              author will examine sediments from 3 sites where planktonic N2 fixing
              cyanobacteria are known to have proliferated and have been recorded in the
              sediments through their pigment signatures. These include a lake system in the
              Experimental Lake Region of Canada, the Goteland basin of the Baltic Sea, and
              in Mediterranean sapropel deposits. Key preliminary challenges will be 1) to
              determine the extent of preservation of cyanobacterial DNA with increasing
              sediment depth and, therefore, time and 2) to be able to provide some level of
              relative quantitation of gene occurrence among horizons.

If successful, the
              PI would be to apply this method to shelf sediments of marine systems where
              strong trends in water column N2 fixation over glacial/ interglacial time
              scales have been inferred such as the Arabian Sea - thereby providing important
              direct insights on microbial populations dynamics which may directly affect
              climatological trends. Furthermore, these efforts would provide a model system
              for the analysis of other functional enzymes of biogeochemically relevance on
              paleoecological time scales.

The objective of this project is to develop and
              employ a molecular approach for describing biogeochemical aspects of ancient
              microbial communities. The specific aim is to examine the development of
              cyanobacterial populations that would reflect the presence and absence of N2
              fixing conditions over geological time scales. This approach would provide
              unique data on the functional role of microorganisms in a historical context,
              and thus will provide new information on the history of N2 fixation on
              Earth.


