Title       : Simulation of the Functional Dynamics of Bacteriohodopsin in the Integral Purple
               Membrane
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2001  
File        : a9982629

Award Number: 9982629
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus J. Schulten kschulte@ks.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Schulten
MCB 9982629

Vectorial proton translocation through membranes is a
              fundamental energy conversion process in biological cells. Bacteriorhodopsin
              (bR) is a membrane protein that acts as a light-driven, voltage sensitive
              proton pump in the purple membrane (PM) of Halobacterium salinarium and
              achieves its biological function by cycling through a reaction that includes
              ultrafast (~ 500fs), intermediate (micro), and slow (~10ms) processes in its
              photo-cycle.  The simulation of the photo-process and the first intermediates
              of bR's photo-cycle in the integral PM will be carried out in order to explain
              the pump mechanism.  Internal water that participates in proton pumping is
              fundamental for an understanding of the function of bR.  Several water
              molecules have been resolved now crystallographically.  Free energy
              perturbation theory has also been used to successfully place water molecules in
              bR in modeling studies.  Simulations have also revealed that water molecules
              become displaced during the photo-cycle.  The latter calculations depend on the
              quality of the force fields for water-peptide interactions that still need to
              be improved. This project will (i) use molecular dynamics (MD) tools and build
              a realistic model of the PM, including all of its protein, lipid and water
              components; (ii) apply a new generation of water-peptide potentials to describe
              bR's internal water; (iii) use the PM model to investigate through MD
              simulations the influence of hydration on structural properties of the PM; (iv)
              furnish multiple potential energy surfaces for the retinal chromophore of bR in
              the ground and excited state, as a function of relevant internal coordinates
              and including conical intersection to the ground state; (v) carry out quantum
              dynamical calculations of the primary photoreaction; and (vi) characterize the
              photocycle intermediates K, L and M using classical molecular dynamics
              simulations.

Bacteriorhodopsin is of utmost simplicity in comparison with
              other proton translocating bioenergetic proteins and, therefore, constitutes 
              an ideal model for the study of the reaction process.  The purple membrane of
              Halobacterium salinarium involves a highly structured supramolecular
              organization, and is fundamental for the in vivo functioning of
              Bacteriorhodopsin.

