Title       : LTER: Land/Ocean Interactions and the Dynamics of Kelp Forest Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a9982105

Award Number: 9982105
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Reed reed@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Melack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott D. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven D. Gaines  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sally J. Holbrook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1195,1306,1316,1650,EGCH,
Abstract    :
               This study will establish an LTER (Long-Term Ecological Research) site in Santa
              Barbara, CA that will focus on ecological systems at the land/ocean-margin.
              This location is typical of many semi-arid regions in that it includes a large
              number of watersheds with episodic stream flow that vary in size and land use.
              The focal coastal ecosystem will be giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) forests,
              which are extremely important to the ecology and economy of coastal areas along
              the West Coast of North and South America. Kelp forests occur on shallow
              coastal reefs and are affected in both positive and negative ways by land and
              open ocean through the movement of water carrying constituents (e.g. sediments,
              nutrients, larvae, pollutants) from these different sources. Kelp forests have
              a unique trophic structure in which producers (macroalgae) and consumers
              (sessile invertebrates that filter plankton) compete for space. Competition
              between macroalgae and sessile invertebrates can be mediated by the relative
              supply of nutrients and particulate organic matter to the reef.  Although
              several lines of evidence suggest that the effects of terrestrial runoff on
              kelp forests in the Santa Barbara Channel can be large, the relative
              contributions of land vs. ocean derived constituents in structuring this and
              other coastal ecosystems in the region is poorly understood.
              
Interdisciplinary research coordinated among 22 investigators will examine
              questions and hypotheses related to all five core areas of research shared by
              LTER sites. The key issues that will specifically be addressed are (1) spatial
              and temporal scales over which terrestrial runoff and ocean forcing perturbs
              kelp forest ecosystems, (2) patterns and processing of organic matter in the
              ecosystem, (3) patterns of organic and inorganic inputs and their movement from
              the land to the coastal zone, (4) the effects of terrestrial runoff on patterns
              and controls of primary production in kelp forests, and (5) the effects of
              terrestrial runoff on the long-term population dynamics of key kelp-forest
              species and on trophic interactions. Regional studies will combine satellite
              imagery and field measurements of discharge from 3 primary and 12 secondary
              watersheds with modeling of solute and sediment-discharge relationships to
              determine patterns of runoff entering the Santa Barbara Channel. Detailed
              sampling of water chemistry and short and long-term experiments will be done in
              the three primary watersheds to determine smaller scale processes that are
              critical in controlling overall export to coastal waters. Satellite imagery
              combined with detailed measurements of ocean currents, waves, suspended
              sediment, subsurface irradiance, and seawater chemistry collected from moored
              instruments in the kelp beds offshore of the three primary catchments will be
              used to determine the timing, spatial extent, and residence time of runoff in
              the coastal zone and the degree to which they are modified by ocean processes. 
              The effects of runoff on patterns of primary production will be investigated
              for both phytoplankton and macroalgae (the two major groups of primary
              producers found in kelp forests). Phytoplankton production will be estimated
              from optical data collected from moored instruments and satellites, chlorophyll
              concentration data collected from moored instruments and ocean cruises and C14
              uptake experiments. Kelp production will be estimated from in situ measurements
              of growth and survival of tagged individuals and aerial photos of surface
              canopy area. Experiments will be done to evaluate factors that control primary
              production and the degree to which they are influenced by land and ocean
              processes. Short and long-term experiments and modeling will be performed to
              determine the extent to which changes in nutrient supply due to runoff alter
              trophic interactions of the unique food web.

