Title       : Hydrogen Phase Behavior in Thin-Film Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9982520

Award Number: 9982520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent J. Heuser bheuser@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9982520
Heuser

This program has been designed to provide a comprehensive set
              of experimental and simulation data of hydrogen in thin metal films. The
              program addresses all aspects of hydrogen phase behavior in thin film metals,
              building on recent investigations of hydrogen-metal systems.  Neutron
              scattering techniques with superior sensitivity to hydrogen in metal lattices
              are employed to measure the pressure-composition-temperature or PCT behavior,
              elastic response, solute depth profile, and precipitation morphology in
              thin-film geometry.  X-ray diffraction analysis is used to determine lattice
              strain and coherency loss.  Transmission electron microscopy analysis
              characterizes dislocation substructure.  Numerical simulations model lattice
              expansion, solute segregation, substrate-film interactions, and precipitation
              morphology.  The systems chosen for this study include model metals, such as
              epitaxial Pd and Nb, and more application-specific systems, such as Pd alloys
              and rare earth depositions.  The results are expected to lead to a more
              complete understanding of fundamental properties of hydrogen-metal systems.
              
%%%
Many hydrogen-related applications have been identified for thin metal
              films, including hydrogen sensors, battery electrodes, and switchable mirrors. 
              The development of thin metal films for industrial applications has been a
              motivating factor in many recent investigations of hydrogen effects. Careful
              studies of the relationship between film PCT behavior, the elastic response,
              and the lattice strain state are needed to advance understanding of
              hydrogen-thin metal film systems.  In addition, a measurement of hydride
              precipitation morphology in thin film geometry has never been made. This
              measurement will be made in single crystal (epitaxial) Pd films and compared to
              measurements of the hydride morphology in bulk single crystal Pd.
***

