Title       : Chloroplast Microsatellite Mutators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a9982600

Award Number: 9982600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara B. Sears sears@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Microsatellites are composed of simple sequence repeats that have been found in
              both nuclear and chloroplast DNA.  In both genetic compartments, they are sites
              of genomic instability due to replication slippage, which causes duplications
              or deletions of individual repeats.  Although the numbers of repeats in
              microsatellites are intrinsically unstable, mechanisms exist for the
              recognition and repair of slipped and misaligned DNA strands.  Studies in
              bacteria and yeast have shown that mutations in genes that encode components of
              mismatch repair or replication can have a mutator effect on microsatellites by
              causing their further destabilization.  The goal of this research is to isolate
              mutator alleles that increase the instability of chloroplast microsatellites,
              using Chlamydomonas reinhardtii as a model plant system.  To enable rapid
              recognition and quantification of microsatellite variation, specific
              microsatellite repeats will be inserted into a reporter gene, which will
              produce a selectable phenotype when one or more repeats are deleted or
              duplicated.  The microsatellite "targets" will be placed in the alga
              chloroplast using standard procedures for transformation, relying on a linked
              selectable marker for the detection of transformants.  After basal levels of
              chloroplast replication slippage are quantified, another plasmid will be used
              for nuclear transformation to accomplish gene disruptions.  The nuclear
              transformants will be tested for elevated levels of chloroplast microsatellite
              instability.  The second plasmid will serve as a tag to enable recovery of
              adjacent sequences for identification of the disrupted nuclear loci that
              contribute to microsatellite stability.  In parallel, chemical mutagenesis will
              be used to induce chloroplast microsatellite mutators, which will be mapped
              genetically and physically.  These mutators will be tested to determine whether
              they target a variety of microsatellites and whether they increase the
              frequency of base substitutions.


This research will yield the first true
              library of nuclear mutators of the chloroplast genome in any plant system. 
              This should complement and extend what has been learned from the very few
              chloroplast mutators that have been isolated by chance in assorted plants. 
              This approach should also identify a different range of loci from those that
              have been recovered through complementation of specific microbial
              recombination/repair defects by plant cDNA clones.

