Title       : Integrating 3D Dynamic Meteorological Data and Algorithms into a Scalable
               Geospatial Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2000        
File        : a9982299

Award Number: 9982299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1902066            (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin W. Ribarsky ribarsky@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tad R. Thurston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nickolas L. Faust  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Vaughan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Valliappa Lakshmanan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1595,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              People, governments, manufacturers, airlines, and others rely more and more on
              accurate and timely weather forecasting. An increased population, especially in
              areas prone to flooding or severe weather, requires pinpoint weather warnings
              and longer range predictions. This project will help operational weather
              forecasters in making decisions about severe weather situations by developing
              tools to visualize and analyze large data sets, including real-time weather
              observations. Staff of the National Severe Storm Lab also will participate,
              especially in the evaluation and testing of visual analysis and
              decision-support tools and in the insertion of those tools in operational
              software for forecasters and weather researchers. These tools will provide a
              framework for the future that can be used not only by weather forecasters but
              also by researchers. The weather prediction and warning capabilities built on
              the methods proposed here may ultimately result in many billions of dollars
              saved in lost products, equipment, and time. Lives, too, can be saved and
              injuries reduced.

Technically, the project will bring together, for the
              purposes of analysis and forecast decision-making, 3D time-dependent volumes
              from multiple overlapping Doppler radars, and simultaneous satellite
              information for the same and wider coverage areas. These will be combined with
              accurate terrain elevations, multiple image layers, maps, and other geospatial
              thematic data. This universal data collection will be organized for integrated
              visual analysis and made available for interactive navigation, exploration, and
              discovery by weather forecasters, researchers, and other users. These
              observational data will be displayed for the first time on accurate 3D terrain
              so that the correlation of landscape and weather can be revealed in detail,
              thus enabling new predictions of flood extents, inclusion of the effects of
              mountains on weather phenomena, and other new capabilities. To support fast,
              scalable visualization, a "geo-layered volume" will be introduced that will
              take advantage of the underlying terrain global quadtree organization and
              out-of-core paging structure. Hierarchical visual models will be developed
              within the geo-layered volume structure to produce several visual
              representation including volume rendering, isosurfaces, simple 3D
              time-dependent feature representations, and iconic annotations. A fast and
              scalable cluster-based feature analysis method will form a dynamic feature
              hierarchy also. This hierarchy will be used to produce levels of detail for the
              volume and isosurface visualization of the 3D time-dependent observational
              data. The visual analyses will be put in a decision-support framework. Since
              the analyses attach meaning and importance to the various observations, the
              observational data can be displayed in the right form for easy use. Important
              phenomena can be given visual forms that catch the eye, and more detail can be
              given to objects that the analysis says are important or to objects that the
              user looks at more closely. 

