Title       : Signaling by Ethylene Receptors of Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a9982510

Award Number: 9982510
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359997             (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Schaller egs@cisunix.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The gas ethylene functions as an endogenous growth regulator in plants,
              affecting seed germination, seedling growth, abscission, senescence and  fruit
              ripening.  The initial steps by which plants perceive and transduce the
              ethylene signal have begun to be elucidated by studies in Arabidopsis thaliana.
               It has been found that plants contain a family of ethylene receptors that are
              related to bacterial histidine kinases.  Downstream of the receptor is a MAP
              kinase pathway.  The research in this project is studying how the ethylene
              signal is transduced through the receptor and passed on to other elements in
              the signaling pathway.  The membrane localization of ethylene receptors in
              plants will be determined by expression of fusions with green fluorescent
              protein (GFP) in Arabidopsis.
Dynamics of receptor expression and localization
              will be examined by use of biochemical methods  in concert with visualization
              of GFP fusions.  Phosphorylation activity of the receptors will be examined
              after transgenic expression and purification from yeast.  The mechanisms of
              action of the ethylene receptors will be examined by transforming mutant
              versions back into Arabidopsis and determining how ethylene signal transduction
              is affected.  This work will  clarify early steps in ethylene signal
              transduction and provide a framework for engineering modifications into these
              steps.  Modifications of ethylene sensitivity will enhance our ability to
              regulate such processes as abscission and fruit-ripening of crops.  These
              studies will also help to understand how bacterial histidine kinases have been
              adapted to function in a eukaryotic system.

