Title       : RUI: Molecular Characterization of a Gene Important for Auxin Action in
               Arabidopsis Embryogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a9982926

Award Number: 9982926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Hobbie hobbiel@adelphi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adelphi University
	      South Avenue
	      Garden City, NY  11530    516/294-8700

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
	The plant hormone auxin plays an important role in virtually all aspects of
              plant growth and development, including formation of shoots and roots and
              responses to gravity and light. Auxin affects these processes through
              regulation of cell elongation, cell division, and cell differentiation.
              However, exactly what auxin does and how it does it at the molecular level are
              still poorly understood. The proposed research will increase knowledge of the
              molecular mechanism of auxin action in plant development by molecular
              characterization of the AXR6 gene of the plant Arabidopsis thaliana, a
              widely-studied member of the mustard family. Previous work has shown the AXR6
              gene to be important for auxin function in all parts of the plant and
              especially in the embryo. The defects during embryogenesis in the plants with
              mutations in the AXR6 gene indicate that the gene is involved in patterning and
              normal development of the basal region of the embryo.

	The AXR6 gene will be
              isolated and characterized using an approach combining genetic mapping to
              define the chromosomal location of the gene with testing of candidate genes
              identifed in the region by the Arabidopsis Genome Project. Once isolated, the
              gene's role in development and its biochemical function will be studied with a
              variety of approaches. This research should lead to a more complete
              understanding of plant physiology and development at the molecular level, and
              especially of the role of auxin. Such an understanding is fundamentally
              important, and will also enhance our ability to regulate plant development in
              desirable ways.

	This project also includes as an integral component the
              training and mentoring of master's and undergraduate students. Their
              involvement in this research project will foster the development of laboratory
              skills and intellectual abilities that will enrich their lives and enable them
              to contribute to further progress in science. 




