Title       : DIMACS Special Year on Computational Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a9982983

Award Number: 9982983
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50010              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred S. Roberts froberts@dimacs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wilma K. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig G. Nevill-Manning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Farach-Colton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              DIMACS, the Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science,
              will run a ``Special Year on Computational Molecular Biology'' to follow up on
              its highly successful ``Special Year on Mathematical Support for Molecular
              Biology.'' The special year is motivated by major developments at the interface
              between biology and information science: The availability of massive amounts of
              data in novel and diverse forms, requiring the expertise of information
              scientists; the availability of new technologies, powerful experimental tools
              that need to be integrated with fundamental algorithmic research; and the
              development of new mathematical and computational tools that make it possible
              to understand biological processes at a much more complex level than before.
              The special year will include workshops, visitors, and the involvement of
              postdoctoral fellows and graduate students from around the country. Activities
              will be organized around a series of workshops: Integration of Diverse
              Biological Data, Sequence Motif Recognition, Whole Genome Comparison, Learning
              Stochastic Processes, Protein Structure (Recent Computational Advances and
              Future Directions), System-based Modeling in Bioinformatics, Geometric
              Searching, Analysis of Gene Expression Data, Computational Issues in Signal
              Transduction, Protein Structure Comparison and Prediction Assessment, and DNA
              Topology. This award is co-funded with the Sloan Foundation. NSF funds will
              specifically be used to support the attendance of young scientists from
              underrepresented minorities.
