Title       : Soybean Genes Involved in Urease Activation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a9982213

Award Number: 9982213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph C. Polacco PolaccoJ@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Enzymes are protein catalysts, substances which speed up biological reactions. 
              Enzymes are essential for the complex chemistry of life processes.  While
              enzymes consist of protein, most require the participation of a cation
              (positively charged metal ion) in catalysis.  Nickle (Ni2+) is a rare component
              of enzymes.  It is not known to be required by any of the 50 to 100,000 human
              enzymes.  However, it is of extreme global importance as a component of four
              enzymes essential for inter-conversions of the one-carbon compounds, urea,
              carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide and
methane. 
 
Urease is one of the four Ni
              metalloenyzmes.  Urease is produced by  a wide variety of bacteria, fungi and
              algae, and is extremely important in recycling urea from industrial and
              biological sources:  Greater than 6 x 1010 pounds of urea nitrogen are applied
              annually to the world's cropland.  In terrestrial mammals, urea is the major
              "jettisoned" form of excess metabolic nitrogen; adults excrete the protein
              equivalent of about 1,000 soybean seeds daily as urea.
 
Urease is inactive
              without other protein factors to insert Ni into its catalytic (active) site. 
              Soybean produces two ureases which are inactive without the function of two
              genes, Eu2 and Eu3.  The primary objective of this research project is to
              determine whether these genes code Ni insertion proteins.  Eu3 codes a
              Ni-binding protein (Eu3).  Antibodies to Eu3 inhibit urease activation in  anin
              vitro (test tube) assay we established for urease activation by Ni.  Eu3 is
              absent in one mutant lacking all urease activity and altered in another mutant
              with trace amounts of activity.  We have three goals for further elucidation of
              urease activation:  (1) Structure-function analysis of Eu3 in vitro and in
              transgenic tissues.  This involves directed alteration of the sequence of the
              Eu3 component amino acids and examining the effect on Eu3 function.  (2)
              Identification and characterization of the Eu2 protein.  (3) Charactization of
              a new gene, AJ6.  This gene is unusual in being essential for the activation of
              only one of soybean's two ureases.  The pursuit of these goals is aided by a
              convenient radioactive Ni tracer, 63Ni.  Successfully addressing these
              objectives will expand our understanding of plant urease activation, a complex
              process which has already shown some differences from bacterial urease
              activation.  These insights may also help us understand how plants assimilate
              minerals.


