Title       : RUI: Spatial Pattern Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a9982244

Award Number: 9982244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197415             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Brown michael.brown@villanova.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Patterns of many kinds abound in nature.  Behavioral scientists believe that the
              brain and the learning systems it supports have evolved to be especially
              sensitive to patterns.  There is clear evidence that temporal patterns (e.g.,
              an event that occurs every 10 seconds) and patterns of magnitude (e.g., the
              amount of food provided for a particular response increases or decreases with
              each response) play special roles in learning.  This project examines how rats
              learn about patterns in space.  Many resources are distributed systematically
              in space (e.g., clusters of food resources may tend to occur a specific
              distance apart from each other) and learning systems may be sensitive to these
              spatial patterns.

In this research project, rats will search for food hidden
              of the tops of poles, such that the subject must rear-up and examine the top of
              the pole to determine if it contains food.  There are no cues to the location
              of the baited poles, except that the baited poles always form a particular
              spatial pattern.  If rats learn the pattern, such learning will be revealed by
              the details of their search behavior.  Experiments will be done to determine
              what sorts of patterns can and cannot be learned, what features of the patterns
              are used by the learning system to guide search behavior, and the relations
              between pattern learning and other processes that are involved in spatial
              navigation ability.  These experiments will provide basic information about how
              brains and learning systems allow objects to be located in space.

