Title       : RUI: Acid and Base Stress in Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a9982437

Award Number: 9982437
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan L. Slonczewski slonczewski@kenyon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kenyon College
	      22 Ransom Hall
	      Gambier, OH  43022    740/427-5114

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Bacteria can grow at a wide range of pH values.  Acid and base resistance play
              important roles in survival in soil and aquatic environments, where pH may vary
              drastically.  Neutrophiles such as Escherichia coli are particularly
              interesting because they can maintain internal pH homeostasis (pH 7.3-7.8)
              during growth at pH values either more acidic (as low as pH 4.5) or more
              alkaline (as high as pH 9.2) than their intracellular pH.  At even greater
              extremes of acid (pH 2) or base (pH 10), E. coli can retain viability after
              many hours in a stationary, non-growing state; this phenomenon is termed acid
              resistance, or base resistance, respectively.  A number of genetic systems
              enable E. coli and related enteric organisms to maintain internal pH and
              reverse external acidification.  The amino acid decarboxylases produce basic
              amines to neutralize acidity.  The Na/H antiporter exchanges sodium ion for
              hydronium ion at alkaline pH.  Acid and base resistance systems connect with
              responses to other stress conditions such as anaerobiosis, oxidative stress,
              and stationary phase. Yellowstone National Park (YNP) represents a unique
              setting wherein significant geothermal activity occurs.  These thermal areas
              include aquatic systems as well as soils, and vary significantly with respect
              to temperature, chemistry, and physical properties.  There is an exceptional
              opportunity to observe, follow, and quantify changes in a soil microbial
              population that occur in response to elevated temperature.  Typically,
              environments that are the focus of thermophile investigations are mature,
              established geothermal features (relative to the human experience and known
              records).  This preemptive study will take advantage of naturally occurring
              temperature gradients that have recently surfaced across the landscape at one
              specific location in YNP.  These recent changes provide a rare opportunity,
              whereby thermophiles and/or the development of thermophile communities can be
              studied in real time.  As opposed to other neothermal environments such as deep
              sea vents which are logistically difficult to access, the research site is
              easily accessible and sampled.  Using a combination of molecular and culturing
              techniques, the microbial community in this evolving thermal environment is
              being studied over time, with apparent alterations in community structure being
              correlated with changes in soil temperature and chemical properties.  Several
              E. coli proteins not previously known to be pH-dependent have recently been
              shown to exhibit pH-dependent expression in two-dimensional electrophoretic
              gels (2-D gels).  In this project, the response of these proteins to pH, and
              their role in survival at extreme pH, will be characterized genetically, using
              lac fusion reporters and null mutants constructed by allelic replacement.  One
              protein expressed only in acid is YfiD, a homolog of pyruvate formate-lyase. 
              The expression of yfiD::lac will be observed as a function of pH and of
              permeant acids which depress internal pH.  A yfiD null mutant will be tested
              for survival in extreme acid.  A protein induced by base is TnaA, tryptophan
              deaminase, becoming one of the most abundant proteins of the cell at high pH. 
              This observation confirms the prediction that amino acid deaminases are induced
              to help neutralize alkaline growth media. Expression of tnaA::lac, and of other
              amino acid deaminases, will be tested for pH dependence.  The role of tnaA in
              neutralizing growth media will be tested.  The pH responses of the glutamate
              decarboxylase (GadA, GadB) and of alkyl hydroperoxide reductase (AhpC) will
              also be investigated.  The project will also continue proteomic investigation
              of the connections between pH stress, anaerobiosis and stationary phase.  The
              connections between pH and other stresses are known, but until recently these
              connections have been little studied.  Proteins expressed under various
              combinations of these stress conditions will be separated using high-resolution
              2-D gels.  Proteins showing pH-dependent responses will be identified by
              N-terminal sequence and matched to the E. coli genomic sequence.  This project
              will enhance our understanding of the diverse mechanisms of bacterial response
              to pH, and the ways in which bacteria both maintain their own pH homeostasis
              and control the external pH of their environment.  The project will contribute
              to the nation's human resources by continuing a successful research program
              involving undergraduates, many of whom are encouraged to pursue careers in
              science.



