Title       : Oxysterol Binding Protein Homologs in Dictyostelium Discoideum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2001      
File        : a9982731

Award Number: 9982731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore L. Steck t-steck@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sterols are universal constituents of eukaryotic membranes.  Their abundance and
              intracellular disposition are under elaborate control, but we do not understand
              the central mechanisms underlying this regulation.  Among the few known
              candidates for such functions are the OSBP, oxysterol binding proteins. 
              Oxysterols serve as signal molecules in sterol homeostasis, and OH (OSBP
              homolog) proteins could comprise an ancient family which plays diverse roles in
              membrane lipid management.  Because their mechanisms of action are not well
              understood, the OH family in the amoeba, Dictyostelium discoideum (the dOH) is
              being investigated.  cDNA fragments for the five known dOH genes are being
              cloned and sequenced.  These sequences will be analyzed in comparison with
              their diverse eukaryotic homologs.  While the possibility of multiple functions
              for the dOH family is of great interest, those proteins which actually bind
              oxysterols and/or participate in sterol homeostasis are of greatest current
              interest.  One clue to the function of the dOH will be their subcellular
              distribution and their possible redistribution in response to physiological and
              pharmacological effectors.  The dispersion along the endocytic pathway of
              relevant dOH species will be of particular interest.  Their mechanism of action
              will be pursued by correlating defined mutations with biochemical phenotypes. 
              This inquiry will include defining their binding sites for oxysterols,
              membranes, self-association and association with other proteins.  Chimeric
              constructs will help us to understand the specificity and commonality of the
              dOH domains. 




