Title       : Empirical and Theoretical Studies of pH in the Rhizosheres of Growth Zones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9982563

Award Number: 9982563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy Kuhn Silk wksilk@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A recently published theory suggests that the root growth zone produces fluxes
              of substance that create a micro-environment of acidity (pH) around the root
              tip as it penetrates the soil (Kim, T.K., Silk, W.K., and A.Y. Cheer 1999.  A
              mathematical model for pH patterns in the rhizospheres of growth zones.  Plant,
              Cell and Environment 22: 1527-1538).  Here I propose a pilot study to explore
              empirically the predictions of the theory.  A number of plant species will be
              screened to find variation in ability to change the pH of soil substrates.
              Screening will be conducted with seedlings in miniature growth chambers. Root
              surface pH will be measured with microelectrodes at points along the root axis
              and in the soil substrate directly behind the root. To assess developmental
              trends, techniques will be developed to excavate growing parts of more mature
              root systems and insert the older root tips into the miniature growth chambers.
              Then root surface pH will be measured as for the screening experiments.  These
              measurements will give temporal trends over longer periods in the development
              of the root system.  Preliminary studies will be needed to determine whether
              the larger main roots or abundant fine roots will be accessible to the pH
              microprobe. If time permits, some older root systems will be used for
              nutritional studies. Spectrophotometric assays will be used to find nutrient
              concentration within the root as a function of axial distance from the root
              tip. The rate at which the plant deposits nutrient elements to support the
              growth of the tip will be calculated with an equation using growth rates and
              the nutrient concentration data. Genotypes found to induce slight and strong
              acidification of the soil surrounding the growth zone will be compared for
              their nutrient deposition rates.  Since the ability of the root to change the
              pH of the soil in its immediate vicinity affects the uptake of both beneficial
              nutrients and phytotoxic metals, an understanding of root-induced pH changes in
              the surrounding soil is central to the study of nutrient cycling.


