Title       : The Systematic and Phylogenetic Significance of the Hominin Temporal Bone: A
               Landmark-Based Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1999  
File        : a9982022

Award Number: 9982022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23589              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Lockwood cal.iho@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Lynch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Kimbel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study addresses a series of unresolved issues in hominid evolution using
              new and rapidly developing approaches to the quantitative analysis of bone form
              in the field of geometric morphometrics.  The researchers propose to analyze
              the comparative anatomy of the temporal bone of the early hominid cranium in
              order to arrive at fresh perspectives on the identification of key
              morphological characters used to attribute of fossil specimens to species, and,
              more generally, on methodological approaches to the study of primate skeletal
              variation in an evolutionary context.  Both are difficult, but critical areas
              of research, along the road to answering specific questions concerning early
              hominid evolution.

They chose to study the temporal bone of the early
              hominid cranium because: 1) several debates concerning early hominid evolution
              center on the temporal bone, which is anatomically complex and well
              differentiated in the various evolutionary lineages; 2) previous analyses have
              focused on qualitative comparisons of temporal bone form, which have not led to
              progress in resolving outstanding debates; 3) the temporal bone is well
              represented in the hominid fossil record; 4) their methods are well suited to
              the study of fragmentary fossils, which comprise a significant component of the
              total temporal bone sample.

Studying the hominid temporal bone, they address
              such unresolved questions as: 1) What are the earliest documented
              representatives of the genus Homo? 2) How much, if any, taxonomic heterogeneity
              exists within conventionally recognized species such as Australopithecus
              afarensis, A. africanus, and others? 3) How should the morphological signs of
              unique affinity between "robust" Australopithecus species and Homo (homoplasy
              vs. synapomorphy) be interpreted? 

The approach employs three-dimensional
              landmarks on the temporal bone to quantify the expression of morphological
              features that have thus far been examined only qualitatively and/or in a
              univariate context.  Specifically, they use "relative warp analysis" to
              quantify overall shape variation and "thin-plate spline analysis" to describe
              and graphically portray difference between taxa or specimens.  The goal is the
              identification of novel aspects of temporal bone morphology to distinguish
              hominid taxa.

