Title       : Quantification of Species Differences in Adaptive Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2000     
File        : a9982452

Award Number: 9982452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209780             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy D. Hackenberg hack1@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Quantification of Species Differences in Adaptive Choice

Timothy
              D. Hackenberg

9982452

The aim of the present research is to develop a
              method for systematically comparing adaptive choice in humans and other
              animals.  Several lines of evidence suggest that humans behave differently than
              other animals when confronted with choices involving short-term versus
              longer-term outcomes.  More specifically, humans are often more sensitive to
              remote and probabilistic outcomes, suggesting perhaps that the processes
              governing adaptive choices in humans and other animals are fundamentally
              different.
Another possibility is that human-animal disparities in adaptive
              choice reflect differences in the ways in which humans and other animals have
              typically been studied.  The present research was designed to explore this
              latter possibility by examining the choice patterns of pigeon and human
              subjects under more closely analogous laboratory conditions than has been
              attempted in prior research.  This work grows out of some recent research in
              the investigator's laboratory, which shows that modifying the procedures used
              with pigeons in ways that more closely approximate those used with humans
              results in performance that is more "human-like."  The present research extends
              this approach in several significant ways, including the use of procedures that
              permit detailed quantitative information.  By eliminating key procedural
              differences which have plagued prior 
cross-species comparisons, the present
              research will help in distinguishing genuine from superficial species
              differences.  This will provide important information on the continuity of
              choice patterns across species, and on the degree to which principles
              discovered in the animal laboratory can be extended to fairly complex human
              activity.  In identifying factors contributing to adaptive choice, this
              research may also provide a starting point for developing effective
              self-management techniques in humans.



