Title       : CAREER: From Protocol Support to Applications: Elevating Multicast to a
               Ubiquitous Internet Service
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2000       
File        : a9982769

Award Number: 9982769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin C. Almeroth almeroth@cs.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The investigation of multicast communication as a service in the Internet
              has been an issue for nearly a decade.  And in that time, much progress has
              been made.  From its early inception as a means of streaming audio and video to
              researchers around the world, the Multicast Backbone (MBone) has grown into an
              infrastructure supporting commercial applications.  But, even though great
              strides have been made, there are still numerous, serious technical problems to
              be solved.  The rapid growth in multicast users, and the rapid growth in the
              interest in multicast means not only more and more multicast-capable sites are
              being added but more demands are being made for a richer set of multicast-base
              services.                                                                As
              multicast grows in use, the need to make good on the promises of scalability
              becomes even more important.  Furthermore, the complexities of multicast
              protocols are significantly greater than for unicast protocols.  Multicast
              protocols must communicate state information to manage the dynamic growth of
              multicast trees and ensure traffic flows only on necessary links; they must
              implement congestion control among many receivers instead of just one; and they
              must support management fuctions in an environment with more complexity than
              traditional management protocols were designed to handle.  If multicast
              implementors have learned anything, it is that fuctions that are easy for
              unicast protocols are not so easy for multicast.  Once one problem is solved,
              there is another set of problems to be identified and then solved.  But even
              with all the hurdles to overcome the potential utility of a ubiquitous
              multicast service is immense.  Once the protocol issues are more fully solved,
              the potential for new multicast-based applications and services will carry the
              Internet to a new level of utility.                                            
                                                                           While multicast is
              quickly evolving and industry is beginning to take notice, there are still
              problems to be solved by the academic community.  In the last several years,
              multicast has developed into more than just a research initiative.  Multicast
              is now of interest to many companies.  These companies see the value in
              multicast and also see the value in having multicast as a premiere Internet
              service.  However, just because multicast is being touted as a service ready to
              roll-out, does not mean all of the technical problems have been solved.  More
              importantly, it would be dangerous for the academic community to believe
              industry will assume full responsibility for solving the most important
              problems.  The role of academia, and the goal of the research plan described in
              this proposal, is to support the investigation of problems limiting the
              effectiveness of the Internet-wide deployment of multicast.  Furthermore,
              results of this research will hopefully be applied in next-generation high
              speed regional (Ca1REN-2) and national (vBNS and Internet2) networks.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                          The
              basic goal of the research outlined in this proposal is to continue evolving
              multicast into an Internet service.  A number of multicast research topics and
              deployment issues are targeted.  Because multicast communication is both the
              subject of ongoing academic research and deployment issues, this CAREER
              proposal is an investigation of issues along two axes:  (1) networking issues
              ranging from the data link layer up to the application layer, and (2) the type
              of research ranging from basic research to applied research.  Significant
              thought has been given to organizing this CAREER proposal in a manner that
              reflects the changing philosophy of academia.  The first axis is developed
              based on the philosophy that applications drive the need to develop new
              Internet services.  In the network, Internet service enable new paradigms and
              applications to be developed.  The second axis is developed based on the
              philosophy that a new era has begun in which successful faculty must be capable
              of addressing both fundamental research issues and applied research issues
              across a range of areas.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                     The proposed education plan relates very closely to the
              proposed research plan.  The educational mission is to teach undergraduates and
              graduates the fundamental aspects of networking and then to relate them to how
              things work in the Internet.  The key strength of the educational mission is
              its close ties to the research plan.  In particular, the digital classroom is
              the enabling concept which bring education and research together.  The  digital
              classroom is an ideal application.  It embodies much of my research philosophy
              and is an excellent bridge for students.  They can see the need for distance
              learning at the macro-level and can use that knowledge to put into context the
              micro-level projects.  The best way to evaluate a digital classroom is to use
              it, and the best way to build a digital classroom is to have students (not as
              chep labor but as eventual "useer") build it.  The classroom provides a
              traditional environment for students to learn theoretical topics, the classroom
              can also be a place where traditional topics using non-traditional methods, and
              the classroom is an ideal place to motivate students to think beyond textbooks
              and closed-end problems.  While distance learning is the subject of much
              research, academic faculty are in the unique position of using, evaluation,
              proposing, and developing the techniques and tools that will someday define and
              enable distance learning.
