Title       : Telomere-like Linear Retroplasmids of Fusarium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a9982775

Award Number: 9982775
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Kennell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Kennell

The project is focused on the mechanism of replication of a novel
              group of mitochondrial plasmids that have features expected of genetic elements
              that are related to the progenitors of telomerase. Plasmids pFOXC1, pFOXC2 and
              pFOXC3 arerelated, double-stranded linear DNAs that reside in the filamentous
              fungus, Fusarium oxysporum, and represent the first reported linear,
              autonomously-replicating genetic elements that replicate via reverse
              transcription. An in vitro system will be developed to study the mechanism of
              reverse transcription associated with the pFOXC retroplasmids. Initial efforts
              are directed at characterizing plasmid replication intermediates in order to
              accurately synthesize RNA templates used in reconstituted ribonucleoprotein
              complexes for in vitro analysis. Once established, the in vitro system will be
              used to evaluate the mechanism of (-) strand cDNA synthesis and its
              relationship to the generation and maintenance of telomere-like repeats
              associated with the plasmids. The findings will contribute to the understanding
              of reactions catalyzed by reverse transcriptases and provide insight into the
              relationship between retroelements and telomerase as well as the evolution of
              linear DNAs.


The ends of eukaryotic chromosomes, termed telomeres, are
              maintained by enzyme complexes which contain a protein (reverse transcriptase)
              and an RNA component. It is widely speculated that these complexes, or
              telomerases, were derived from invasive genetic elements that encode reverse
              transcriptase.  Previously, however, no genetic element has been identified
              that has structural and other features expected of a candidate progenitor that
              may have given rise to telomerase. This project seeks to elucidate the
              mechanism of replication of a novel group of  mitochondrial plasmids that have
              features expected of genetic elements that are related to the progenitors of
              telomerase. Plasmids pFOXC1, pFOXC2 and pFOXC3 are related, double-stranded
              linear DNAs that reside in the filamentous fungus, Fusarium oxysporum, and
              represent the first reported linear, autonomously-replicating genetic elements
              that replicate via reverse transcription. Research involves the development of
              a system to study the mechanism of reverse transcription associated with the
              pFOXC retroplasmids and will provide insight into the relationship between
              retroelements and telomerase as well as the evolution of linear DNAs.

