Title       : CeEMAP-95 Function in the Nematode, C. elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a9982377

Award Number: 9982377
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $560000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathy A. Suprenant   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Microtubules are critical structural components of eukaryotic cells.  They are
              responsible for the accurate segregation of chromosomes during mitosis and
              meiosis, and for the intracellular transport of several membrane-bounded
              organelles and macromolecular complexes. Failure to complete nuclear division
              results in chromosome missegregation, resulting in aneuploidy, which can have
              drastic consequences for the organism.  In addition, malfunctions in
              intracellular transport can lead to serious developmental defects. The
              regulation of microtubule assembly by microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) is
              critical to these fundamental biological processes.

This project involves a
              detailed molecular study of a novel microtubule-associated protein, EMAP, first
              identified in sea urchins and more recently discovered in higher and lower
              eukaryotes. The fundamental importance of EMAP is underscored by the high
              degree of sequence conservation from the nematode (C. elegans) to humans. In
              addition, the gene for human EMAP-1 maps to the Usher syndrome 1a locus, a
              disease that results in profound deafness and blindness. Sea urchin EMAP has
              unique effects on microtubule assembly. Microtubules assembled in the presence
              of EMAP are slightly longer, but significantly more dynamic, with infrequent
              rescue events. Because EMAP is an abundant component of the mitotic apparatus,
              EMAP may regulate microtubule assembly dynamics during the early embryonic cell
              cycles. EMAP is also unusual in that it co-purifies with microtubules that are
              associated with a subset of mRNAs, poly(A)-binding proteins and ribosomes.  The
              experiments in this project take advantage of Dr. Suprenant's experience in the
              biochemical and molecular characterization of EMAP and the ability to
              manipulate EMAP function in the nematode, C. elegans. These experiments are
              designed to determine whether the C. elegans EMAP homologue, CeEMAP-95, is a
              bona fide microtubule-binding protein and to identify CeEMAP-95-dependent
              processes in the worm. Similar to sea urchin EMAP, worm CeEMAP-95 may be
              involved in regulating microtubule assembly during embryogenesis or perhaps in
              the generation of cellular asymmetry through the localization of specific
              developmental determinants. The early stages of this project will involve the
              generation of specific antibodies, CeEMAP-95 mutant alleles, and recombinant
              CeEMAP-95 constructs that will provide essential molecular reagents for the
              continuing study of this interesting protein family. Also, additional
              microtubule-associated proteins in the worm will be identified and
              characterized, with the eventual goal of determining whether these proteins act
              independently, coordinately or in parallel with worm EMAP. Specifically, the
              following questions will be addressed: 1, is CeEMAP-95 localized to
              microtubule-rich cell types in the worm? 2, is CeEMAP-95 a regulator of
              microtubule assembly dynamics?  3, does the loss of function of the CeEMAP-95
              gene affect embryonic cell division or neuronal cell function? and 4, what
              other essential microtubule-binding proteins are present in C. elegans? 

The
              long term goal of this work is to identify the cellular functions that require
              EMAP and to understand how these processes affect the development of a
              multicellular organism. This will be done through the combination of
              biochemistry, cellular and molecular biology, and genetics, with both the
              biochemical demonstration of EMAP's function in vitro and the genetic
              identification of its function in vivo.

