Title       : Monte Carlo Filters for Nonlinear and Non-Gaussian Dynamic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1999 
File        : a9982846

Award Number: 9982846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rong Chen rongchen@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9982846

This research is concerned with Monte Carlo methods for nonlinear and
              non-Gaussian dynamic systems.  The basic idea of the Monte Carlo filter is to
              sequentially generate random samples from the distribution of the current state
              of the system.  Compared with traditional filtering methods, simple, flexible,
              yet powerful Monte Carlo techniques provide effective means to deal with
              complex dynamic systems.  The investigator studies four specific topics in this
              research.  Topic (I) studies a special Monte Carlo filter called Mixture Kalman
              filter for the conditional dynamic linear models, a class of widely encountered
              systems in practice.  This filter utilizes the `marginalization' operation to
              improve efficiency.  Topic (II) studies a partial rejection control operation,
              an operation aimed to generate more efficient random samples in Monte Carlo
              filters.  Topic (III) studies methods to deal with dynamic systems with unknown
              system coefficients, an important but difficult problem.  Topic (IV) is devoted
              to several applications of Monte Carlo filters, including tracking multiple
              maneuvering targets in a clutter environment; Bayesian receivers in digital
              wireless communications; on-line estimation of the market volatility in 
              financial time series analysis; and stochastic system control with non-Gaussian
              innovations.

Dynamic systems are widely used in almost all fields of
              applications.  Examples abound in radar or sonar surveillance systems, in
              mobile telecommunications, in economic and financial data analysis, in computer
              vision, in medical diagnostics, in speech recognition, in feed-back control and
              guidance systems, and in Internet traffic monitoring and control, just to name
              a few.  Most of them are nonlinear and non-Gaussian.  One of the main
              challenges in dealing with dynamic systems is that they usually require on-line
              (in real time) estimation and prediction (filtering) of the ever-changing
              system characteristics, given the continuous flow of observations and
              information from the system.  The investigator studies and develops Monte Carlo
              filters for nonlinear and non-Gaussian dynamic systems. The basic idea of the
              Monte Carlo filter is to sequentially generate random samples to represent the
              status (distribution) of the current state of the system. Modern computing
              power has made it feasible to use Monte Carlo methods as filtering methods in
              application.  Compared with traditional filtering methods, simple, flexible,
              yet powerful Monte Carlo techniques provide effective means to deal with
              complex dynamic systems.  This research enriches the toolkit of on-line
              filtering for nonlinear and non-Gaussian dynamic systems. Faster and more
              effective filtering techniques will certainly have significant impact on a wide
              range of important applications in real life and make significant contributions
              to advancing science and technology.  It also promotes the interdisciplinary
              research between engineering and statistics.


