Title       : Disintegration of Replication Forks and their Recombinational Repair
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a9982502

Award Number: 9982502
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei Kuzminov   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to elucidate the mechanism of replication fork
              disintegration and subsequent recombinational repair in the bacterium
              Escherichia coli.  Long-term objectives for this research are to answer the
              following questions:  1) What happens when a replication fork reaches a
              single-strand interruption, present in all DNA molecules of cells, in a
              template DNA? 2) What happens when a replication fork is inhibited or stalled?,
              and 3) How is a solitary double-stranded end repaired in E. coli?  The
              bacterial virus lambda and E. coli chromosomes will be used to study mechanisms
              of these processes in vivo.  Studies with the lambda chromosome will include
              the introduction of a single-strand nicked site and a replication termination
              site to see if they cause replication fork disintegration with subsequent
              recombinational repair.  Lambda crosses with other lambda viruses will be
              employed to directly demonstrate DNA synthesis primed by double-strand end
              invasion and to study systematically the double-strand end repair reaction in
              vivo in terms of the reaction stages and their genetic requirements.  Studies
              with the E. coli chromosome will include a search for recombination-dependent
              mutants and characterization of the replication-induced chromosomal
              fragmentation in conditions suspected to cause replication for disintegration. 
              If replication fork disintegration with subsequent repair by homologous
              recombination is demonstrated it will explain the puzzling recombination
              dependence of many mutants in DNA metabolism, both in bacteria and
              eukaryotes.
Since a disintegrated replication fork is a DNA lesion that can be
              repaired only by homologous recombination, its demonstration will also shed
              light on the inviability of recombinase-deficient cells of higher organisms.

