Title       : Organization and Function of the Extra-Bulbar Olfactory Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a9982934

Award Number: 9982934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heather L. Eisthen eisthen@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Evolutionary changes in the nervous system offer a tremendous
opportunity to
              understand the relationship between the nervous system and
behavior. When new
              brain structures are created, what does this do to an
organism's behavior? How
              do these new structures interact with other
portions of the nervous system? We
              are using
the vertebrate olfactory system (the system responsible for the
              sense of
smell) as a model for examining evolutionary changes in the nervous
              system.
To this end, we are exploring the organization of the olfactory system
              in
a variety of vertebrate animals.
	Recently, scientists have learned that
              receptor cells in the nose
of some fishes and amphibians are connected to the
              a region in the base of
the forebrain, instead of to the olfactory bulbs, as
              is usual for these
cells. The structure of this newly-discovered subsystem,
              the "extra-bulbar
pathway," is poorly understood, and its function has not
              been investigated.
In the proposed experiments, the location of the receptor
              cells of the
extra-bulbar pathway within the nose will be examined in adult
              axolotls
(Ambystoma mexicanum), a salamander species that lives in water
              throughout
its life. Single-cell electrophysiological recording methods will
              be used
to study the odorant response properties of the receptor cells of
              the
extra-bulbar pathway in axolotls. These experiments will allow us
              to
examine the function of the extra-bulbar pathway, and
to test an
              interesting hypothesis that suggests that the extra-bulbar
pathway functions
              in detection of pheromones. Pheromones are chemicals
produced by animals that
              carry information to other members of the same
species to tell them about the
              producer's sex or reproductive status. 
	These experiments will provide the
              first clear description of the
organization and function of the extra-bulbar
              pathway. This research has
important implications for our understanding of the
              ways in which odorant
information is converted into electrical signals in
              olfactory receptor
cells, as well as the way odorant information is processed
              in the olfactory
bulbs, potentially shedding light on the neural mechanisms
              underlying odor
perception.


