Title       : Genetic Analysis of Indole-3-Butyric Acid Function in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a9982611

Award Number: 9982611
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bonnie Bartel bartel@bioc.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal outlines experiments to elucidate the function of indole-3-butyric
              acid (IBA) in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana.  Although IBA, a naturally
              occurring form of the plant growth hormone auxin, is used commercially to
              promote rooting in many species, the molecular mechanisms by which it acts are
              largely unknown.  It has been suggested that IBA is converted into
              indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) using reactions analogous to those of fatty acid
              degradation (b-oxidation), a peroxisomal process in plants.  A set of
              IBA-response mutants has been isolated and provisionally grouped into two
              classes: 1) mutants defective in peroxisome biogenesis or general boxidation,
              which may inefficiently convert IBA to IAA, and 2) mutants with apparently
              normal peroxisome function, which may be defective in IBA perception or
              signaling
.  
The hypothesis that IBA functions in auxin signaling through
              its conversion to IAA in peroxisomes will be tested by characterizing these
              mutants.  The following experiments will be conducted: 1) Phenotypes related to
              auxin and peroxisomal functions will be examined in the IBA-response mutants. 
              2) Specific defects of two IBA-response mutants for which the responsible genes
              have been identified will be investigated.  One mutant is defective in a
              peroxisomal targeting receptor.  Peroxisome morphology will be visualized and
              the subcellular distribution of peroxisomal proteins will be examined.  The
              sequence of the gene defective in the second mutant suggests that the encoded
              protein hydrolyzes IAA-CoA to release free IAA following IBA chain shortening. 
              The substrate specificity of this enzyme will be tested.  3) The genes
              defective in several other IBA-response mutants will be isolated, with emphasis
              on those having apparently normal peroxisomal function.  These genes and
              mutants will be further characterized to elucidate their role in IBA action. 
              4) Additional IBA-response mutants will be isolated to identify a more complete
              set of genes involved in IBA function.
To understand auxin action, the
              functional significance of the various auxins found in plants must be
              determined.  Identifying genes involved in IBA to IAA conversion is a first
              step to understanding the regulation of this conversion.  This knowledge is
              essential in determining the contributions of the various facets of IAA
              metabolism to the active IAA pool.  Elucidating of the molecular mechanisms of
              IBA action in a genetically tractable plant may provide insights for
              agricultural and horticultural IBA uses.  Identifying and characterizing the
              specific isozymes that convert IBA to IAA may facilitate their modification in
              difficult-to-root cultivars where IBA application is normally ineffective. 
              This research will also reveal genes critical for the function and biogenesis
              of plant peroxisomes, which carry out functions not found in mammalian or yeast
              peroxisomes.  Finally, the proposed experiments will expand understanding of
              plant boxidation, which is essential both for the utilization of seed storage
              lipids and for chain shortening of other substrates, including jasmonic acid, a
              plant hormone involved in defense responses.  



