Title       : Role of mRNA-rRNA Interactions in Translation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2001  
File        : a9982574

Award Number: 9982574
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303903             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent P. Mauro vmauro@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Mauro
The focus of this research is a newly discovered mechanism of
              translational control in which the nucleic acid component of ribosomes (rRNA)
              appears to regulate translation by base pairing to complementary segments
              contained within particular mRNAs.  The working hypothesis is that base pairing
              interactions between mRNAs and rRNA may affect ribosome recruitment,
              competition, or translation efficiency.  Studies are proposed to determine when
              base pairing occurs between mRNAs and rRNA and to describe the mechanisms by
              which these interactions affect translation.  They will also evaluate the
              extent to which these interactions contribute to the overall pattern of protein
              expression in a cell.  Initial studies will focus on the mRNAs that encode
              ribosomal protein S15 and homeodomain protein Gtx. Photochemical cross-linking
              and inhibition of reverse transcriptase (toeprinting) will be used to analyze
              how full-length mRNAs, that contain segments complementary to 18S rRNA,
              physically interact with the 18S rRNA contained within intact 40S ribosomal
              subunits.  In addition, polysome profiles will be examined and ribosome spacing
              will be measured to distinguish between interactions that are independent of
              translation and interactions that occur while ribosomes scan or translate the
              mRNA.  A number of other mRNAs that contain segments complementary to different
              regions of the rRNA will also be analyzed to address accessibility of different
              segments of the rRNA and to determine the extent to which the results obtained
              with the S15 and Gtx mRNAs are sufficient to describe a general mechanism.  In
              addition, the binding of complementary sequences to rRNA will be examined to
              determine if these interactions affect the rate of translation of other mRNAs
              by competing for common sites on the rRNA or by altering the ribosomal
              subunit.

Studies of eukaryotic gene expression often rely on measurements of
              mRNA levels.  Yet, for many protein-coding genes, this is a poor predictor of
              protein production because many posttranscriptional events, including mRNA
              processing, stability, and translation, are subject to regulation.  This
              research should increase our understanding of a mechanism of translational
              control that has not been extensively investigated before, while providing
              basic information about ribosome structure and accessibility to mRNA.  The
              results of these studies may also identify RNA motifs with potential
              applications as regulatory sequences in gene therapy.  

