Title       : Compiler and Runtime Support for Data Intensive Computing on Multi-dimensional
               Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a9982087

Award Number: 9982087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $426272             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Sussman als@cs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel H. Saltz  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              One of the largest and fastest-growing problems in scientific computing is the
              analysis and processing of very large data sets. These scientific data sets can
              come from long-running simulations (e.g. simulations of water pollution that
              create "snapshots" of the expected water conditions at later times), archives
              of remote sensing data (e.g. high-resolution satellite imagery), and archives
              of medical images (e.g. MRI scans for a patient or group of patients). These
              data sets are usually multi-dimensional, including spatial coordinates, time
              stamps, and several physical properties at each point. Several systems now
              support storage, retrieval, and visualization of such data sets, but few can
              efficiently process the data. This project will develop methods to produce
              efficient programs to carry out multi-dimensional data processing and analysis
              using a high-level parallel language.

The project will attack this problem
              by developing runtime routines for optimizing resource usage, appropriate
              language extensions, and aggressive compiler optimizations for large data
              processing. The runtime methods will implement policies that optimize
              computational efficiency on a broad range of large data set analyses, taking
              into account the spatial structure and partitioning of the data and the
              computation to be performed. Incorporating these routines into the
              investigator's Active Data Repository will substantially generalize and improve
              that system. The language extensions and compiler optimizations will then make
              use of the runtime system to enable applications that analyze multi-dimensional
              data sets to be expressed at an abstract level, yet achieve high utilization of
              computational, storage, and communication resources.

