Title       : Conflict resolution with noisy signaling: fat, color and social status in
               damselflies.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9982203

Award Number: 9982203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150094             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Getty getty@kbs.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Signaling is important in conflict resolution.  When signals are noisy and
              unreliable, negotiations are more likely to erupt into unnecessary fighting. 
              This study will determine whether male black-winged damselflies (Calopteryx
              maculata) use unreliable signals to assess each other's fighting ability, and
              whether inaccurate assessment is an important cause of fighting.  Fighting
              ability in male damselflies depends on fat reserves. Old lean males lose fights
              and are driven from their territories by young, fat challengers.  Recent
              research discovered a subtle cue to fat reserves:  color.  Young, fat, males
              are slightly bluer than old, lean males.  Color depends on how sunlight is
              reflected by the body of the damselfly and this changes with age and fat
              reserves.  This study will use behavioral experiments to test whether the
              damselflies actually use this cue to assess each other, and determine the
              extent to which a noisy relationship between fat and color contributes to
              fighting.  We will use reflectance spectrophotometry to measure color, electron
              microscopy to measure the reflector geometry and chemical assays to measure fat
              reserves.  This data will help us to develop more realistic models of conflict
              resolution with unreliable signaling.



