Title       : Transduction of Synaptic Potentials into Neuronal Firing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0079619

Award Number: 0079619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander D. Reyes reyes@cns.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We know that the brain is a highly efficient computational machine but little is
              known about how neurons in the central nervous system process information.
              Deciphering the neural code is made difficult by the enormous and complex set
              of variables at both the cellular and systems level that determine the behavior
              of a neuron and of the network in general. Neurons in a network communicate via
              small electrical signals termed postsynaptic potentials (PSPs).  A neuron
              integrates the PSPs from thousands of other neurons; when the composite signal
              is sufficiently large, a large all-or-none electrical event, termed the action
              potential (AP; which is the equivalent of a binary digit), is generated. The AP
              is subsequently transmitted to other parts of the nervous system where it
              results in a PSP in other neurons, thereby repeating the process.  Information
              is encoded in the timing and frequency of the APs. The cortex contains a vast
              array of neurons, each with different biophysical properties. Designing
              experiments that control for these variables is challenging.
While biophysical
              studies permit detailed characterization of subcellular ion channels in single
              neurons, they do not directly address how these properties translate to
              encoding in a network of neurons. Conversely, behavioral electrophysiology
              describes the behavior of neurons under natural conditions but provides little
              data about the underlying cellular mechanisms.  In the current study, the
              strategy is to interface a computer with a live neuron. By using computer
              simulations to generate realistic inputs into the neuron, the manner in which a
              neuron processes signals within a neural network can be examined systematically
              and be correlated directly with its biophysical properties.  The data obtained
              from these experiments will provide a solid foundation for constructing
              realistic models of networks, developing better computing algorithms and
              hardware, and designing neural prostheses.


