Title       : MRI: Instrumentation Acquisition for the Development of a Wet Facility for
               Nano-Bioengineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0079243

Award Number: 0079243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa A. Pruitt lpruitt@newton.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luke P. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tony M. Keaveny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arunava Majumdar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn Bertozzi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0079243
Pruitt
The objective of this NSF MRI Award is to develop a Wet
              Facility for Nano-Bioengineering that employs nanoengineering for the
              characterization of cellular to molecular-level biological systems.  The
              facility will be unique in that it will provide laboratory equipment that
              enables characterization of living biological systems in their physiological
              environments.  The research focus of the facility is based on the merger of
              nanotechnology and bioengineering which are both emerging fields with promise
              of great scientific breakthroughs in the area of tissue engineering, cell
              mechanics, biological processes, and imaging.  The facilities will provide the
              resources for creating a biomimetic framework necessary for novel synthesis of
              engineered materials or devices.  The impact of this facility will span the
              disciplines of mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, bioengineering,
              and materials science, as well as the general areas of chemistry, biology and
              medicine.  The acquired equipment for this facility will provide the necessary
              tools for nanoscale characterization of cells, proteins, interfaces, and
              BioMEMs structures.  The approach to developing this facility is to acquire
              several large pieces of complementary equipment that would be difficult for any
              single faculty member to acquire alone because of the large initial cost and
              associated long-term maintenance.  Thus, they propose to purchase the following
              systems using funds from this NSF initiative:  an atomic force microscope and
              nanoindenter with fluid chambers for cell and tissue manipulation studies, a
              confocal microscope for cell imaging and manipulation, an infrared spectrometer
              and high pressure liquid chromatography system for characterization of protein
              binding, and an environmental scanning electron microcope to study substructure
              morphology of biomaterials.

