Title       : Acquisition of a high-speed digital imaging system for time-resolved
               measurements of short duration events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0079458

Award Number: 0079458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vikas Prakash vxp18@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chih-Jen Sung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Lewandowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1058,1189,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
The NSF Major Research Instrumentation grant funds a versatile imaging system
              based on new developments in the state of the art technology.  The research
              instrumentation comprises (a) an extremely versatile, high resolution, image
              intensified framing/streak CCD camera, (b) an all-solid state coherent,
              collimated and monochromatic laser light source to be operated in conjunction
              with the high-speed camera, and (c) a wide bandwidth, high sampling rate
              digital oscilloscope for use in various laser interferometry based optical
              techniques. The system represents a fundamental upgrade of the laser based
              diagnostic capabilities of several major laboratories in the Department of
              Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering and would support other research and
              development in the Case School of Engineering.
	The advanced capabilities of
              the new ultra-fast imaging system will be utilized by the PI, two Co-PI's and
              several other contributing faculty members of the Case School of Engineering
              for conducting fundamental experimental investigations in areas of importance
              to experimental techniques. The proposed equipment is expected to significantly
              encourage intra- and inter- university collaborations. At Case Western Reserve
              University the acquisition of the high speed imaging system will bring together
              talents and facilities in the Macromolecular Science, Materials Science and
              Engineering, Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, and Civil and Environmental
              Engineering.  These collaborative, multidisciplinary research efforts will
              explore fully the phenomena of high-speed friction between dissimilar
              materials, design and development of novel damage-tolerant light-weight
              multifunctional material systems, fundamentals of combustion and explosion
              science, reliability of MEMS devices, damage evolution and failure in
              bio-skeletal tissues of importance to trauma-biomechanics and orthopaedics,
              fundamentals of deformation processing with applications to high rate
              manufacturing, to name a few.
Besides being useful on research and
              development, the new high-speed digital imaging system will provide an
              opportunity for laboratory experience and training for graduate and
              post-graduate students in the state-of-the-art of modern instrumentation.  In
              addition to the basic scientific content within the proposed project areas,
              this training reaches into areas of applied technology that are bridged by
              elements within the proposed research that look for active opportunities in the
              development of instrumentation and novel experimental methods for advanced
              laser diagnostics of short duration events.  One outcome of this would be the
              development of engineers who can integrate experimental and analytical
              techniques to attack technologically important areas. The Case School of
              Engineering at CWRU is strongly encouraging the involvement of undergraduate
              students in faculty research projects and this would occur for the proposed
              work as well.  Every effort will be made to encourage and involve undergraduate
              and graduate students especially from groups presently under-represented in the
              engineering discipline.


