Title       : Acquisition of a High Resolution Scanning Electron Microscope for Forensics and
               Surface Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0079481

Award Number: 0079481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Chapman                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168360             (Estimated)
Investigator: Otto J. Gregory gregory@egr.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-0079481
Otto J. Gregory
University of Rhode Island
MRI: Acquisition of a
              High-Resolution Scanning Electron Microscope for Forensics and Surface
              Technology

Abstract

A high-resolution scanning electron microscope for
              forensic and surface sciences will be acquired.   The capabilities of the
              instrument include low atomic number microanalysis (down to atomic number 4)
              along with the ability to characterize the microstructure and morphology of
              pressure and moisture-sensitive species in low vacuum (10-3 torr) environments.
              This latter feature is extremely important because it permits analysis of 'wet'
              specimens such as liquids with low vapor pressure, polymers, cements, organic
              membranes, solvated surfaces, and biological specimens. In addition to these
              capabilities, the microscope is equipped with an automated programmable
              specimen stage and appropriate software for residual gunshot-residue analysis,
              and it has an oversized chamber that permits multi-specimen analysis without
              operator intervention. 


The state-of-the-art electron microscope with its
              expanded capabilities will have a major impact on the quality of research and
              teaching at the university.  In particular, the equipment will provide an
              opportunity for university researchers in the Forensic Science Partnership and
              the State Crime Laboratory, located on campus, to develop new courses in
              textile classification, soils and marine specimen identification, and
              biological residue tracing.   It will present new research opportunities in
              forensics such as residual gunshot residue analysis and bloodstain analysis.
              The university investigators in the Sensors and Surface Technology Partnership
              will also benefit from the acquisition.  They are engaged in developing
              specialty thin-film materials for high sensitivity sensor applications ranging
              from optical strain gages to GMR high-density hard disk readers. Almost all of
              these materials developments depend on the ability to analyze rapidly and
              accurately the chemical composition, morphologies, and structures of the thin
              film materials involved in these devices, which frequently extend into the
              realm of nanotechnology.

 


