Title       : Cyanogels: A Coordination Polymer Based System for the Synthesis of Solid-State
               Materials Via Sol-Gel Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0079169

Award Number: 0079169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew B. Bocarsly bocarsly@chemvax.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award to Professor Andrew Bocarsly of Princeton University is a renewal of
              an earlier award and is supported by the Advanced Materials and Processing
              Program in the Chemistry Division.  The focus of the award will be to develop
              the chemistry of cyanogels based on multi-metal cyanides prepared by sol-gel
              processing.  Systemic development of cyanogel chemistry, their characterization
              for catalysis, and low temperature processing of them in ceramics,
              semiconductors and coatings for electrodes will be part of this award.  Studies
              with cyanogel to absorb and preconcentrate carbon dioxide and finally to reduce
              to methanol will be carried out under this award.  Also, multimetal cyanogel
              will be evaluated as electrocatalysts at low temperatures for combinatorial
              chemistry.  Teaching and training of students in materials science at all
              levels from high school to graduate school including teachers from high school
              are parts of the award. 

Cyanogels prepared from multi-metal cyanides by
              sol-gel processing will be characterized for functional properties and for
              applications in catalysis, and for the preparation of ceramics, semiconductors
              and coatings for electrodes. Use of cyanogels for the absorption and
              preconcentration of carbon dioxide and its reduction of methanol, will have a
              lasting improvement in the environment in general, and in the energy sector in
              particular. In addition, the research program will provide a rich
              multidisciplinary education and training opportunity in materials chemistry to
              postdoctoral and graduate students, and students and teachers from high
              schools.
