Title       : The Chemistry of Fungal Antagonism and Defense
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a0079141

Award Number: 0079141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292500             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Gloer james-gloer@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick F. Dowd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald T. Wicklow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the study of mycoparasitic/fungicolous fungi that
              colonize the stromata and polypores of other fungi.  Colonists obtained from
              the southern, subtropical latitudes of southern Georgia and northern Florida
              will increase the biodiversity found in samples already collected from
              Illinois.  Activity of isolates from the colonists against Aspergillus flavus,
              Fusarium verticillioides and the agriculturally important insect Spodoptera
              frugiperda will be tested.  The results of the project will help to determine
              whether an ecological rationale can be useful as a guide to the discovery of
              new and potentially bioactive natural products.

With this renewal award, the
              Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr.
              James B. Gloer of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Iowa.  Dr.
              Gloer, in collaboration with Drs. Donald T. Wicklow and Patrick F. Dowd of the
              U.S. Department of Agriculture, will focus his work on investigating the the
              fungal invasion of long-lived or "persistent" stromata of other fungi.  Since
              the invasion may involve antibiosis, the fungal colonists are a potential
              source of anti fungal agents.  The work is an excellent training ground for
              graduate students and the work could have impact on the pharmaceutical and
              agricultural industries.
