Title       : Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0079478

Award Number: 0079478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65390              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian W. Knowles iwk@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yanni Zeng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Halpern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ryoichi Kawai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard McNider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The Department of Mathematics of the University of Alabama at
              Birmingham will purchase and assemble onsite a 25 node dual Pentium III Beowulf
              cluster using commodity personal computer technology. The cluster will be
              dedicated to support of research in the mathematical sciences. The equipment
              will be used in particular for the following mathematics research projects
              based in the  Departments of Mathematics and Physics at the University of
              Alabama at Birmingham and the Departments of Mathematics at the University of
              Alabama in Huntsville and the University of Alabama (Tuscaloosa):

	Inverse
              Problems: Ian Knowles. This project centers on the development of computational
              algorithms for elliptic inverse problems for groundwater modeling and medical
              imaging.

	Modeling Coupled Katabatic/Ice/Ocean Processes Related  to the
              Energy and Carbon Budget in the High Latitude Southern Ocean: Richard T.
              McNider. It is the purpose of this  project to test and further develop
              simplified two-dimensional coupled atmospheric, ocean, ice and biological
              models to elucidate the role of physical factors in Antarctic sea ice
              distribution and heat flux exchange and, ultimately, to  address CO_2 exchange
              between the atmosphere and ocean.

	Coupled Stochastic Differential
              Equations: Ryoichi Kawai. When a number of nonlinear dynamical elements
              interact with each other in the presence of multiplicative noise, ordered
              phases appear via symmetry breaking noise-induced phase transitions, whereas
              the same system does not exhibit any interesting behavior in the absence of
              noise; this phenomenon is investigated computationally.

	Stability of
              Interfacial Flows: D. Halpern and A.L. Frenkel. The stability of thin films
              coating a capillary tube or a planar wall subject to a time-dependent forcing
              is investigated computationally .

	Intermediate Shocks for
              Magnetohydrodynamics: Yanni Zeng. This project is to study the nonlinear
              stability of intermediate shock waves occurring in magnetohydrodynamics.

