Title       : Acquisition of a Laser Ablation Single Collector High Resolution Inductively
               Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a0079721

Award Number: 0079721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287099             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Mohamad Ghazi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Seth E. Rose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Vanko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela C. Burnley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Crawford Elliott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0079721
Ghazi

This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation
              (MRI) Program, provides partial support of the costs of acquiring a magnetic
              sector inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer equipped with a laser
              ablation microprobe (hereafter referred to as LA-HR-ICP-MS) for the Department
              of Geology at Georgia State University.  The new high resolution instrument
              offers increased sensitivity and lower detection limits for the analysis of
              trace elements in solution or contained in ablated particulates than the
              current and no longer manufactured quadrupole-based instrument at Georgia
              State.  An excimer laser system operating in the deep UV (193 nm wavelength)
              will provide for better coupling with relatively translucent minerals (i.e.
              quartz) than do Nd-YAG lasers, offers a finer spot size and more stable energy
              profile across the beam width, and offers the ability to raster the laser beam.
               The LA-HR-ICP-MS system offers the potential to substantially improve the
              quality and quantity of measurements of trace element abundances contained
              within fluid inclusions, the specialty of this group at Georgia State.  The new
              ICP-MS facility will also continue a long standing tradition of open use as an
              analytical facility serving the southeastern U.S. both for academic needs and
              use by industrial collaborators from Atlanta-based Lucent Technologies.  This
              academic-industrial collaborative effort has resulted in a symbiotic
              relationship between the Georgia State Geology Department and Lucent
              Technologies, with Lucent providing financial support for operation of the lab
              and educational experiences for students and with Georgia State providing
              trained graduates for Lucent's workforce.   

Specific research projects in
              the geosciences that will utilize this new facility include:  studies of the
              petrogenesis of Tethyan ophiolites exposed in Iran to better understand the
              process of oceanic crustal formation; rare earth element studies of pegmatite
              mineral-hosted fluid inclusions to shed light on water-rock interaction and its
              role in the formation of metalliferous deposits; trace element partitioning in
              high pressure experimental charges to elucidate the geochemical evolution of
              exposed metamorphic facies; and trace element analysis of groundwater samples
              from coastal plain aquifers of the southeastern U.S. as indicators of
              problematic salt-water intrusions caused by over pumping of fresh groundwater
              resources for agricultural and municipal needs.
***

