Title       : Topics on Inequality: The Changing Household Composition and Implications for
               Policy Coordination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a0079504

Award Number: 0079504
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236335             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose-Victor Rios-Rull vr0j@anaga.sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5952,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project consists of two parts concerned with the determinants as well as
              the implications of inequality both between people and across countries.  The
              first part studies recent rather dramatic changes in the composition of U.S.
              households. Between the mid seventies and the beginning of the nineties the
              share of non-married females grew dramatically in the U.S. (from 17% to 30% in
              the 30 to 44 age group). At the same time that people are living less as
              married couples. there has been a steady increase in out of wedlock
              child-raising that increased the share of single mothers from 12%o to 17% of
              the total female population, while total fertility remained constant over the
              same period. There has been another major change in the sane time period: the
              structure of wages is much different now than twenty five years ago. There has
              been a modest increase in average wages. together with fairly large increases
              in the ratio of wages of college to non-college educated and in the ratio of
              women's to men's wages. This project investigates the contribution of the
              changes in wages to the aforementioned demographic changes. To this end, a
              model is constructed where agents differ in age. sex, education. wages, and in
              the type of family they live. Agents search for a mate, make marital status and
              fertility decisions and invest in their children's education. The model is
              calibrated so that it replicates the economic and demographic characteristics
              of the mid seventies. Next, the model is studied with only changes in wages,
              absolute and relative (across sexes and education levels) to see how much of
              the changes in the type of family that people live in can be traced back to
              changes in wages.  The project may have far reaching implications. The findings
              of a recent body of empirical literature indicate that factors that happen
              early in life. before age 16, account for most of the differences in lifelong
              achievements of people. Moreover, it seems that the type of family where
              children grow up contributes significantly to shape those achievements: the
              presence of both parents yields more successful children than one parent alone.
              This implies that a change in household structure of the magnitude observed can
              shape the characteristics of the next generation of Americans, not only in
              terms of their average achievements, but probably and in a more dramatic
              fashion, for the characteristics of inequality.  Understanding the mechanisms
              that generate the changes in family type seems to be a very important
              task.

The second part of the project attempts to understand how differences
              in the wealth and productivity of nations affect the type of taxing policies
              that they choose. How do taxes of poorer countries compare to those of richer
              countries?  Why does the U.S. tax capital more intensively than Europe?  To
              answer these questions the investigator develops a model where governments are
              benevolent towards their own citizens, and choose how to best collect revenue
              thorough different forms of taxation (corporate taxation, and personal labor
              income and capital taxation) at different rates.  Moreover, these governments
              cannot commit to future policies, they can always change their mind.  In this
              model government policies of rich and poor countries are interrelated since
              capital can flow across countries. This part of the project might also shed
              some new light on the issue of whether it is a good idea that governments can
              coordinate their policies.

