Title       : Improving Empirical Applications of the Expected Utility Theory of War
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0079120

Award Number: 0079120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72773              (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Scott Bennett sbennett@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The researcher proposes an examination of three likely sources of regional and
              temporal variation in the fit of expected utility predictions of international
              conflict to actual international conflict.  Tests of the msot sophisticated
              general implementation of rational choice theory to international conflict
              (based on Bueno de Mesquita and Lalman's 1992 "international interaction game")
              reveal systematic variations in the fit of the predictions of the theory across
              time and space.  This unexpected variation in the fit of the so-called
              "expected utility theory of war" is not predicted by the theory, and it has
              importance implications for the application of rational choice models to
              international relations, to the study of international conflict, and to
              quantitative analysis in international relations.  The systematic nature of the
              variation and its apparent fit to plausible hypotheses about learning and
              regional diffferences suggest that the variation is not solely the result of
              poor measurement or natural variation.  As a result, these variations should be
              explained as a means of obtaining a more accurate and empirically applicable
              implementation of a key rational model of international conflict.
	Variation
              in the fit of any rational choice model to interactions across time and space
              could be explained by at least two general approaches.  First, some scholars
              would focus attention on the game structure, refusing to accept the premise
              that the international interaction game is an appropriate theoretical model of
              dyadic interaction for all dyads across time.  Second, others would argue that
              measurement and application issues are the keys to testing and using expected
              utility theory in an applied setting, and that there are particular problems in
              the current measurement and operationalization of key expected utility concepts
              that have systematic distorting effects on tests of expected utility theory. 
              Both of these possible problems have relevance in this particular case.
	The
              principal investigator first plans to investigate how critical changes in the
              game structure of the international interaction game affect its predictions and
              the fit of those predictions to international conflict behavior.  The
              investigator does this by focusing on the key game assumption that all states
              have the option to use force against one another, and also by developming a
              computer simulation intended to relax game assumptions sequentially and to
              reassess the fit of the resulting euilibria to global and regional behavior
              patterns.  The investigator also examines critical measurement issues involved
              in the current operationalization and implementation of key expected utility
              concepts.  In particular, close attention is given to the effects of distance
              and absolute state power as key determinants of why the predictions of the
              international interaction game do not fit as expected in broad empirical
              application.  This work draws in part on insights gained during the development
              of EUGene (Expected Utility and Data Generation Program), the software package
              used to generate data to test fully the predictions of the international
              interaction game (Bennett and Stam 1997, 1998).

    

