Title       : Optimal Distinctiveness and Intergroup Discrimination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a0079165

Award Number: 0079165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259055             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilynn B. Brewer brewer.64@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Race relations and violence in our nation's schools are problems that stem in
              part from fundamental human needs to seek inclusion in social groups and to
              maintain and defend the boundaries that distinguish ingroups from outgroups. In
              this context, social psychological theory and research on the connection
              between individuals and their social groups is particularly critical if we are
              to understand how needs for social identity can be met without the devastating
              effects of intergroup conflict, prejudice, and discrimination. The theory of
              "optimal distinctiveness" is a theory of the motivational underpinnings of
              group identification which holds that group identities are selected and
              maintained to help the individual achieve a balance between the need for
              inclusion and the need for differentiation from others. "Optimal" identities
              are group memberships that meet the need for inclusion within the group and
              meet the need for differentiation through intergroup comparison and
              distinctiveness. Identity needs can be aroused if either intragroup inclusion
              or intergroup differentiation are threatened. The purpose of the current
              program of research is to extend the application of optimal distinctiveness
              theory to understanding what factors determine the strength of the needs for
              inclusion and differentiation, with particular attention to implications for
              intergroup attitudes and behavior. Ten interrelated studies test the effects of
              value orientations and multiple group memberships on an individual's
              sensitivity to threats to optimal social identity. Collectivist values are
              predicted to be associated with heightened needs for inclusion and
              differentiation, a limited range of optimal identity, and high levels of
              sensitivity to threats to that identity. Individualist values, by contrast, are
              expected to be associated with tolerance for inclusiveness and less concern for
              ingroup-outgroup distinctions. The availability of multiple alternative social
              identities is expected to have effects similar to those of individualist
              values, reducing sensitivity to threats to specific social identities and
              increasing acceptance of outgroups. These hypotheses are tested in a
              multi-methodological program of research combining laboratory experiments and
              cross-national surveys. Results from these studies will contribute to
              understanding how social structure, value systems, and individual needs combine
              to determine the relationship between ingroup identification and outgroup
              discrimination.

