Title       : SBIR Phase II: Visible Light Audio Information Transfer System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0079323

Award Number: 0079323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roderick T. Hinman rod@talking-lights.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Talking Lights Co
	      28 Constitution Road
	      Boston, MA  02129    617/242-0050

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1545,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project  will develop an
              inexpensive Visible Light Audio Information Transfer System (VLAITS) that
              transmits information to small Personal Audio Receivers (PAR) for blind, hard
              of hearing, non-physically impaired and non-English speaking users.  VLAITS
              uses already-installed visible lighting fixtures like fluorescent lights to
              provide modulated light as a carrier medium for data.  The PAR receives this
              modulated light and presents audio to the user.  VLAITS is remarkably
              inexpensive because it requires no additional equipment or special wiring other
              than typically used in existing lighting fixtures.  There is no perceptible
              visual flicker in light because of data coding schemes.  Phase I demonstrated
              VLAITS, qualified commercial visible light as an information carrier, and
              demonstrated wayfinding and aural assistance with blind and hard of hearing
              users.  This project seeks to design and refine a commercial VLAITS system and
              validate system functions and capabilities with blind and hard of hearing
              users.  Included are miniaturization and reduction of production cost of the
              computer-controlled light ballast transmitter and computer-controlled portable
              receiver.  The receiver will also be designed to be compatible with currently
              installed infrared systems.

This project proffers a solution for the
              communication of information to people, particularly to those with
              disabilities, that leverages existing infrastructure in an innovative and cost
              effective way.  Commercial products will be modified light ballasts, personal
              audio receivers and design of assistive networks.
