Title       : Development of Equipment for Fabrication of Quantum Cellular Automata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a0079485

Award Number: 0079485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209867             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Greve dg07@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. M. Feenstra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katayun Barmak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Development of Equipment for Fabrication of Quantum Cellular Automata

D.W.
              Greve
ECS-0079485

Current interest in nanostructures and nanoelectronics is
              in part motivated by the perceived limits to scaling of current electronic
              devices. One critical barrier to the development of future nanoelectric
              technology is the development of techniques for patterning and the integration
              of patterning with device fabrication.  In this project we will develop
              equipment for fabrication of one of the highly promising structures for future
              nanoelectronics. Quantum cellular automata are organized arrays of quantum dots
              which implement interconnection lines and logical operations. We will develop
              equipment for fabrication of quantum dot arrays which implement all the
              essential features of a digital electronic circuit. Quantum dot arrays will be
              fabricated on silicon substrates using silicon-compatible materials. The arrays
              will have a quantum dot size suitable for demonstration of operation at
              cryogenic temperatures (4-77 K) and the techniques used will have the potential
              for scaling to quantum dot sizes which will permit operation at room
              temperature.  The apparatus we will develop integrates quantum dot lithography,
              growth of quantum dots and an overlayer, and in situ characterization
              facilities.  This equipment will make possible development of a broad research
              program directed at future digital electronics. It will provide a focus for
              future semiconductor device and technology research, with strong potential for
              interactions with researchers both within and outside the university. This
              research will be highly interdisciplinary, and will also impact the education
              of undergraduate students through involvement in research projects and also
              through the develoment of new course materials specifically related to our
              nanostructure research.

