Title       : Structural and Kinetic Characterization of Barriers and Intermediates in Folding
               of Cytochrome c
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0079148

Award Number: 0079148
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heinrich Roder H_Roder@fccc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Cancer Research
	      7701 Burholme Avenue, Fox Chase
	      Philadelphia, PA  191112412    215/728-2490

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Roder
MCB 0079148

The goal of this project is to provide a thorough
              understanding of the structural and energetic factors that govern the
              spontaneous folding of globular proteins. The kinetic mechanism of folding and
              unfolding of a small single-domain protein, horse cytochrome c, will be
              investigated by combining site-directed mutagenesis with ultra-fast mixing
              techniques, hydrogen exchange labeling and NMR. In order to identify critical
              interactions involved in stabilizing early intermediates and the transition
              state ensembles during folding, hydrophobic residues throughout the a-helical
              core will be altered, and the resulting changes in equilibrium and kinetic
              parameters will be measured as a function of denaturant concentration. A second
              series of cytochrome c variants will be prepared to test the hypothesis that
              polar tertiary interactions are formed late in folding and contribute to the
              cooperativity of the native structure. Quantitative analysis of the kinetic
              results for each mutant will provide information on the involvement of
              individual residues at various stages of folding, including the initial
              collapse of the chain on the microsecond time scale, the subsequent acquisition
              of partially structured states and the rate-limiting formation of the native
              structure. Complementary information on H-bonded structure in early folding
              intermediates will be obtained by hydrogen exchange labeling and NMR methods.
              Protection of individual amide protons against H/D exchange on the
              submillisecond time scale will be measured by combining a sensitive burst-phase
              labeling protocol with a novel capillary mixing device.

The structural
              insight into intermediates and transition state ensembles thus obtained will
              identify key interactions involved in their stabilization, which is an
              essential step toward understanding the sequence determinants for folding and
              stability of this protein. The findings will elucidate fundamental issues in
              protein folding, including a) the properties and origin of the kinetic barrier
              encountered during the initial collapse of the polypeptide chain, b) the role
              of intermediates in directing folding, c) the nature of the rate-limiting
              energy barrier and d) the cooperativity in folding/unfolding transitions. The
              mutational analysis will provide a critical test for the hypothesis that
              conserved hydrophobic contacts in the core of globular proteins are formed
              early in folding and are important for efficient folding, while specific side
              chain packing and polar tertiary interactions are established late in folding
              and are important for the rigidity and cooperativity of the native structure.
              The results will provide a firm experimental basis for testing theoretical and
              computational models of protein folding, fold recognition, structure prediction
              and de novo protein design. 

