Title       : Heterogeneous Consumer Search and Social Learning: Empirical Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a0079201

Award Number: 0079201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102371             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan T. Sorensen asorense@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        This pair of research projects explores two aspects of consumer demand
              that can have important implications for market efficiency: heterogeneous
              consumer search and social learning. Both projects make use of new datasets
              that are uniquely well-suited for the questions to be addressed.
          The
              first project examines the nature and intensity of consumer search in retail
              markets for prescription drugs. Retail prices for prescription drugs vary
              widely across pharmacies even within the same local market, and previous
              research has shown that patterns in price dispersion are consistent with
              economic models of consumer search: for instance, prices tend to be much less
              disperse for medications that are purchased repeatedly (for which the
              incentives to price-shop are strongest) than for one-time medications. This
              project will investigate data on over 200,000 prescription purchases in two
              small cities. For each transaction, the data identify the actual price and
              payment type (cash, third-party insurance, or Medicaid) as well as prescription
              characteristics. Since data are available on prices and quantities at all
              competing pharmacies, information about the extent of consumer search is
              revealed in the observed sensitivity of market shares to relative price
              differences. The research will provide answers to important questions about
              price dispersion and consumer search: How intense is consumer search in these
              markets (i.e., what fraction of consumers chooses to price-shop before
              purchasing?) Is variation in search intensity across drugs consistent with the
              predictions of economic theories of consumer search? What do the estimated
              search intensities reveal about the underlying distribution of search costs?
 
                      The second project concerns the impact of social learning on
              individuals' choices of health insurance plans. Employees of large firms
              typically choose from a set of health insurance options sponsored by their
              employer; since the choice of a health plan can be a complex decision,
              individuals may attempt to learn about plans' relative qualities from
              co-workers-either through direct communication or by drawing inferences based
              observed choices. The causes and consequences of this kind of learning have
              been formalized and discussed in the theoretical literature, but little effort
              has been made to measure the importance of social learning empirically. This
              study will use data on the health plan choices of the employees of a major
              university to obtain quantitative estimates of the effects of social learning.
              Information about employee demographics--and especially the departments in
              which they work-will be used in identifying the communication channels through
              which learning occurs. Stated very simply, if individuals' decisions are
              significantly more similar within departments than they are across departments,
              this can be taken as suggestive of a learning or "herding" effect. This is the
              basic idea underlying the project's principal approach, which is to estimate an
              econometric model of health plan choice that incorporates the influence of
              neighbors' decisions on the decision of the individual. The empirical results
              will yield important insights into the nature and extent of learning, the
              implications for demand analysis and health plan competition, and the magnitude
              of potential welfare losses due to imitative behavior.
