Title       : CSEDI: Core-Mantle Interactions and the Polar Motion of the Earth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0079998

Award Number: 0079998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Weijia Kuang wkuang@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Weijia Kuang
0079998 

The investigators plan to expand the Kuang-Bloxham
              geodynamo model to investigate in detail the dynamical couplings between the
              Earth's core (including the solid inner core) and its solid mantle, and the
              angular momentum variation of the solid Earth. They will focus on the
              equatorial components of the angular momentum that excite the polar motion
              (variation of the rotation axis of the solid Earth; past studies on this
              subject have all been dealing with the axial component related to the
              length-of-day). Geophysical excitations of the "secular" polar motion as well
              as polar motion of time scales shorter than a few years have been largely
              understood. On the intermediate time scales, a particularly large undulation
              known as the Markowitz wobble in the polar motion with a quasi-periodicity of
              about 30 years and an amplitude as large as 30 milliarcseconds has long been
              observed but remains a mystery to date. However, the time scale and amplitude
              of this wobble suggest that the core-mantle coupling may be a possible cause.
              

This project has two parts. First is the modification of the existing
              3-dimensional, self-consistent dynamo model to include the hydrostatic elliptic
              mantle, the hydrostatic elliptic solid inner core and the couplings of the
              solid Earth. Then, the investigators will use the modified geodynamo model to
              evaluate core-mantle interactions within the geodynamo simulation. Of
              particular interest, they plan to investigate the contributions of
              electromagnetic, topographic and gravitational (between the inner core and the
              mantle) energy on the equatorial angular momentum exchange between the core and
              mantle. The proposed research shall be carried out among the PI, Dr. Weijia
              Kuang, at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County (leading effort in
              geodynamo simulation) and collaborators Dr. Lanbo Liu of the University of
              Connecticut (mantle structure and dynamics) and Dr. Benjamin Chao of NASA's
              Goddard Space Flight Center (Earth rotation dynamics). 



