Title       : MRI: Instrument Development For Optical Bioimaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0079483

Award Number: 0079483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $466748             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Farkas farkas@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,5345,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0079483
Farkas
The applicant proposes to develop unique optical bioimaging
              capabilities, based on combining some of the most modern current methods in
              use:  confocal and multiphoton-excitation microscopy, spectral imaging, and
              optical coherence tomography.  The most important feature consists in
              integrating these (on the same workstation to investigate the same specimen),
              to yield complementary and, hopefully, synergetic information.  The workstation
              resulting from such integration will constitute the centerpiece of a facility,
              located at the University of Pittsburgh but serving as a regional
              resource.

The rationale is based on the demonstrated advances in physical,
              chemical, biological and engineering research that can be attained by adding
              imaging to the arsenal of investigative tools, and the acute need for new
              approaches to this task.  The concept consists in extending what has been
              learned by the PI and his collaborators during the past decade in an NSF
              national center (CLMIB, Center for Light Microscope Imagining and Biotechnology
              at Carnegie Mellon University) predicated to the advancement of microscopic
              bioimaging.  This will be achieved by developing new methods that have been
              assessed as necessary for advancing optical bioimaging applications.  Combining
              instrument development with newly acquired state-of-the-art commercial devices
              and the experience gained from past efforts should result in new and relevant
              capabilities.  It is likely that these improved capabilities will yield new
              insights, superior quantitation and better interfacing with other methods of
              study.

The new funding requested is for development of a novel optical
              imaging station combining multiphoton excitation 3-D fluorescence measurements
              (in cells, tissues and in vivo) with optical coherence tomography and spectral
              imaging.  This will be coordinated and augmented via new image processing
              approaches:  remote access will also be implemented by telemicroscopy.  The
              focal point of these developments is a special (and expensive) laser system,
              capable of both the high intensity, short duration (~fs-ps) near-infrared
              pulses needed for non-linear excitation, and the broadband output needed for
              high resolution OCT; additional, patented acousto-optic tunable filters
              technology will be applied to allow for versatile wavelength and timing
              selection in these experiments.  Expected new capabilities include
              sub-millisecond spectral shifting, luminescence lifetime and anisotropy
              measurements, sub-cellular resolution optical coherence microscopy and spectral
              confocal and 2-photon imaging.  Targeted application areas range from testing
              new dye chemistry and cell membrane fluidity to imaging nerve impulse
              propagation and minimally invasive sensor placement in vivo.

