Title       : Collaborative Research: Detecting Spatial Patterns of Dust Effects on Soils:
               Testing New Methodology in the Central Great Plains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a0079320

Award Number: 0079320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79496              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Jacobs jacobsp@uww.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Whitewater
	      800 West Main
	      Whitewater, WI  531901705    414/472-1027

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the role of atmospheric dust deposition in
              creating regional spatial patterns of soil variation, using a study area in the
              central Great Plains.  On the Great Plains, as in many other arid to subhumid
              landscapes, there is both geologic evidence and modern documentation of
              recurrent regional dust transport and deposition.  During the Holocene, dust
              deposition at high rates produced distinct loess deposits in scattered
              localities in this region. More slowly deposited dust may have been
              incorporated into developing soil profiles over much larger areas. The key new
              element in this project is the focus on detecting regional spatial patterns
              indicative of dust transport, using a network of sampling sites across the
              central Great Plains.  Dust deposition rate, grain size, and mineralogy vary
              systematically with distance from the source.  These trends should be reflected
              in regional spatial patterns of soil morphology and mineralogy corresponding to
              "plumes" of Holocene dust dispersal from major sources.  Multiple soil profiles
              will be sampled at each site to quantify local variability.  From the regional
              sampling network, the investigators will select representative soils to use in
              more detailed investigations of the mineralogical and geochemical evidence for
              dust addition during soil development.

This project will test methodology
              that can be much more broadly applied to a basic problem of soil science, in
              landscapes affected by recurrent dust production and deposition.  Dust
              deposition is widely recognized as an important process in soil formation, but
              most previous studies have not focused on broad regional patterns of dust
              effects on soils.  These spatial patterns are the key to incorporating dust
              effects into our understanding of important soil-related environmental issues. 
              For example, the potential of soils to store organic carbon is an important
              issue in efforts to predict and mitigate human-induced changes in the global
              carbon cycle.  Dust deposition may affect regional patterns of soil carbon
              storage potential because the added dust can change soil properties that
              strongly influence carbon storage.  Because this project will sample a regional
              network of soils, the results will be directly applicable to mapping soil
              carbon storage potential over a large region.  Results of this project will
              also help interpret buried soils that are important indicators of past climate
              change.


