Title       : Object-Based Control of Eye Movement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0079594

Award Number: 0079594
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178285             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Abrams rabrams@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The visual environment is so full of information that it is simply impossible
              to process all of it.  Instead, people must select parts of the world to
              process more fully, and parts of the world to process less fully. Two means are
              available for this selection.  First, it is possible to fixate upon a new
              location in a scene by moving the eyes.  Second, it is possible to select
              covertly, within a fixation, by movements of visual attention.

	Recently it
              has become clear that attentional selection is accomplished not merely by
              reference to a simple spatial coordinate system that might definelocations in a
              scene, but also by accounting for the physical or perceived objects that are
              present.  Despite several demonstrations of close links between eye movement
              and attention systems, relatively little is presently known about the role that
              objects play in selection that involves saccadic eye movements.   That issue is
              the focus of the present project.

	Four empirical questions regarding the
              role of objects in selective eye movements will be addressed in separate
              clusters of experiments.  The questions each examine a key way in which eye
              movements might be affected by the objects in a scene.  In the first cluster,
              experiments examine the extent to which a plan for an eye movement may benefit
              eye movements to other parts of the targeted object.  The second cluster
              examines the extent to which a plan to make an eye movement may change if the
              target for the saccade moves.  The third cluster explores the possibility that
              a newly perceived object or the disappearance of an old one may both facilitate
              eye movements.  In the fourth cluster, experiments examine the extent to which
              eye movements are planned to a location in an object-centered reference
              frame.

	In many experiments the objects to be studied are defined not by
              physical boundaries, but instead by illusory, subjective contours, or by
              instructions to the subject.  Dependent measures include both the latency and
              the spatial accuracy of the eye movements in the various
              situations.

	Answers to the questions addressed in the experiments will
              contribute to a better understanding of the nature of the reference frames and
              mental representations that are used by the brain to plan and produce eye
              movements.  Such an understanding will further elucidate the relation between
              eye movement and attention systems.  Taken together, the results will provide
              important insights into how it is that people select subsets of the world for
              further processing.


