Title       : SBIR Phase II: Net Shape, SiC-Toughened Molybdenum Disilicide Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0079262

Award Number: 0079262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramachandran Nageswaran rnageswaran@coiceramics.com.  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : COI Ceramics, Inc.
	      181 West 1700 South
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84115    801/364-6446

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1774,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims at further
              developing and optimizing the innovative technology for the cost-effective
              fabrication of dense silicon carbide (SiC) fiber-reinforced molybdenum
              disilicide (MoSi2) composites with enhanced strength and toughness up to very
              high temperatures (1400 degrees C).  Molybdenum disilicide has very attractive
              thermal, oxidative, and corrosion resistance properties for applications in
              turbine engines, burner rigs, hot gas filters, molten metal lances, and heating
              elements, but is structurally weak.  Reinforcement with a mechanically superior
              second phase material makes MoSi2-based composites serious candidates for such
              applications if the composites can be processed to net shape cost effectively. 
              The Phase I project demonstrated the feasibility of reaction forming the MoSi2
              matrix with controlled amounts of SiC whiskers or particles, which themselves
              are formed in-situ.  Further, several SiC(f)/MoSi2 compositions were developed
              that are strong, dense, and resistant to pesting.  These compositions were
              developed using a single step process that combines Self-Propagating
              High-Temperature Synthesis (SHS) of elemental mixtures of Mo, Si, and C with
              psuedo-Hot Isostatic Pressing (HIP) -- electroconsolidation.  Phase II research
              will demonstrate the near-net shape capability of the process along with the
              ability to produce robust MoSi2-based composites.  Based on design
              specifications from turbine engine manufacturers, the project will also
              fabricate prototypes for testing at the end of Phase II. 

Immediate
              commercial use of the SiC(f)-toughened MoSi2 composites can be realized as
              heating elements, combustion and burner rigs, and molten metal filters.  Future
              applications include uses for aviation and gas turbine engine components, heat
              exchangers, hot gas filters, and waste incinerators.  Other advanced
              applications include energy storage devices such as ultracapacitors.

