Title       : SGER: A Multi-Gene Approach to Understanding Relationships Among Ciliates in the
               Class Spirotrichea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a0079325

Award Number: 0079325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura A. Katz lkatz@science.smith.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smith College
	      Elm Street
	      Northampton, MA  01063    413/584-2700

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0079325
Laura A. Katz

	Dr. Laura A. Katz has been awarded a grant to
              study the evolution of a fascinating type of microorganisms known as ciliates, 
              a diverse group of protozoa characterized by the presence of two types of
              nuclei in each cell and by unusual molecular processing of their chromosomes. 
              Unlike many plants and animals, we currently have only a basic framework for
              interpreting the evolutionary history of these organisms.  For example, in the
              past twenty years, as techniques for identifying species have improved, the
              number of classes of ciliates has risen from only three based on microscopic
              analyses, to eight based on electron microscopy, to at least nine based on DNA
              sequence data.  
	The class Spirotrichea represents a particularly contentious
              assemblage of ciliates as previous analyses provide varying pictures of which
              ciliates belong within this class and how these ciliates are related.  Ciliates
              thought to belong to the class Spirotrichea can be found in both freshwater and
              marine ecosystems, and are characterized by diverse, and sometimes dramatic,
              arrangements of their ciliature.  Our current classification system is based on
              limited data from only a handful of taxa.  Analysis of multiple genes from a
              comprehensive survey of ciliates is needed to accurately reconstruction
              relationships among these organisms.
	The overall goals of this study are (1)
              to identify species of ciliates that belong to the class Spirotrichea, and (2)
              to reconstruct relationships among these species.  To achieve these goals, DNA
              sequences will be determined for three genes (small subunit rRNA, alpha-tubulin
              and the largest subunit of the DNA polymerase II) from potential members of the
              class Spirotrichea.   In addition, sequences will be characterized from
              appropriate outgroup species (non-spirotrichs).  The resulting DNA sequences
              will be aligned using at least two alignment methods and estimates of species
              relationships will be made using several phylogenetic methods (e.g. maximum
              parsimony and maximum likelihood) on both individual genes and a combined data
              set.  The resulting genealogies will answer questions about the evolutionary
              history of spirotrichs, while also indicating areas for future research on the
              relationships among ciliates.

