Title       : Role of GABAc Receptor Mediated Inhibition in Retinal Visual Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a0079388

Award Number: 0079388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen A. McCall mamcca01@athena.louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,9150,9177,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The retina is a layered structure and each layer is populated by different cell
              classes. Most cell classes are further subdivided on the basis of their shape
              and on the excitatory and inhibitory inputs they receive. In the retina, as
              well as in the rest of the brain, inhibition plays a central role in neuronal
              function by modulating excitatory signals. Most inhibitory neurotransmission is
              mediated by the release of either glycine or gamma amino butyric acid (GABA)
              from the pre-synaptic cell. GABA is detected by the post-synaptic cell by one
              of three receptors: GABAA, GABAB or GABAC. Each GABA receptor can be identified
              by its structure, sensitivity to GABA and selectivity for different agonists
              and antagonists. These receptors also differ in their pattern of expression in
              the brain. These structural and functional differences lead to the hypothesis
              that each GABA receptor mediates a different type of inhibition in the nervous
              system. In the rodent retina, the GABAC receptor is located only on the axon
              terminals of bipolar cells. Thus, the GABAC receptor should be able to modulate
              the excitatory output of the bipolar cells and, thus, ultimately modulate to
              the overall visual response of the retina. 

The proposed experiments will
              use a mouse in which the GABAC receptor was eliminated (GABAC null mouse) via
              molecular genetic manipulations. The anatomy of the retina of the GABAC null
              mice will be examined and compared to controls to determine if the absence of
              the GABAC receptor alters retinal structure. The visual responses of all of the
              cells in the retina will be assessed in the GABAC null mice and compared to
              controls using a non-invasive technique, the electroretinogram. These data will
              determine how the absence of GABAC mediated inhibition affects the visual
              response at the level of the retina. These experiments represent the first
              attempt to define the function of an inhibitory input in the retina, using
              molecular genetic manipulations

