Title       : Acquisition of A High Performance Computing System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a0079647

Award Number: 0079647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Olaf G. Wiest wiest.l@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Maginn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Stadtherr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Daniel Gezelter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Albert-Laszlo Barabasi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program allows the
              Colleges of Science and Engineering at the University of Notre Dame to purchase
              a LINUX-based High Performance Computing Cluster to enhance the computational
              resources in the Science Computing Facilities (SCF). The research programs
              using the SCF span a broad range of disciplines in the areas of theoretical
              condensed matter physics, theoretical physical chemistry, theoretical and
              computational chemical engineering, theoretical astrophysics and computational
              organic chemistry. Within these areas, both method development and applications
              are pursued.  In particular, mechanistic studies of self-assembled quantum-dot
              formation, transport processes in membranes, simulation of phase equilibria in
              complex systems, relativistic hydrodynamics and stellar evolution, modeling of
              industrial chemical processes and the modeling of quantum cellular automata for
              molecular computing will be performed. For this purpose, Monte-Carlo, Molecular
              Dynamics, hydrodynamic and ab initio electronic structure calculation will be
              performed on the proposed cluster.

The use of computational methods has
              become an indispensable tool in science and engineering during the last years.
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports to
              the high performance computing cluster in the Science Computing Facilities at
              the University of Notre Dame and will provide essential resources for research
              in the fields of chemistry, physics, chemical engineering, and computer
              sciences. In particular, the new facility will be used to investigate new
              application in the areas of nanoscience and materials, to make chemical
              production processes safer and more efficient, to study the transport of drug
              molecules across cell membranes, and the study of neutron stars. The proposed
              facility will also allow to train undergraduate and graduate students as well
              as postdoctoral researchers in the application of high-performance computing in
              their respective fields. 





 


