Title       : New Aspects of Thymidine Metabolism in E. coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0079086

Award Number: 0079086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Weiss   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               With a single known exception (a virus), the DNA, or genetic material, of every
              organism contains thymine rather than its simpler analog, uracil.  This is true
              even though uracil was used long before thymine in evolution and even though,
              in the test tube, uracil-containing DNA can be replicated and encodes genetic
              traits. The reason for the preference of thymine over uracil is a major
              unanswered question in biology.  A major long term goal of this project is to
              produce a thymineless bacterial chromosome. A multiple mutant in a common
              gastrointestinal bacterium (Escherichia coli) has been already been constructed
              that can replace 30% of its chromosomal thymine with uracil.  By gradually
              forcing this bacterium to use increasing amounts of an alternative DNA
              precursor, deoxyuridine, from the medium, it may be possible to drive the
              evolution of a thymineless chromosome.  The bacterium used in this project has
              been widely used for the discovery of universal metabolic pathways.  It has
              multiple ways to make thymine compounds, to keep uracil out of DNA, and to
              remove it once it is incorporated.  Some pathways that are still unknown will
              be identified by mutation.  By successive mutation, it may be possible to
              "reverse" evolution and produce a bacterium that no longer excludes uracil from
              the chromosome.  Whether or not the goal of a completely thymineless chromosome
              is reached, the results should provide valuable information about alternate
              pathways of thymine synthesis, about what genes and enzymes keep uracil out of
              DNA, and about differences in the biological properties of uracil-containing
              versus thymine-containing DNA.

