Title       : Collaborative Research: Perfectly Rational Markets, Imperfectly Rational
               Traders: Theory and Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0079374

Award Number: 0079374
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Plott cplott@hss.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter L. Bossaerts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
General equilibrium theory underlies our understanding of how complex
              economies manage risk. It is the basis of the tools used to make investment
              decisions and to guide policy in applications as diverse as regulated
              industries (utilities, telecommunications, etc.) and pension funds. In spite of
              this widespread use, scientific support for such applications has been mixed.
              The research proposed here seeks to build and test a more robust implementation
              of general equilibrium theory. Our work integrates theory, experiment, and
              econometrics in an essential way:  experiments suggest the shape the theory
              should have, the theory suggests which further experiments should be carried
              out, experiments provide tests of the final theory; econometrics links theory
              and experiment in a formal way.

We have developed and succesfully conducted
              laboratory experiments that test the principles of general equilibrium theory
              in the context of markets with risk. The model that guided our inference is the
              Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM). The experiments confirm the complex pricing
              relationships predicted by the theory. Since we used the same measurement tools
              as in the analysis of historical data in the field, our findings suggest that
              the controversy surrounding historical evidence need not be attributed to a
              failure of the basic principles of the theory, but to the auxiliary assumptions
              added to the models to make them testable on field data. Still, we reject the
              portfolio (allocation) implications of the same theory. The latter finding is
              particularly perplexing because the traditional theory that explains and
              supports the prices rests explicitly on the allocational predictions.

Our
              theory explains the puzzle. It perturbs traditional general equilibrium models
              in ways that better accomodate the types of behavior of individuals when
              observed in isolation, away from markets. We provide a unified approach to
              study the effects of such perturbations. We show, for instance, that random
              perturbations need not always wash out in large economies; in the case of
              information aggregation, they cause clearcut biases. Preliminary experiments
              confirm our predictions. We plan to build on these initial successes, to
              further our understanding of pricing and allocation of risk in competitive
              markets. In addition, the theory suggests experiments that will uncover the
              origin of the perturbations that are needed to make general equilibrium models
              explain the data. One of these will determine whether risk is like any other
              commodity and that no special principles must be invoked in order to understand
              market behavior, a fundamental premise of extant theory. Actual attitudes
              towards and beliefs about risk may be at odds with this view.

In addition to
              its scientific and policy implications, this proposal also has an important
              educational component. Our experiments are web-based and have involved many
              subjects from more than a dozen undergraduate, graduate, and professional
              schools across the country. These experiments provide the subjects with a
              unique educational experience. Our experiments have shown that access to such a
              large pool of subjects with diverse backgrounds is necessary to achieve
              results, and the theory explains why. At the same time, it provides exposure to
              complex financial markets to students who would otherwise not be given the
              opportunity, for various geographical and socio-economic reasons.

This is a
              collaborative proposal involving Peter Bossaerts and Charles Plott (both of
              Caltech) and William Zame (of UCLA).


