Title       : A Neuropsychological and Computational Investigation of Past Tense Verb
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0079044

Award Number: 0079044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254109             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Plaut plaut+@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. McClelland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The simple process of transforming the present tense of an English verb into its
              past-tense form has dominated the debate between two fundamentally different
              views of language knowledge and processing. According to traditional, symbolic
              theories, language knowledge takes the form of explicit rules operating over
              discrete, symbolic representations. By contrast, according to connectionist or
              neural-network theories, language processing involves the massively parallel
              interaction of large numbers of neuron-like processing units.

	The principal
              objective of the proposed work is to implement a
connectionist-style
              computational model that demonstrates the differential
influence of semantic
              and phonological factors on past-tense production and in
turn, derives novel
              predictions that could be assessed by future
neuropsychological
              testing.

	The computational simulations will extend preliminary work
              by
Joanisse and Seidenberg in which verb processing involved the
              parallel
interaction of representations of phonology (both in comprehension
              and
production) and their meanings. The proposed simulations will incorporate
              more
realistic representations and temporal dynamics. An initial stage of
              modeling
will employ fixed-length phonological representations of monosyllabic
              verb
stems, but a second stage will employ continuous-time trajectories
              for
phonological input and output capable of handling multisyllabic items.
              Semantic
representations will be derived from a number of analyses of large
              text
corpora, including Lund and Burgess' Hyperspace Analogue to Language
              (HAL),
which will be replicated if necessary in order to make the resulting
              semantic
representations publicly available for unrestricted use by other
              researchers.
  
	The development of a strongly theoretically motivated
              connectionist computational model of selective impairments in English
              past-tense formation will not only provide important insights into the role of
              semantic and phonological representations in lexical processing, but also more
              generally about the fundamental character of the principal components, and
              their interactions, in the language system.


