Title       : Acquisition of Microbial Ecology Instrumentation to Improve Science Education at
               Marist College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0079625

Award Number: 0079625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96083              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond L. Kepner ray.kepner@marist.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marist College
	      3399 North Road
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  126011328    845/575-3000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Equipment will be acquired to implement an integrated undergraduate
              education/research program in microbial ecology at Marist College.   An Olympus
              BX60F epifluorescent microscope with digital imaging and image analysis system,
              2) a BiOLOG MicroStation for microbial identification/community
              characterization, 3) filtration and centrifugation instrumentation, 4)
              microbial culturing instrumentation, and 5) HydroLab water-quality monitoring
              instrumentation will be purchased.  This equipment will allow the PI to
              integrate teaching with research in environmental microbiology at Marist and
              will provide greater opportunities for faculty colleagues to involve students
              in active learning exercises.  Requested instrumentation will be shared by
              teacher/researchers within Marist's School of Science.

Work to be
              accomplished with the requested instrumentation will focus on viral and
              bacterial contaminant dynamics in the Hudson River watershed, microbial
              host-virus interactions in the Hudson, characterization of host-virus
              assemblages from extreme arctic and antarctic habitats (e.g., the McMurdo Dry
              Valleys LTER site), work on the characterization of polar microbial
              communities, and pollutant impacts on microbial communities.  The equipment
              will be used for the isolation, culture, enumeration, identification and
              preservation of a variety of both pro-and eukaryotic microbes from
              environmental samples.  The structure and function of microbial communities
              will be assessed along with a consideration of relevant habitat
              characteristics.  Students conducting research projects for the PI's course in
              Environmental Microbiology, those with undergraduate research fellowships, and
              others performing research for credit, (under the direction of either the PI or
              faculty colleagues), will have an improved capacity to utilize modern
              technology in addressing relevant scientific questions.

Current scientific
              research and education-through-research capabilities will be expanded with the
              creation of better-equipped learning environments.  Instruments improving
              capabilities to conduct research on aquatic systems in the Hudson drainage will
              place Marist College in a better position for future involvement with Governor
              George Pataki's proposed Henry Hudson Institute for Riverine and Estuarine
              Research and Education.  Improving capabilities at Marist will also foster
              collaborative projects with those at other local institutions having expertise
              in microbial ecology (e.g., the Institute of Ecosystem Studies in Millbrook,
              NY).  As the requested instrumentation will be for shared-use, faculty in the
              Biology, Environmental Science and Chemistry Departments will utilize this
              equipment in diverse ways to promote research, research training and to enrich
              the educational experiences of Marist science students.  This will strengthen a
              framework in which greater numbers of students, (including female and minority
              undergraduates

