Title       : Investigating the Role of Novel Nuclear Envelope-Associated Plant Proteins in
               Nuclear Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0079577

Award Number: 0079577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Iris Meier   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

A striking feature of the nucleus of multicellular eukaryotes is its
              ability to completely disassemble and re-assemble during the course of cell
              division. This process may allow higher organisms to have a structurally highly
              complex nuclear interior during interphase, but not have such structures
              interfere with the condensation and partitioning of chromosomes during cell
              division. Such nuclear dynamics require the regulated reversibility of
              interactions between chromatin and proteins of the nuclear envelope and
              probably involve dynamic changes of nucleoskeletal structures. Since plants and
              animals are most likely derived from different unicellular ancestors that
              underwent intranuclear mitosis, one expects that nuclear assembly and
              disassembly have evolved twice. Presently, their molecular mechanisms are
              poorly understood in any system.

The long-term goal of this research is to
              understand the mechanism, the function in interphase, and the dynamics during
              cell cycle of chromatin-nuclear envelope interactions in plants. Two novel,
              interacting plant proteins (MFP 1 and MAF 1) have been identified that are
              associated both with a filamentous nuclear framework called the nuclear matrix
              and with the nuclear envelope. MFP 1 is a plant-specific, filament-like
              protein, which binds specifically to matrix attachment regions (MARs), specific
              DNA segments which have been proposed to be involved in chromatin organization.
              In vitro, its MAR-binding activity is regulated by phosphorylation. The
              hypothesis is that MFP1 is involved in attaching chromatin to the plant
              interphase nuclear envelope and that MAF 1 is involved in this process through
              interaction with MFP 1.

The specific questions asked in this project
              are:

1) How does the localization of MFP 1 and MAF 1 change during cell
              cycle? The strategy employs dual-color imaging of co-expressed MFP 1 and MAF 1
              fusion proteins with GFP spectral variants in synchronized cell cultures. The
              results will show whether the localization of the two proteins functionally
              correlates with nuclear envelope dynamics.

2) How does the depletion of MFP
              1 and MAF 1 alter nuclear, cell, and plant phenotypes? To this end, insertional
              knock-out mutations of MFP 1 and MAF 1 will be identified in Arabidopsis. They
              are expected to cause informative cellular and possibly developmental
              phenotypes, which will allow conclusions about the in vivo function of the
              proteins.

3) Is phosphorylation of MFP1 involved in reversible regulation of
              DNA-binding during cell cycle? The pattern of phosphorylated MFP1 isoforms and
              their MAR-binding activity will be compared at different cell-cycle stages. The
              effect of overexpressing a constitutively DNA-binding MFP 1 isoform on cellular
              and plant phenotypes will be investigated. These data will indicate whether
              reversible MFP1 phosphorylation is a means to regulate the interaction of
              chromatin with the nuclear envelope.

Together, the answers to these
              questions will allow the evaluation of the role of MFP 1 and MAF 1 in
              chromatin-nuclear envelope interactions in plants. Because of the possibility
              that nuclear dissociation and re-association have evolved twice in plants and
              animals, any molecular information about the plant nucleus is likely to add
              novel concepts to our understanding of a process which is currently enigmatic
              in any organism. In addition, the discovery of plant-specific aspects of
              cellular organization could lead to the development of new classes of
              broad-spectrum herbicides.

