Title       : Fresh Water and Maritime Issues in World Politics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a0079421

Award Number: 0079421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86838              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Hensel phensel@garnet.acns.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sara M. Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This project is intended to improve our understanding of how nation-states
              manage their contentious issues, focusing on disagreements between
              nation-states over shared freshwater supplies and over maritime zones, to
              supplement recent research on territorial claims.  A general issue-based
              approach to world politics has developed slowly since the mid-1970s.  This
              approach depicts world politics as the quest for issue satisfaction by actors
              that use numerous potential means (including the unilateral initiation of
              militarized conflict, bilateral negotiations, and multilateral attempts
              involving binding or non-binding, third-party assistance).  Empirically
              testable hypotheses are developed from this issue-based approach to account for
              the occurrence and success of attempts to manage or settle issues.  Emphasis is
              placed on the salience of the issues, past attempts to manage the same issues,
              the regional and global institutional context, and characteristics of the
              adversaries.
	Past research on contentious issues has been impeded by a lack
              of systematic data for empirical testing of propositions about the nature and
              management of contentious issues.  Recent data collection by the Issue
              Correlates of WAR (ICOW) project overcomes these problems by collecting data on
              the extent, salience, and management of territorial issues, and, thus, offers
              substantial support for the hypotheses of the issues' approach.  The primary
              objective of this proposed research is to study freshwater and maritime issues
              in the same manner as this recent research on territorial issues.  Data are
              collected on all freshwater and maritime issues in the twentieth century,
              including the extent of the issues (the number of issues worldwide and the
              specific actors involved for each one), their salience (characteristics of each
              issue that make it more or less valuable to the involved states), and attempts
              to manage these issues unilaterally, bilaterally, or multilaterally.  This
              collection allows the hypotheses from the general issues' approach to be tested
              using these two additional issue types as a supplement to our current knowledge
              of territorial issues, and -- in combination with the existing data on
              territorial issues -- for the first time, allows comparative study of the
              management of different issue types.
	The results of the proposed analyses
              have important implications for both theory and policy, ranging from improved
              academic understanding of processes of foreign policy making, negotiations,
              international law, and interstate conflict to the possibility of assisting
              governments in the identification of peaceful solutions to their problems. 
              This is especially important because the issues covered by this proposal, the
              management of often-scarce freshwater resources and of potentially oil- or
              fish-abundant maritime zones, are argued to be among the leading sources of
              conflict into the next century.  The collection of freshwater and maritime
              issue data also helps to advance an issues' approach to world politics.  This
              advance has been slowed considerably by the dearth of systematic data on
              issues; the few systematic data collections that exist focus primarily on the
              single issue of territory.  Finally, the data sets collected under this
              proposal will be released publicly for use by other scholars in the field. 
              Although the creation of a new data resource is a secondary objective behind
              the improved testing of propositions on issues and world politics, this is an
              important benefit that helps the field of Political Science long after our
              original analyses with this newly collected data are completed.     

