Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Grammar of Laguna Keresan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a0079190

Award Number: 0079190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa Axelrod axelrod@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this dissertation project is to produce a thorough and accessible
              reference grammar of Laguna Keresan. Laguna is one of seven members of the
              Keresan language family, which is an isolate, not known to be related to any
              other language family. Despite this special status, Keresan remains one of the
              least well-documented families in North America, with no published dictionaries
              or analyzed text collections, and no full-scale grammatical description since
              Miller (1965).

This project will produce a reference grammar, in two
              versions, which will address this gap in the literature. The first version is
              primarily intended for linguists, and will provide coverage of the phonology,
              morphology, syntax and discourse structures of Laguna Keresan, as well the
              current sociolinguistic setting of the language in the Laguna community. It
              will take into account recent work in typology and grammaticization, and will
              place the grammatical phenomena of Laguna in a cross-linguistic context. This
              first version will be written in the framework of what has recently come to be
              called Basic Linguistic Theory, similar to the work of other researchers such
              as Dixon on Fijian and Foley on Yimas. The goal is to provide information on
              the language in a way which is accessible to researchers working in a wide
              variety of different theoretical frameworks.

The second version of the
              reference grammar will be written specifically for the speakers, teachers and
              learners of Laguna Keresan. It will do away with much of the technical jargon
              and cross-linguistic perspective of the first version, and instead focus on
              describing the strictures of the language for the lay audience, using
              terminology and points of reference which are understandable and meaningful to
              them. By producing these two versions, the results of the research are made
              available both to the academic community, as well as to the members of the
              Laguna tribe, who have afforded the researchers the privilege of working on
              their language.
