Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Non-Contact Multi-Scale Material Response
               Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0079589

Award Number: 0079589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301807             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. David Frost dfrost@ce.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rami M. Haj-Ali  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kimberly E. Kurtis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Abdul-Hamid Zureick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Carlos Santamarina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1058,1189,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the acquisition of non-contact equipment that forms the
              foundation of a unique state-of-the-art laboratory for microscale and mesoscale
              characterization of traditional (e.g., concrete, steel, soils) and innovative
              (e.g., fiber reinforced polymers, shape memory alloys, geosynthetics) civil
              engineering materials under combinations of mechanical loading and
              environmental exposure.  The requested equipment combined with the current
              resources will allow the development of a facility which will be an integral
              part of an educational/research initiative in progress in the School of Civil
              and Environmental Engineering at Georgia Tech.  Development of this facility,
              through the acquisition of the proposed equipment, will stimulate a variety of
              research, educational, and institutional interactions, including:

(1)
              Development of laser and infrared measurement techniques for in situ,
              non-contract characterization of material and structural response.

(2)
              Provision of equipment for the characterization of materials at the micro and
              meso scales while subjected to various loading and environment
              conditions.

(3) Integration of equipment and research results into new and
              existing courses at the undergraduate and graduate levels to generate and
              further develop expertise in the non-contact evaluation of materials and
              structures.

(4) Stimulation of interactions with local and national industry
              and government agencies to monitor, assess, and improve performance of
              materials and existing structures by novel applications of the equipment for in
              situ, non-contract evaluation.

This project is supporting the acquisition of
              complementary systems for infrared thermography, photoelasticity, laser
              extensometery, and materials characterization using scanning white light
              interferometry and laser scanning confocal microscopy.  These systems will be
              used in tandem to measure material response (e.g., deformation and damage
              accumulation) to loading and/or environment. It is considered that concurrent
              integrated research at different scales will generate new scientific and
              engineering findings that are expected to have national and international
              significance.
 
