Title       : Regulation and Functional Analysis of a Novel Calmodulin-Binding Microtubule
               Motor Protein From Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0079938

Award Number: 0079938
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499861             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. S. N. Reddy reddy@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Calmodulin (CaM), a ubiquitous multifunctional intracellular calcium receptor in
              all eukaryotes, mediates a number of calcium regulated processes by interacting
              with and regulating the activity of a number of key enzymes and structural
              proteins. In an effort to identify the proteins that interact with CaM, a novel
              kinesin-like calmodulin-binding protein (KCBP) was isolated from Arabidopsis
              and other plants.  The C-terminal region of KCBP contains a motor domain that
              is similar to kinesins and kinesin-like proteins (KLPs). However, KCBP is a
              novel member of the kinesin superfamily in having a CaM-binding domain (CBD)
              adjacent to the motor domain. In addition, the N-terminal region of KCBP has
              significant similarities to the myosin tail homology  (MyTH4) and talin-like
              regions present in some myosins, suggesting that the KCBP is part kinesin and
              part myosin. KCBP has been isolated from three other plant systems including
              dicots (potato and tobacco) and monocots (maize), suggesting that it is
              ubiquitous in flowering plants; however, homologues have not been found in the
              completely sequenced genomes of S. cerevisiae and C. elegans.  Several lines of
              evidence indicate a mitotic role for KCBP in plants.  In addition, genetic
              studies have shown that KCBP (also called Zwichel, ZWI) is essential for normal
              development of trichomes (Oppenheimer et al., 1997). Suppressor screens with a
              zwi mutant strongly suggest the interaction of KCBP with several other yet
              unidentified proteins (Krishnakumar and Oppenheimer 1999).  Very little is
              known about the mechanisms that regulate the activity, localization and
              function of microtubule motor proteins in plants.  The long-term goal of this
              project is to elucidate the function and regulation of this novel CaM-binding
              microtubule motor protein in cell division and trichome morphogenesis.  This
              unique KLP with a CBD and myosin homology regions offers an excellent
              opportunity to study the mechanisms by which Ca2+/CaM regulates the activity
              and the precise role of this protein in cell division and trichome
              morphogenesis.  The specific objectives of this project  are: 1) To isolate
              protein partners that interact with the KCBP, especially the amino-terminal
              region, using a variety of genetic, biochemical and molecular approaches and
              characterize these partner(s).  Isolation of KCBP interacting proteins should
              not only help us understand the function of KCBP in cell division and trichome
              morphogenesis but also provide insights into the function of the tail region in
              some myosins.  2) To express different regions of KCBP in live cells with green
              fluorescent protein tag to elucidate precise roles of KCBP in cell division and
              trichome development. For example, overexpression of constitutively active KCBP
              (KCBP lacking the CaM-binding domain) should help us understand the role of
              Ca2+/CaM in functioning of the KCBP in trichome morophogenesis and cell
              division. Dynamic localization of full-length and different truncated versions
              of KCBP in dividing cells and trichomes should provide important insights into
              the function and regulation of KCBP.  The effects of manipulation of cytosolic
              calcium levels on the localization of KCBP will also be investigated.  3) To
              determine crystal structure of KCBP motor domain with the CaM-binding domain in
              the presence and absence of Ca2+/CaM. CaM-binding domain in KCBP confers
              Ca2+/CaM regulation, and biochemical data suggest that the binding of activated
              CaM to KCBP influences microtubule binding sites on the motor.  Knowing the
              crystal structure of KCBP motor domain in free and CaM-bound form should
              provide insight into the mechanism(s) by which Ca2+/CaM regulates the
              interaction of KCBP with microtubules. Overall, these studies will elucidate
              various aspects of the function of this unique CaM-binding KLP.  Understanding
              the calcium regulation of a CaM-binding motor will be relevant not only to
              other plants of agricultural importance (as KCBP appears to be ubiquitous in
              flowering plants) but also to animals where a CaM-binding KLP (albeit with very
              different properties) has been discovered recently (Rogers et al., 1999). 
              Identification of proteins that interact with MyTH4 and talin-like regions of
              KCBP should also help understand the role of these domains in animal
              myosins.


