Title       : MRI: Development of an Ultra-miniature Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0079789

Award Number: 0079789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $515591             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Costerton bill_c@erc.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Dickensheets  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,5345,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0079789
Costerton
This is a development proposal to build a miniature confocal
              laser scanning microscope for in situ imaging of bacterial biofilms in their
              natural environments.

Confocal microscopy is the dominant imaging modality
              for the study of bacterial adhesion onto surfaces, and their organization into
              communities called biofilms.  Our understanding of these microbial communities
              is limited to those species that can be coaxed to grow in optically compliant
              environments such as flow cells, which are compatible with conventional
              microscopy tools.  Extension of studies to films in their native environment,
              such as inside pipes and vessels or underground, are hindered because we do not
              have imaging tools that are compatible with those environments.

The
              applicant proposes to exploit recent advances in Silicon micromachining and
              microlens technologies to produce a confocal microscope smaller than 2 mm in
              diameter and only 10 mm long.  Called the confocal microprobe, the instrument
              may be introduced through the working channel of a borescope or endoscope to
              permit in situ studies of biofilm formation and growth.  The confocal
              microprobe will support brightfield imaging as well as fluorescent imaging with
              submicrometer resolution.  It will interface to an existing commercial confocal
              optical microscope, and operation of the microprobe will be controlled via the
              user interface of our commercial instrument.

This new miniature instrument
              will be used extensively in the Center for Biofilm Engineering, where its
              impact will be felt on several programs.  One of those programs is the study of
              biofilm formation in porous media such as soil, where biofilm research is
              targeting 'biobarriers" for isolation of pollutants or to improve secondary
              recovery of oil from injection wells.  Another research direction in the Center
              that will benefit from this development is the microscopic study of fouling and
              microbially influenced corrosion in nuclear storage facilities, using an
              ultraminiature microscope delivered through the working channel of a borescope.
               The study of mixed species biofilms (such as subgingival plaque) in their
              natural environment is extremely important, and the confocal microprobe will
              offer tremendous advantage for those studies.

This instrument will be used
              collaboratively between the Center for Biofilm Engineering, the Department of
              Electrical and Computer Engineering and Microvision, Inc., the world leader in
              micromechanical laser beam scanning devices.  Microvision is well positioned to
              capitalize on this development program and would be a willing partner to
              transition this technology from the university lab environment into the
              commercial arena.

