Title       : Acquisition of Atomic Force Microscope and Transmission Electron Sample
               Preparation Equipment to Enhance Materials Science Research Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0079546

Award Number: 0079546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157756             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjay R. Mishra srmishra@memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Milan C. Buncick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0079546
Mishra

This Major Research Instrumentation project will support the
              acquisition of an atomic force microscope (AFM) and sample preparation
              equipment for TEM to enhance materials science research activity at the
              University of Memphis (UM).  The equipment will become part of the Integrated
              Microscopy Center.  The acquisition of the requested equipment will enable
              investigators from the UM and surrounding institutions to carry out diverse
              research and training activities in materials science.  These activities
              include: (1) characterization of the surface of orthopedic, dental, and
              cardiovascular materials and correlation with biological responses to the
              materials (2) surface and interface investigation of magnetic thin films (3)
              investigation of the relationship between the surface of metallic materials and
              their corrosion behavior in various electrolytes.  The acquisition of the
              requested equipment will enhance ongoing projects and facilitate new projects
              and continued industrial collaborations.  Equally important, the requested
              equipment will be used to train and educate both undergraduate and graduate
              students in the area of materials science.

In the last 30 years, electron
              microscopy has revolutionized our understanding of the relationship between the
              structure of materials and their properties.  Materials scientists have a
              growing ability to tailor materials for specific performance properties at even
              the atomic level.  Modern microscopy tools are essential for today's materials
              research challenges.  The acquisition of an atomic force microscope (AFM) and
              TEM sample preparation equipment will be important additions to the Integrated
              Microscopy Center (IMC) at the University of Memphis.  Modern TEM instruments
              provide almost all the structural and crystallographic information for analysis
              of new materials.  AFM was developed for imaging surfaces on nearly the atomic
              scale and has become an established surface analysis tool in scientific and
              industrial labs.  AFM can also measure electrical, magnetic, mechanical and
              thermal properties on the micron scale.  The enhanced IMC will provide
              increased materials research opportunities and student training in relevant job
              skills critical to the materials science industry.  Through collaborations,
              training seminars, and community outreach, the equipment will be used as a
              vehicle for increased interaction with regional universities and industry.  

