Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for Genomics at Auburn University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0079797

Award Number: 0079797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196334             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Liu zliu@acesag.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Bird  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brent L. Nielsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia M. Morton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael C. Wooten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   High throughput automated nucleotide sequencing is critically important for
              genomics research.  A wide array of research projects at Auburn University
              requires extensive DNA sequencing and fragment analysis.  These projects
              include development of molecular markers, genetic mapping, marker-assisted
              selection, genetic resource analysis, germplasm conservation, molecular
              ecology, population genetics, phylogenetic studies, molecular evolution, gene
              discovery and cloning, molecular detection, environmental genomics, and
              functional genomics.  This award will support the acquisition of high
              throughput DNA analysis equipment that will greatly increase the capacity of
              Auburn's research community. 
     The ABI Prism 377 automated DNA sequencer
              is a high throughput machine with a capacity of 96 samples per run.  It is
              easier to use than the capillary-based DNA sequencers and, therefore, is more
              suitable for a core facility with multiple users.  Its acquisition will meet
              the current and growing needs in DNA analysis at Auburn University and in the
              region.
     The instrumentation supported by this award will address a
              critical aspect of research need in the region.  It will dramatically enhance
              research capacity, efficiency, precision, and output.  Application of the
              information obtained from accelerated research, research training, and outreach
              will have a large economic impact in Alabama. Acquisition of this equipment
              will represent an important step toward improving the research infrastructure
              at Auburn University.  A large number of graduate and undergraduate students
              will benefit by their involvement in research projects using the equipment or
              from course offerings providing hands-on experience and workshops on advanced
              technologies in genomics.  The equipment will also be made available to
              researchers and students at Tuskegee University. 

