Title       : Acquisition and Development of Equipment for Unsaturated Soil Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0079785

Award Number: 0079785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368778             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald A. Miller gamiller@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tohren Kibbey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Musharraf M. Zaman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kanthasamy K. Muraleetharan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1058,1189,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The School of Civil Engineering and Environmental Science (CEES) at the
              University of Oklahoma (OU) will purchase and develop state-of-the-art
              equipment for integrated research/education in problems associated with
              unsaturated soil behavior. Within the civil engineering community, behavior of
              partially saturated near-surface soils is receiving intense research interest.
              Slope failures, embankment settlement, foundation heave due to expansive clays,
              pavement subgrade performance, chemical spills, and vadose zone remediation,
              are just a few examples of prevalent engineering problems whose solution
              depends on understanding unsaturated soil behavior. The CEES is poised to be a
              leader in this field due to the expertise of the faculty and the compelling
              research already established in unsaturated soil mechanics. Equipment obtained
              via NSF MRI funding will enable researchers to examine in-depth, comprehend,
              and define unsaturated soil behavior in ways not currently possible. 

Five
              pieces of equipment for testing unsaturated soils will be acquired and
              developed: 1) A direct shear test device will be purchased and a unique test
              cell/apparatus will be constructed for control and/or measurement of pore-air
              and pore-water pressure. The test cell will accommodate testing of soil-to-soil
              or soil-to-construction material interfaces. 2) A custom made hollow cylinder
              apparatus used for examining stress-strain behavior of soil will be purchased
              and will provide complete freedom on the stress and strain paths applied to the
              soil. The apparatus allows a hollow cylinder test specimen to be subjected to
              axial force and torque, and to different internal and external cell pressures.
              In addition, pore air and pore water pressures can be controlled.  These forces
              and pressures are controlled independently from a PC. Accordingly, it is
              possible to control the magnitude and direction of the three principal
              stresses.  Data acquisition will be included, and a pressure control panel will
              be fabricated. 3) An oedometer will be purchased and a test cell will be
              constructed for control and/or measurement of pore-air and pore-water pressure.
              Data acquisition will be acquired and a pressure control panel will be
              fabricated. The equipment will allow for the determination of fundamental
              one-dimensional compression properties of unsaturated soils. 4) A cubical
              device, currently owned by CEES, permits independent control of total normal
              stress applied in the principal stress directions during cubical triaxial
              testing of unsaturated soil.  Modifications will allow measurement of pore air
              and pore water pressure, and automated application of cyclic loads, in addition
              to measurement of displacements.  5) A parallel miniature pressure cell system
              will be constructed for rapid, detailed measurement of air/water and
              organic-liquid/water capillary pressure-saturation relationships and relative
              permeabilities in soils.  The system will be comprised of eight custom-built
              miniature pressure cells operated in parallel, and a computerized control
              system for automated operation and data acquisition.

Equipment obtained
              through the MRI grant will greatly enhance current research capabilities and
              allow CEES to become a preeminent research institution in the area of
              unsaturated soil behavior.  Currently, there is no unique center of this type
              in the United States, and thus the new facilities will have broad appeal.  It
              is fitting that OU becomes the location of a preeminent research center for
              unsaturated soils, particularly in light of the numerous unsaturated soil
              problems that plague Oklahoma and other surrounding states such as Texas and
              Colorado.

