Title       : Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Natural Sciences Research and
               Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0079582

Award Number: 0079582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul V. Hamilton paulh@mail.uca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin M. Waggoner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl K. Frederickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Arkansas
	      201 Donaghey Avenue
	      Conway, AR  720350001    501/450-3451

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The University of Central Arkansas (UCA) will establish a Scanning Electron
              Microscopy (SEM) facility with a R.J. Lee PSEM-2000 scanning electron
              microscope having both Energy Dispersive Xray (EDX) and variable vacuum
              capabilities; a Pelco critical point dryer; a Denton Vacuum sputter
              coater/etcher; and a 42-inch Plasmavision monitor for group viewing of images. 
              The equipment will be housed in a dedicated laboratory within Lewis Science
              Center on the UCA campus.  This SEM facility will support the research programs
              of a diverse group of natural sciences faculty, the instruction of science
              students, and public outreach activities aimed at pre-college students and
              science teachers.

The SEM will be used by eight primary faculty, whose
              research covers a wide range of fields, including: paleontological studies of
              Cambrian life forms; analysis of models of sound propagation in porous media;
              study of the distributions and characteristics of sensory receptors in
              gastropod molluscs; understanding the genetic control of micropatterns in
              developmental anatomy of flowering plants, using a mold-replica technique;
              comparative study of characteristic structures of invertebrates in support of
              systematics descriptions and phylogenetic reconstructions; analysis of the
              formation of particulate matter in the atmosphere, and the catalytic role of
              metals in atmospheric particulates; and, determination of the chemical and
              physical properties of meteorites.  SEM-based activities will be integrated
              into 10 courses in biology, chemistry and physics.  Finally, the SEM will
              support three outreach programs to K-12 students and teachers: open sample
              submissions, an opportunity for K-12 teachers to submit samples related to a
              class activity; Saturday With SEM, an opportunity for high school students to
              gain personal experience with the SEM; and, the High School Science Workshops,
              where high school students gain exposure to SEM as part of a multi-activity,
              science promotion day.  

Establishment of a SEM facility on the UCA campus
              will allow science faculty to pursue lines of research that previously required
              travel to more distant SEM facilities, or were not pursued at all.  Projects in
              acoustics, developmental biology, neurobiology, and paleontology will be the
              most immediately impacted, but other areas will also benefit.  The SEM will
              also expose undergraduate and graduate students to modern instrumentation and
              techniques, through both course enhancements and expanded research
              opportunities.  Finally, because SEM is a readily approachable technology, the
              K-12 educational and public outreach activities will improve the level of
              technical literacy of Arkansans.



