Title       : Acquisition of Five Controlled Environment Chambers for Plant Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a0079539

Award Number: 0079539
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118860             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jyoti Shah shah@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith L. Roe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xuemin Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Guikema  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jian-Min Zhou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0521400   Plant Productivity                      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Five controlled environment plant growth chambers will facilitate research of
              a cross-disciplinary group at Kansas State University (KSU) on the response of
              plants to biotic and abiotic environmental stresses.  These chambers will
              provide controlled growth conditions crucial for understanding the mechanism by
              which plants perceive and respond to environmental cues. 

The acquisitions
              will facilitate the individual and collaborative research of the group members
              on understanding the biochemical, physiological and molecular changes in plants
              exposed to stress, identification of genes involved in stress signaling,
              development of plant varieties resistant to pathogens and insects, and
              understanding the molecular basis of cell division and cell death in plants.  
              The growth chambers will enhance the quality and productivity of research at
              KSU by providing infrastructure for innovative research, through cooperative
              use of facilities and increased collaboration.  Students will benefit from
              specialty courses providing training on plant stress response.  The equipment
              will further facilitate and enhance the recruitment and training of women and
              minorities in plant biochemistry, physiology, molecular biology and genetics at
              KSU.  

Plant growth, development and productivity are influenced by
              environmental cues.  The stress of disease, insect infestation, increasing
              global temperatures, limited water supply and chemical toxicity, limit plant
              productivity.  The proposed work on understanding the perception and response
              of plants to biotic and abiotic environmental stresses will expedite the
              development of plant varieties with enhanced resistance to stress, thereby
              improving plant productivity, food quality, public health and the environment

