Title       : Acquisition of a 800 MHz NMR Spectrometer for the National Magnetic Resonance
               Facility at Madison
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a0079387

Award Number: 0079387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1032990            (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Markley markley@nmrfam.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian F. Volkman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eddie S. Mooberry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Westler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frits Abildgaard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award will add an 800 MHz NMR spectrometer to the National Magnetic
              Resonance Facility at Madison (NMRFAM), a shared instrumentation facility. The
              presence of  this instrument will enable researchers to solve new problems and
              to achieve definitive answers to scientific questions about biomolecular 
              structure-function relationships. The spectrometer will be devoted to
              experiments that require its uniquely-high field strength: studies of  larger
              molecules, investigations of field-dependent molecular ordering effects,
              studies of the field dependence of chemical exchange and  relaxation phenomena,
              and functional studies of proteins, nucleic acids, and other biomolecules that
              require exceptional resolution and/or sensitivity. The instrument will be used
              by a core group of about 40  principal investigators from all around the
              country, who work on a variety  of problems. The improved resolution and
              sensitivity of the proposed  spectrometer will ease the limitation of low
              solubility, lower the time requirements (and molecular stability requirements)
              for biomolecular data collection, and increase the accuracy of NMR
              measurements. The increased  sensitivity of the instrument, coupled with new
              data acquisition protocols (such as TROSY-based pulse sequences), promise to
              roll back the molecular weight limit for structure-function investigations and
              improve the feasibility of solution structures of membrane proteins and
              functional RNA molecules.

The 800 MHz NMR spectrometer will serve as a focal
              point for hands-on training in biomolecular NMR spectroscopy. On average, the
              National Magnetic Resonance Facility at Madison trains about 30 new users each
              year. These generally are graduate students and postdoctoral research
              associates.  The facility regularly hosts visiting scientists who come for
              periods of one week to one year to receive training in biomolecular NMR
              spectroscopy. Training is primarily by hands-on activities supervised by the
              staff of the facility.  All new internal and external users are required to
              receive orientation and training, which is tailored to their previous
              experience. The large number of users of the facility and the many maintenance
              tasks required lead to unique training opportunities. Staff members also train
              graduate students and advanced undergraduates to assist in the performance of
              routine maintenance and testing of the spectrometers.


