Title       : Cognitive Resources and Affect in Time Discounting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0079138

Award Number: 0079138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Drazen Prelec DPRELEC@MIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Drazen Prelec  
	 
Cognitive Resources and Emotion in Time Discounting
              


It is a basic finding in economics and psychology that people heavily
              undervalue or discount future events, and we can see evidence of it in many
              areas of our lives.  In financial decisions, many of us find it hard to start
              to save money for the distant prospect of our retirement or for our children's
              education.  We fail to take proper care of our health, putting off exercise,
              eating unhealthy snacks, avoiding vaccinations or the dentist, smoking a
              cigarette or having unprotected sex.  Although a great deal of research has
              demonstrated such discounting, very little is known about why it occurs. 
              Understanding the psychological mechanisms of undervaluation is the aim of the
              current research. 

Preliminary findings indicate that the valuation of a
              future may combine two processes, an initial a-temporal rapid affective
              judgment followed by slower cognitive adjustment that incorporates temporal
              information.  Pilot data indicate that operations that disrupt the cognitive
              component (like being forced to decide under time pressure or while distracted
              by another task) reduce the amount of discounting.  Somewhat surprisingly,
              giving people more time to think things through increases rather than decreases
              the appeal of immediate rewards.  

We interpret these changes in valuation
              in light of the psychological literature on the role of affect in decision
              making.  This literature suggests that, while thoughts may be complex, slow and
              effortful, feelings are simple, rapid and effortless.  It is also true that, in
              making judgments, people will use their feelings as information. Therefore,
              initial judgments of people or objects are often based first on their feelings
              about the object and then adjusted more slowly or modified by their thoughts. 
              In our pilot studies, the valuations of far future events changed when
              cognitive resources were restricted, suggesting that these valuations had a
              cognitive component that is disrupted by the resource manipulation. The
              valuations of the near future events were relatively immune to the restriction
              of cognitive resources, suggesting these valuation judgments are more
              feelings-based. 

With the proposed research, we will extend these
              preliminary findings to real outcomes and look more closely into the role of
              affect in the valuation process.   These findings will have significant
              implications for a wide range of decisions.   From a normative standpoint, the
              novel implication of the research is that thinking harder or more thoroughly
              about a decision may perversely increase the rate at which future outcomes are
              discounted. The disregard of future outcomes shown therefore may not be simply
              a case of cognitive myopia, as is commonly thought. On the account proposed
              here, it is the result of an active cognitive process that counteracts the
              initial emotional response to a future event. 



