Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Solid Freeform Fabrication Laboratory for
               Interdisciplinary Research and Education in Manufacturing through a
               University/Industry Consortium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a0079397

Award Number: 0079397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John N. DuPont jnd1@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Ochs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herman F. Nied  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott R. Hummel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randall M. German  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the purchase of a Laser Engineered Net Shaping
              (LENS) system and a Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM) unit for interdisciplinary
              research and education in Solid Freeform Fabrication (SFF). The primary
              objective of the research is to develop science-based processing and
              microstructure models that will aid in moving LENS from the proof-of-concept
              stage towards full scale implementation by industry. Processing models will be
              developed for predicting heat flow, minimizing residual stress and distortion,
              controlling microstructure, and optimizing tool path planning. The LENS unit
              will be used for model validation and development of processing algorithms for
              controlling microstructure and minimizing distortion. Methods for depositing
              components with graded microstructures and properties will also be investigated
              through both model and experimental based activities. The role of powder
              properties on flow uniformity will be assessed, and the LENS process will be
              evaluated to identify advantages and limitations relative to competing SFF
              processes. The instruments will be used for education through undergraduate
              course instruction. In this educational effort, the FDM unit will be used by
              undergraduates in the Materials, Mechanical, and Industrial Engineering
              Departments in an integrated manufacturing course to create solid models from
              computer aided drawings. Once solid models are created, the LENS unit will then
              be used to prepare functional prototypes for performance testing. New
              instruction modules on rapid prototyping and SFF will be developed jointly
              between the participating engineering departments to support the new
              equipment.

From these efforts, generic models and algorithms will be
              developed that can be applied by end users for process optimization in order to
              avoid "trial and error" approaches to LENS manufacturing. The results of this
              research will be used by industrial partners to fabricate components with
              reduced manufacturing time, improved dimensional accuracy, and properties that
              are tailored for enhanced performance. The educational activities will teach
              undergraduate students how to apply basic concepts in materials, mechanical,
              and industrial engineering to manufacture components using SFF processes.

