Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Dilemma of
               Decentralization: A Study of Local Politics in Uganda
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a0079357

Award Number: 0079357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicolas Van de Walle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Decentralization is considered to be a remedy for historical problems of
              authoritarian, inefficient, and corrupt government in Africa.  The current
              emphasis on decentralization increases the importance of local governments and
              local elites.  Yet, within a country, the performance of local governments may
              vary dramatically.  Existing theories tend to focus on social and cultural
              explanations of variation in performance.  Yet, these explanations fall short
              when one attempts to understand the ability of recent decentralization schemes
              to achieve stated goals.  Many of the countries moving toward greater
              decentralization are found in parts of the world where patronage and
              clientelism remain crucial in deterring political outcomes.  In neo-patrimonial
              societies, one cannot assume that decentralization policies are implemented
              completely, meet all stated objectives, and remain insulated from previously
              existing patterns of political rule.  This project examines whether
              decentralization improves local government performance, and it suggests that
              the nature of local politics explains observed differences in performance
              across administrative units.
	In analyzing local politics, it is important to
              acknowledge the prevalence of clientelist or neo-patrimonial politics in Africa
              and throughout the developing world.  The artificiality of national boundaries
              and the external imposition of state structures in most African countries
              explain the fact that national identities and feelings of community at the
              national level are relatively undeveloped.  Consequently, the line between
              public and private is blurred by clientelism as politicians are forced to
              exchange material benefits for political support.  Similarly,
              neo-patrimonialism refers to situations in which the line between public and
              private is shattered completely.  According to Clapham (1982), public politics
              refer to situations in which political actors pursue the goals of the state,
              whereas private politics describe instances in which individuals or groups
              pursue their own well-being rather than promoting the general public
              welfare.
	This project examines the relationship among decentralization,
              institutional performance, and local politics in a sample of Uganda's
              administrative districts.  Districts are sampled purposively to reflect
              diversity in several important characteristics  They include region, ethnicity,
              date when the district was decentralized, and distance from the capital city. 
              Local political institutions are expected to perform better in districts where
              politics is described best as public but worse in districts where private
              politics dominate.  This type of research requires a mixture of qualitative and
              quantitative data and, thus, several data collection methods are used.  These
              methods include archival research, participant observation, elite interviewing,
              and survey research. 

