Title       : Development of Coherent Gradient-Sensing Tomographic Interferometer: Application
               to 3D Transient Temperature, Concentration, and Refractive Index Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a0079494

Award Number: 0079494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207398             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon P. Longtin jlongtin@ms.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raman P. Singh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harbans S. Dhadwal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vishwanath Prasad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-0079494
Jon P. Longtin
State University of New York Stony Brook
MRI: 
              Development of a Coherent Gradient-Sensing Tomographic Interferometer:
              
Application to 3D Transient Temperature, Concentration, and Refractive Index
              Meas-urement

Abstract

This project combines a novel interferometric
              measurement technique, Coherent Gradient-Sensing Interferometry (CGI), with
              multi-view tomography to develop a powerful new tool for transient,
              three-dimensional (3D) measurement of temperature, concentration, or density in
              fluid systems.  The unique advantages of CGI over traditional interferometric
              techniques include: (1) complete insensitivity to vibration, (2) no
              reference-beam requirement, (3) continuously variable sensitivity, and (4)
              lower cost, and (5) more reliable operation.  These features make a CGI-based
              instrument particularly well suited for portable and commercial applications. 
              This novel instrument consists of a CGI interferometer capable of rotating
              around a transparent test cell to capture interferometric images at different
              angles, which are then used to compute transient, 3-D profiles of
              thermophysical properties such as temperature, concentration, or density for
              the fluid-thermal system in the test cell.

Measurement of three-dimensional,
              time-varying profiles of temperature, concentration, and density is critical
              for the understanding and optimization of many engineering, biological, and
              geophysical thermal-fluid systems.  Examples include advanced materials
              processing; natural and forced convection, and surface-tension-driven heat
              transfer; mass transfer, and species pro-duction; and biological and
              bio-engineering phenomena.  Such measurements are needed to vali-date computer
              simulations of such situations. The successful development of the CGI
              Tomo-graphic Interferometer provides, for the first time, direct, transient,
              3-D measurement capabilities for transport phenomena in fluid-thermal systems. 
              Some immediate applications of the instru-ment will include measuring
              temperature and concentration during simulated crystal growth, measuring
              temperatures during laser-induced surface-tension-driven flows, monitoring
              tracer concentrations in flow through mechanical heart valves, measuring
              temperature and concentra-tion during melting and solidification, and assessing
              3D crack structures in transparent solids.  A prototype instrument is also
              being developed that will be portable and available for other labo-ratories and
              local companies for evaluation and application.  Furthermore, the instrument
              devel-opment itself is an excellent vehicle for training students in optical
              systems and image process-ing. 

