Title       : MRSEC: Nanostructured Materials and Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0079983

Award Number: 0079983
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16450000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan J. De Pablo depablo@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Kuech  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9178,9183,9251,AMPP,BIOT,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University
              of Wisconsin supports an interdisciplinary research program on nanostructured
              materials and interfaces.  The research is carried out in three
              interdisciplinary research groups, with appropriate seed projects.  Within IRG
              1 the Center focuses on the mechanisms  associated with materials integration
              onto silicon.  The ultimate aim is to create "smart" systems based on Si
              technology for electronic and optical applications.  The Center's activities
              are aimed at understanding and managing heterointerfaces, understanding bonding
              between dissimilar materials, understanding the role of strain, and effectively
              utilizing self-organization growth techniques.  All of the above are focused on
              the nanometer scale.  Within IRG 2 the goal is to understand actual grain
              boundaries in high temperature superconductors, which requires an
              interdisciplinary approach to film growth, materials characterization and
              modeling.  The potential impact is the increase of  the maximum current
              densities that can be carried in such materials for advanced superconducting
              devices.  The activities in IRG 3 are centered on understanding  the role of
              nanostructured textured surfaces on the growth and behavior of biological
              systems (proteins, viruses, and cells) which have been deposited onto these
              substrates.  A strong feature of the Center's strong educational outreach is
              the development, testing, and dissemination of instructional materials which
              can be integrated into high school or college science courses.  Of particular
              interest is the Development of Instructional Materials Program (DIMP) that
              enables MRSEC graduate students to develop new instructional materials based on
              their research.  The Center carries out an aggressive program to increase the
              participation of underrepresented groups through enhanced contacts with
              minority serving institutions.  The Center supports well maintained shared
              experimental facilities, which are accessible to outside users and has a very
              extensive program of collaborations with industry.

Participants in the
              Center include 29 senior investigators, 9 postdoctoral associates, 20 graduate
              students, 15 undergraduates, and 4 technicians and other support personnel. 
              Professor Thomas F. Kuech directs the MRSEC.       

