Title       : Acquisition of Surface Characterization Research Equipment for the
               Interdisciplinary Study of Materials Growth and Gas-Solid Reactions at Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0079690

Award Number: 0079690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196632             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tonya M. Klein tklein@coe.eng.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. Lane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Weaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shane C. Street  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Epling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0079690
Klein

This grant supports the acquisition of equipment that will
              enhance the strength of a multidisciplinary group in performing research in
              fundamental areas of chemical engineering, chemistry, and materials science and
              engineering. The interdisciplinary group of scientists and engineers on this
              proposal has a common interest in studying the chemistry occurring at solid
              surfaces. A high-pressure reaction cell and a chemical-vapor deposition (CVD)
              chamber attached to a common analysis chamber will enable the studies
              envisioned by the group. This proposal is for the acquisition of the common
              analysis chamber, which would include X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
              and ion-scattering spectroscopy (ISS). This chamber will be attached to an
              existing CVD chamber for characterization of materials growth in situ. A
              high-pressure reaction cell equipped with a mass spectrometer will also be
              attached so that sample can be exposed to gases at reaction conditions and
              subsequently analyzed without exposure to air. With in situ surface
              characterization, the science behind the growth or reaction becomes obtainable
              and the studies more confident and complete. The proposed equipment will also
              be used as a learning tool in several undergraduate and graduate classes that
              teach laboratory analytical techniques.  In addition to the education of
              graduate students on this equipment, this team of investigators is committed to
              the participation of undergraduates in research in order to prepare promising
              students for graduate school or a career in research and development. These
              undergraduates will have the opportunity to obtain hands-on experience in
              materials characterization and reaction engineering.

As our ability to build
              devices extends into the nanometer dimension, understanding the surface
              phenomena occurring during the device building and use is becoming increasingly
              important. This award will be used to purchase a surface analysis system
              comprising of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, ion scattering spectroscopy and
              a mass spectrometer in order to study the chemical nature of surfaces. The
              powerful set of techniques will enable us to make advances in three very
              important areas; ultrathin (<10 nanometer) coatings for high speed data storage
              media that exhibit resistance to corrosion wear and oxidation, ultrathin
              high-dielectric-constant films for advanced field effect transistors used in
              the chip industry and catalyst development for on board generation of hydrogen
              in automobile fuel cells. The analysis system will be added to a thin film
              chemical vapor deposition system and a high-pressure reactor cell so that
              materials may be prepared, treated and studied in-situ without the
              contamination of laboratory air and humidity. This represents the unique nature
              of the proposed system. Graduate and undergraduate research students will be
              trained to use the proposed system by the interdisciplinary team of researchers
              involved. The proposed system is unique in its abilities but the various
              techniques are commonly used in industry and therefore the student researchers
              will be well trained to make the transition from academic to industrial
              positions.



