Title       : Acquisition of a 3 Tesla MRI Scanner for Brain Imaging by the University of
               Pittsburgh/Carnegie-Mellon Consortium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0079708

Award Number: 0079708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1793000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcel A. Just just+@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter L. Strick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Just
0079708

This proposal requests funding for the acquisition of a 3T MRI
              scanner for human and animal brain imaging for use by a large,
              multi-disciplinary, dual-university community of users. The instrument is based
              on a Signa Horizon LX platform, optimized for activation studies. The very
              high-field strength enhances the signal to noise ratio and contrast for fMRl
              applications, enables the collection of very high-resolution structural images,
              and it is equipped for ultra-fast echoplanar imaging (EPI) that enables images
              to be acquired and processed at the rate of over 10 images per sec.

The
              scanner would be the centerpiece of a new, inter-university Imaging Institute
              that brings together researchers in several disciplines at the University of
              Pittsburgh and Carnegie Mellon: cognitive neuroscientists who study human
              performance in complex environments, neuroscientists combining single-cell
              recording and neuroimaging with monkeys, biophysicists interested in advancing
              MR methods, statisticians with expertise in neuroimaging, and computer
              scientists interested in the analysis of large-scale databases. The basic
              science approach aims at an interdisciplinary synergy focused on brain imaging
              and theoretical integration. The university-supported Imaging Institute will
              provide a rich infrastructure and appropriate staffing to maximize the benefits
              of the scanner.

The new instrument will be optimized for assessing a wide
              range of cognitive processes and will provide an unparalleled opportunity to
              relate human and animal cognition. The new facility will provide a data rich
              environment in which the 34 participating investigators (and a total group of
              174 potential users) can combine their expertise in biomedical engineering,
              cognitive psychology, computer science, education, linguistics, statistics, and
              neuroscience. The investigators include seasoned researchers who can link brain
              imaging to their established research disciplines, thereby enriching the
              imaging research.

There are five areas of basic science research: 1.
              Cognitive processing (of language, problem solving, spatial processing, motor
              control, and learning); 2. Monkey imaging (of network activity,
              maturation/learning, activity dependent contrast agents, relation to single
              neuron activity, and structural imaging); 3. Analysis methods including
              statistical analysis (noise reduction, hierarchical Bayesian assessment, motion
              correction) and computer science analysis (machine learning, data mining, and
              analyzing the content of images); 4. MRI methods development including: fast
              fMRI imaging, respiratory/cardiac noise reduction, reduction of susceptibility
              artifact, metabolic and volumetric imaging, animal RF coils and contrast
              agents; and MR spectroscopy of metabolites; and 5. computational modeling of
              cognitive function, examining how a variety of computational architectures can
              simultaneously account for human performance and fMRI patterns.

The facility
              will provide extensive training and research time (20,000 hours of scanning
              over the next five years) to undergraduates, graduates, postdocs and faculty,
              and will infuse the unfolding science into the ongoing educational mission. The
              training activities include the development of new graduate and undergraduate
              courses (using a new brain imaging computer classroom), seminars and workshops
              on brain imaging, a new brain imaging graduate core, and summer undergraduate
              research traineeships. External training will include workshops, web course
              materials, software tools, and functional imaging and modeling data sets.
              Outreach activities include courses for educators, museum shows, web programs,
              and technology transfer with industrial partners.

The activity would advance
              the new interdisciplinary science, extending and integrating the growing
              knowledge in this area into comprehensive theories of brain and mind.

