Title       : Acquisition of an Isothermal Titration Calorimetry System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0079966

Award Number: 0079966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward L. Ferroni eferroni@ben.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Benedictine University
	      5700 College Road
	      Lisle, IL  605320900    630/829-6000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1228,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              An isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) system from MicroCal Incorporated will
              be used at  Benedictine University for biochemical enzymatic studies. The
              system includes a titration calorimeter and computer for automatic control of
              the instrument. When two substances interact or combine (noncovalently or
              covalently), the absorption or evolution of heat occurs. The MicroCal ITC
              system offers a sensitive and rapid way to determine the amount of heat
              released or taken up by such a reaction. Computer analysis of the data acquired
              yields the desired binding or interaction constants. 

 Initially the system
              will be used in three different projects. Project I involves thestudy of the
              binding of dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) analogues to rabbit muscle
              aldolase (RAMA). This enzyme, which is inexpensive and readily available
              commercially, catalyzes the addition of DHAP to a variety of aldehydes. As a
              result, RAMA has been used for the organic synthesis of a number of novel
              compounds. The analogues will be synthesized and the ability of these compounds
              to bind to aldolase as a function of their structure will be determined using
              the ITC system. The information should shed further light on the binding
              specificity of the aldolase active site and provide further details concerning
              the enzyme mechanism. Project II will investigate the ability of synthetic
              crown ethers to bind cesium ions. Cesium-137 is a radioactive byproduct of
              nuclear reactors. Removal of the cesium from wastewater can be done by
              extraction with inclusion compounds (e.g., crown ethers). The isothermal
              titration calorimetry system will be used to rapidly screen the synthetic crown
              ethers for their ability to bind the cesium ion. The binding of peptides to
              fibrinogen or the fibrinogen receptors of platelets will be investigated in
              project III. Peptides will be tested for their ability to bind to fibrinogen or
              cellular receptors using the isothermal titration calorimetry system. The
              successful completion of this project will make important contributions to the
              understanding of the fibrinogen/receptor interaction. 

Faculty and students
              will use this instrumentation in interdisciplinary research projects, classroom
              exercises 

