Title       : Enhancement for Research and Teaching Capabilities in Ecological, Environmental
               and Evolutionary Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0079820

Award Number: 0079820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele K. Nishiguchi nish@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Oshima  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Howard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brook G. Milligan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey B. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This award will support research at the Laboratory of Ecological and
              Evolutionary Genetics in the Department of Biology at New Mexico State
              University.  A number of investigators will make use of the DNA sequencer
              including:  1) Dr. Michele Nishiguchi (PI), who studies the evolution and
              speciation of symbionts in a squid-luminous bacterium model system and is
              interested in the evolution of infection mechanisms in related pathogenic
              bacteria of the genus Vibrio, which are responsible for the radiation and
              spread of infectious disease.  2) Dr. Peter Houde (co-PI), whose research
              program focuses on the systematics of birds, with an emphasis in the molecular
              systematics of the avian order Gruiformes, an ill-defined group within avian
              phylogenetics.  3) Dr. Daniel Howard (co-PI), whose group is interested in
              species formation, the process responsible for the diversity of life on earth
              using a model system of closely related ground crickets.  4) Dr. Brook Milligan
              (co-PI), whose research interests include developing statistical methods to
              disentangle genetic and environmental factors affecting quantitative traits
              thereby identifying the genetic architecture of important medical,
              physiological, or ecological traits of natural populations.  5) Dr. Kevin
              Oshima (co-PI), whose research focuses primarily on characterizing and
              examining environmental factors that influence the diversity, ecology and
              evolution of fish rhabdoviruses.  6) Dr. Geoffrey Smith (co-PI), whose
              primarily interests include investigating the relationships in the microbial
              community between metabolic function and phylogenetic structure of
              biodegradative microorganisms as they respond to chlorinated pollutant
              exposure. 
     This award will be used to purchase an Applied Biosystems
              (ABI) 377XL automated sequencer.  In addition to sequencing, this machine can
              also run microsatellite gels (used in population genetics for identifying
              specific DNA fragments from individual specimens), as well as AFLP (amplified
              fragment length polymorphism) techniques used in genome mapping in areas such
              as agricultural and evolutionary biology.  The ABI system does not require any
              radioactive labeling, enabling a radiation-free environment in the laboratory.
              
     The faculty of the Laboratory of Ecological and Evolutionary Genetics
              have major interests in the evolution and radiation of organisms with respect
              to environmental and ecological influences.  The ABI 377XL will contribute to
              the research and teaching of numerous graduate and undergraduate students who
              are pursuing careers in those fields. 

