Title       : The Flux of Volatiles from Active MARGINS: the Central American Volcanic Arc
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2001     
File        : a0079402

Award Number: 0079402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51076              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tobias P. Fischer fischer@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Scholes Hall, Room 102
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0079402
Fischer


In a subduction zone, the material transfer from sediments
              of the subducting plate into arc magmas has been identified by chemical
              tracers, such as Berillium and Boron.  In recent years, significant progress
              has been made towards understanding the element cycles in subduction zones and
              the time-scales these cycles operate on with the goal of arriving at element
              budgets of active margins.  The vast amount of detailed geochemical information
              available for arc magmas stands in contrast to the very limited detailed
              information available for volatile discharges from active margin volcanoes. 
              Volatiltes play a pivotal role in element transfers occurring at subduction
              zones.  Despite their importance, comparatively little is known about the
              ultimate sources of the volatiles in subduction zones.  Even less is known
              about the volatile budgets of any active subduction zone.

The goal of this
              project is to perform a detailed, systematic study of the sources of volatile
              discharges and the fluxes of these volatiles to the atmosphere at 3-4 active
              volcanoes along the Central American Volcanic Arc.  The P.I. will attempt to
              determine the sources of carbon dioxide, water, nitrogen and noble gases and
              their fluxes to the atmosphere.  The Central American Volcanic Arc is one of
              the best places in the world for such a study because a vast amount of
              geochemical information on the magmas is available, the amount of fluid
              contributions is documented to vary along strike of the arc, and crustal
              contamination is relatively minor and quite well constrained.  The study is a
              "pilot study" targeting these 3-4 volcanoes in order to test whether there is a
              correlation regarding the sources of volatiles with the sources of the magmas
              as identified geochemically.
***


