Title       : Language, Symbol Structure, and Cognitive Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  2000    
File        : a0079973

Award Number: 0079973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331790             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin F. Miller kevinmil@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George W. McConkie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Learning to read and to work with numbers are among the most basic symbolic
              skills children acquire. In order to distinguish characteristics of symbolic
              acquisition that are universal versus those that depend upon features of a
              particular language or symbol system, we will compare the development of
              reading and early mathematics by children who speak two very different language
              - English and Chinese. The proposed research will study the effects of three
              specific differences between Chinese and English on children's acquisition,
              use, and understanding of numbers and written language. Methods will range from
              eye-tracking studies of reading to model-based artificial counting training
              studies; in all cases the focus will be on the way that aspects of symbol
              structure affects different aspects of the acquisition, use, and understanding
              of symbols. 

Symbol systems, such as numbers and written words, are
              fundamental to human cognition. Symbol systems are structured in ways that make
              learning possible and may affect the way humans think about language and
              mathematics. Understanding the contribution of symbol structure to cognitive
              development requires comparative research, in which variation in symbol
              structure is related to variation in acquisition, use, and understanding of
              symbols. Such research is of practical as well as theoretical importance,
              because mastering symbol systems is at the heart of what it means to be an
              educated person. 




