Title       : The Acquisition of Instrumentation for Microstructural Characterization of
               Materials that are Non-Conductive or Include Volatile Phases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0079469

Award Number: 0079469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490820             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Van Dam tvandam@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia A. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheila A. Grant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laurent Matuana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence L. Sutter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1058,1189,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              A thorough characterization of material microstructure is essential to improve
              the performance of existing materials and to develop new materials for
              innovative applications.  A variety of instruments are available for
              microstructural characterization.  The scanning electron microscope (SEM)
              equipped with an energy dispersive x-ray analyzer (EDX) and an orientation
              image mapping (OIM) system is one of the most popular.  However, the
              application of an SEM for imaging, EDX, or OIM is limited when applied to
              materials that are not conductive and/or contain volatile phases (NC/VP). 
              Volatilization of these materials can not only damage the SEM, but the results
              obtained may be negatively affected because the material under evaluation is
              fundamentally altered as a result of volatilization.  These limitations are
              encountered when using the conventional SEM for characterizing most civil
              engineering materials, wood products, polymer composites, and some materials
              used in biomedical applications.

Recent advances in instrumentation have
              resulted in the development of instruments that are uniquely suited for
              analyzing NC/VP materials.  Specifically, two of these instruments are the
              low-vacuum scanning electron microscope (LVSEM) and the x-ray microscope.  In
              the case of the LVSEM, the sample can be viewed in a relatively high-pressure
              environment, which acts to dissipate any electrical charge that may develop on
              non-conductive specimens while minimizing volatilization.  The x-ray microscope
              allows a specimen to be viewed at atmospheric pressure using transmitted and
              backscattered x-rays, as well as through optical microscopy.  X-ray
              micro-fluorescence can also be performed to determine chemical composition of
              phases and micro-diffraction can be applied to determine the crystallographic
              orientation of the same microstructure.

Without question, the ability to
              characterize NC/VP materials is of paramount importance to a number of
              disciplines at Michigan Technological University (MTU) including civil,
              biomedical, and chemical engineering, as well as in wood sciences.  Example
              applications include studies of portland cement concrete failure, observation
              of asphalt microstructure, investigations of various biomedical engineering
              materials, and research on various wood composite materials. 
              Tensile/compression and heating/cooling stages are being included to allow for
              direct observation of deformation in these materials under controlled
              environmental conditions.  A number of projects are planned using these
              instruments for the development of innovative materials or materials testing
              methods, including development of new biomedical engineering materials,
              research in conductive polymer resins, and methods of determining the water to
              cement ratio in a hardened concrete mixture.

The instrumentation will also
              result in a hands-on approach to learning for graduate and undergraduate
              students, as well as provide the opportunity to draw promising high school
              students into scientific fields of study.  In addition to enrolled college
              students, MTU currently expends great effort to motivate promising high school
              students to pursue scientific or engineering fields of study, particularly
              those from underrepresented groups.  Because of the versatility and
              capabilities of this equipment, entertaining and informative sessions are being
              developed and integrated into these efforts to build enthusiasm among high
              school students.
 
