Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Cognitive Neuroscience Brain Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0079579

Award Number: 0079579
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234772             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randolph Blake randolph.blake@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Blake
0079579

The past decade has witnessed a revolution in methods
              available for imaging correlates of brain activity and, thereby, for studying
              possible links between neural events and mental activity in humans. Most
              prominent among those methods is functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),
              which is based on detecting and localizing variations in hemodynamic response
              associated with fluctuations in neural activity during performance of specific
              cognitive or behavioral tasks (Ogawa et al, 1998). Sophisticated display
              technologies paired with fMRI can delineate individual "maps" of a sensory
              surface onto different brain areas (Wandell, 1999), and advances in single
              event fMRI even make it possible to infer relative timing among the onsets of
              activity in different brain areas (Menon & Kim, 1999). Building on its
              recognized strengths in cognitive neuroscience, Vanderbilt University has
              committed itself to becoming one of the premier research institutions in the
              world for the study of cognitive function using fMRI, and that commitment is
              evidenced in several major initiatives:

   o Establishment of an
              interdisciplinary Center for Magnetic Resonance Imaging, with major focus on
              brain imaging.
   o Purchase of a 3.0 Tesla GE imager devoted exclusively to
              research, to be housed in specially constructed space optimized                
                                   for fMRI work.  
   o Expanded research training in
              cognitive neuroscience, including brain imaging, available through new degree
              programs at           the graduate and undergraduate levels.
   o
              Establishment of a university-wide Neuroscience Institute emphasizing
              interdisciplinary research and education linking bench to bedside, with brain
              imaging figuring prominently in that mission
   o Creation of an
              interdisciplinary group of investigators whose research involves the study of a
              wide range of basic and clinical problems using MRI.

Among those
              investigators is a group of individuals -- the applicants of this grant -- who
              use fMRI to study a diverse set of problems falling within the domain of
              cognitive neuroscience. This group has been created through key hires of new
              faculty explicitly trained in fMRI research as well as through investments in
              the career development of faculty already at Vanderbilt. Our work has already
              led to new insights into brain mechanisms involved in perceiving, attending,
              thinking and remembering. For our group to realize its potential, we now seek
              to expand the Center's fMRI facilities to include cutting edge instrumentation
              that meets needs common to our group. Specifically, this proposal requests
              funds to purchase: 
1. Hardware for generation and presentation of
              high-fidelity visual and auditory stimuli to subjects engaged in cognitive
              tasks during fMRI scanning sessions. 
2. Instruments for monitoring eye
              movements and respiration during scan sessions, so that we can correct fMRI
              signals for artifacts and so we can use eye movements and respiration rate as
              indirect indices of cognitive function and emotional arousal. 
3. Computer
              workstation and software for analysis and interpretation of fMRI data, with
              particular emphasis on computational techniques for three-dimensional,
              volumetric rendering of fMRI data.
As detailed in the body of this proposal,
              faculty associated with this application are studying a variety of problems
              centered around questions within the domains of:
   o visual perception
   o
              object recognition
   o categorization
   o decision making
   o affective
              processes
   o attention
   o spatial memory
   o vocal communication
All
              investigators listed on this grant are also involved in research training of
              graduate and undergraduate students in one of Vanderbilt's several programs
              specializing in cognitive science, clinical science and/or neuroscience. The
              facilities provided by this grant will be utilized by some of those trainees.

