Title       : RUI: Paracrine Factors and Bone Development in the Turtle Shell
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a0079341

Award Number: 0079341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott F. Gilbert sgilber1@swarthmore.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rocky S. Tuan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Swarthmore College
	      500 College Avenue
	      Swarthmore, PA  19081    610/328-8000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0079341
Gilbert

The turtle shell is an evolutionary novelty representing a
              unique departure from the usual way that vertebrate skeletons develop. The
              turtle shell is a casing made almost exclusively of bone, and it is composed of
              two main parts, the dorsal carapace and the ventral plastron. Between them, on
              the lateral sides, is a bridge. The carapace contains fifty bones and is
              supported by the ribs, which grow dorsolaterally rather than ventrally. The
              critical event in turtle development and evolution is thought to be the
              "ensnarement" of the ribs by the carapacial ridge, a bulge of ectoderm and
              mesoderm that resembles the limb bud. The bones of the shell are thought to be
              formed from the dermis by intramembranous ossification, with contributions from
              these ribs. Dr. Gilbert wish to test three hypotheses for the turtle shell
              development: (1) that the carapace ridge forms by the co-option of the
              developmental program that forms the limb buds; (2) that the ribs induce
              intramembranous ossification in the dermis; and (3) that the dorsal growth of
              the rib cartilage precursors depends on their encountering the carpacial ridge.
              To test the first hypothesis, He will examine in the carapacial ridge the
              spatiotemporal expression profile of genes (especially those encoding
              fibroblast growth factors) known to initiate limb morphogenesis.  To test
              whether the ribs induce intramembranous ossification, He will look at the
              expression, in the ribs and in other regions, of those genes encoding paracrine
              factors (especially the bone morphogenetic proteins) that could induce the
              ossification of the dermis. He will also insert beads containing inhibitors of
              known bone-inducing paracrine factors to see if the inhibition of these
              proteins inhibits regional bone development. The behavior of turtle ribs from
              turtle somites transplanted into chick embryos will tell us if the turtle ribs
              need the carapacial ridge to grow dorsolaterally or if this is an intrinsic
              property of the rib cartilage precursors. The results of this research should
              give insights into the mechanisms by which the co-option of developmental
              instructions can be used to create evolutionarily novel structures. It should
              also aid in the reconstruction of the phylogenetic path leading to the "sudden"
              emergence of turtles in the Triassic.   
 
 



