Title       : Development of a Dynamic Helium Atom Scattering Apparatus to Probe Nanoscale
               Surface Fluctuations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0079584

Award Number: 0079584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304528             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Kevan kevan@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory S. Elliott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Most areas of modern materials research focus fundamentally on energetic
              interactions that operate on the nanometer length scale but which nonetheless
              are manifested in unusual macroscopic material properties.  While many
              techniques are available to probe the static microscopic properties of
              materials, few provide microscopic information on the moderate time scales (1
              ms - 1 s) characteristic of dynamical modes that determine the interplay
              between microscopic and macroscopic worlds.  There is therefore an urgent need
              to develop new techniques that combine high spatial and temporal resolution. 
              Professor Kevan and his co-investigators will construct novel apparatus to
              produce a transversely coherent helium atom beam.  They will develop
              methodologies analogous to dynamic laser light scattering and apply these to
              study surface fluctuations at length scales as short as a few nanometers and on
              time scales as short as one microsecond.  Examples of phenomena to be studied
              using this new technique include 1) the elementary steps in diffusion of
              surface species, 2) equilibrium and steady-state surface fluctuations in
              conducting and non-conducting polymer and self-assembled monolayer films, and
              3) the fluctuations of high temperature superconductors in the spin-charge
              segregated phase.  

The PI is developing a helium atom scattering apparatus,
              to probe nanoscale surface fluctuations. A key focus of modern materials
              research is to control a material's structure in order to understand and
              ultimately control its function.  Understanding structure requires measuring
              how atoms are arranged in space and how they are bonded to each other to form
              molecules and solids.  This pertains to a material's static properties.  By
              contrast, understanding function requires measuring how a material operates,
              either mechanically, chemically, electrically, or magnetically.  Function is
              intrinsically a dynamical concept.  While there are many structural techniques
              - various microscopes and x-ray diffraction, for example - there are only
              relatively few that provide incisive information about a material's dynamical
              properties on a length scale ranging from a few to many atoms.  That many key
              technologies rely on materials that are artificially patterned on this scale
              makes it urgent to develop such techniques.  Here the investigators are
              developing a novel use for helium atoms to try to address this need.  Like
              x-rays, helium atoms can probe very short dimensions.  The instrument will
              produce a very highly collimated beam of atoms that will have some laser-like
              properties.  This will allow application of laser-like dynamical techniques,
              but with sensitivity to sizes on the scale of atoms.


