Title       : Identification of Pea Leaf Nuclear PGK, GAPD & Aldolase Isoforms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0079913

Award Number: 0079913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63325              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louise E. Anderson louise@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Louise Anderson
P-glycerate kinase, glyceraldehyde-3-P dehydrogenase, and
              aldolase, or their antigenic analogs, are present in the nucleus of pea leaf
              mesophyll cells.   The kinase appears to be a subunit of the primer recognition
              protein involved in lagging strand synthesis.  The dehydrogenase may be a part
              of this same complex and/or may have additional functions related to nucleotide
              binding.   Aldolase might have a function related to DNA-binding.  It is not
              known whether the nuclear proteins are the chloroplast Calvin cycle (reductive
              pentose phosphate pathway) isozymes or the cytosolic isozymes.   The isozymes
              present in the nucleus will be identified using mono-specific, isozyme-specific
              antibodies.  These experiments will be important to understanding the
              regulation of nucleic acid metabolism and gene expression in the plant nucleus
              and in the chloroplast.  The antibodies will also be used in co-localization
              studies.

The investigator has found three enzymes in the nucleus that appear
              to be the same as three enzymes found in the chloroplast or in the cytosol. 
              The surprising aspect of this discovery is that the functions of the nuclear
              enzymes must differ markedly from those of their chloroplast and cytosolic
              counterparts, which are known to function in carbon metabolism.  The
              investigator will rigorously compare and identify these enzymes from the
              different cellular areas.This work will lay the foundation for future studies
              of the possible roles of these nuclear enzymes in nuclear metabolism and gene
              regulation.


