Title       : The Detection and Segmentation of Image Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0079277

Award Number: 0079277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211167             (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Todd todd.44@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Delwin T. Lindsey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental problem for both human and machine is to detect and identify
              moving patterns from sensory information that is often contaminated by noise. 
              Previous research has shown that one way of enhancing signal to noise
              sensitivity is to sum the outputs of many different motion detectors in
              different locations of the visual field.  An important difficulty with this
              approach, however, is how to decide which local motion detectors should be
              summated.  Whereas previous studies have examined the case of simple
              translatory motion where all elements in a pattern move at the same velocity,
              our research will consider more complicated motions in which it is possible for
              patterns to rotate or expand over time.  We will also investigate the detection
              of camouflaged objects whose motions are confined to a limited region of the
              visual field.  A series of psychophysical experiments will be performed to
              isolate the basic mechanisms by which the human visual system is able to cope
              with these situations.  The basic paradigm of these studies is to present a
              pattern of moving dots with a superimposed pattern of scintillating dots.
              Observers are required to judge some basic aspect of the moving pattern, such
              as its shape or its direction of movement.  The amount of scintillating noise
              is manipulated to determine the limits of human performance for each attribute
              to be judged.  Based on the results of these experiments we will attempt to
              develop a computational model that can simulate the performance of human
              observers on a wide variety of different tasks.  



