Title       : Molecular Control of Ovule Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a0079434

Award Number: 0079434
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Gasser csgasser@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0079434
Gasser

As the precursors to seeds, ovules play essential roles in
              sexual plant reproduction and crop productivity. Because ovule development
              includes processes which typify development in all multicellular organisms, it
              can serve as a model for studying fundamental mechanisms regulating the
              processes of morphogenesis and tissue differentiation. Genes regulating
              critical steps in ovule development have been identified through studies on
              mutations affecting this process in Arabidopsis thaliana. Three mutants
              affecting growth of ovules, or specific substructures, will be used to
              elucidate the regulation of ovule development. HUELLENLOS (HLL) is essential
              for maintenance of ovule growth, and SHORT INTEGUMENTS 2 (SIN2) and INNER NO
              OUTER (INO) are essential for complete formation of the integuments (which go
              on to form the seed coat). INO encodes a putative transcription factor and
              exhibits a tightly regulated pattern of expression in ovules. The mechanism of
              INO regulation will be examined by dissecting the regulatory elements in the
              promoter region, and by testing such elements for interactions with putative
              regulators of this gene. HLL encodes a protein with significant similarity to
              the L14 subunits of bacterial ribosomes. mRNA and protein localizations will be
              used to determine the expression pattern and subcellular location of the
              protein product of this gene.  These studies will test the hypotheses that HLL
              has an essential cellular role, or that it is a novel regulator of ovule
              development. Following isolation, the SIN2 gene will be subject to similar
              analysis. DNA microarrays will be tested with probes deriving from mutant
              tissues to assess the utility of this method in evaluation of overall patterns
              of gene expression in ovules and integuments. Completion of the proposed
              research will significantly increase our understanding of genetic and molecular
              control of plant reproductive development and of morphogenesis and histogenesis
              in general.


