Title       : Translation Initiation Factor IF3 Structure and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0079305

Award Number: 0079305
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267520             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Simons bobs@microbio.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
MCB-0079305
Simons

SIMONS
The ribosome is a complex molecular
              machine that faithfully translates information stored in the genetic code, into
              enzymes and other proteins.  Understanding ribosome function has been and
              remains one of the most important challenges in molecular biology.  The
              long-term goal of this project is to understand how the ribosome ensures
              translational accuracy (proper decoding) at its P-site.  The P-site decodes
              information during translation initiation, and work spanning more that two
              decades has shown that translation initiation factor three (IF3) plays a
              crucial role in this event, almost certainly by modulating activities that are
              intrinsic to the ribosome itself.  During the past 5 years, important new
              insights have emerged, including the three-dimensional structure of IF3 and the
              ribosome, visualization of the IF3/ribosome complex, and new insights into IF3
              structure and function.  IF3 is thought to operate at or close to the level of
              P-site function, most likely altering ribosome conformation and thereby the
              P-site.  This modulation of P-site activity probably manifests itself in
              several seemingly unrelated IF3 effects.  These developments hold great promise
              for an eventual understanding of P-site function and its modulation by IF3. 
              However, before those important goals can be reasonably tackled, several basic
              and key aspects of IF3 structure and function must first be resolved.  This
              project involves an integrated genetic and biochemical attack on several major
              unanswered questions at this level.  The effects of key IF3 mutations will be
              examined with a powerful battery of assays designed to monitor IF3 function at
              several distinct levels of ribosome function.  These efforts are instrumental
              in testing current models for IF3 modulation of ribosome function.  IF3
              determinants required for interaction with the ribosome will also be explored,
              and the IF3 binding determinants within the ribosome itself will be identified,
              in strategies based on existing experimental evidence.  These studies are
              essential for an eventual understanding of how IF3 structure and function are
              integrated with that of the ribosome.  In particular, this work will form a
              strong underpinning for studies that will eventually tackle IF3 function
              directly at the P-site.

