Title       : Collaborative Research: The MuLan Project-Development of instrumentation for a
               new high-precision determination of the Fermi coupling constant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0079735

Award Number: 0079735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Brown                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Hertzog hertzog@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul T. Debevec  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0079735
Hertzog
	The MuLan Project will develop the instrumentation  needed to
              measure the lifetime of the positive muon to  unprecedented precision, namely,
              a factor of 20 better than the  current world average.  The muon lifetime fixes
              the value of the Fermi constant, which governs the strength of all
              weak-interaction processes, just as the fine structure constant governs  the
              strength of all
electromagnetic-interaction processes.   The Fermi constant is
              one of the fundamental parameters of the Standard Model of particle
physics. 
              A low-energy, continuous-wave muon beam at the Paul  Scherrer Institute (PSI)
              in Switzerland will be modified by a new 
beam chopper system in order to
              create intense, short bursts  of muons, which will stop in thin targets.  A
              positive muon stopped in
appropriate materials decays as if it were in vacuum.
               Such targets will be surrounded by a nearly hermetic set of 180
              
fast-scintillator timing detectors, each coupled to a state-of-the-art 
              waveform digitizer, and all readout by a high-speed data 
acquisition system. 
              Online analysis of the nearly 100 terabytes of data will take place with a
              small array of fast microprocessors.  
	A second use of the instrumentation is
              in conjunction with an ongoing effort at PSI to measure the negative muon
              lifetime in
hydrogen gas.  The negative muon can decay exactly in the same
              manner as the positive muon, or in hydrogen it can interact with a
proton by
              the weak-interaction process known as  "capture."  The capture rate is
              predicted very accurately by theory; however,
current experiments, which have
              various interpretation problems, are in disagreement with theory by a very
              significant amount.  If
this disagreement is confirmed, this difference raises
              the exciting possibility of pointing to new and unaccounted  for physics. 
              By
measuring the difference between the positive and negative muon lifetimes,
              we will determine the muon capture rate reliably and at a
precision more than
              four times better  than current measurements.  The MuLan timing detectors,
              beamline and custom electronics are
expected to play a major role in this
              effort. 


