Title       : Acquisition of Storm Phosphorimager for Study of Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0079465

Award Number: 0079465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66045              (Estimated)
Investigator: W T. Lee Theodore.Lee@fredonia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew A. Fountain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Fredonia
	      Central Avenue
	      Fredonia, NY  14063    716/673-3111

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A Molecular Dynamics Storm PhosphorImager system will be used for the study of
              molecular chaperone gene expression and regulation in prokaryotic systems. The
              Molecular Dynamics Storm system is approximately ten times more sensitive than
              X-ray film and has 2.5 times the dynamic range.  These properties and the data
              analysis software provided will allow for easy, fast, and accurate quantitation
              of data.  This makes the Storm system an essential tool for looking at low
              levels of expression and accurate quantitation of labeled oligonucleotides for
              determining the dissociation constants for protein-DNA binding.  The Storm
              system is amenable to the detection of radioactive isotopes and to
              chemifluorescence thus providing a non-radioactive option for students doing
              research while reducing radioactive isotope storage and disposal problems.
              

The research will focus on characterizing the regulation of gene expression
              of the groESL and dnaKJ operons in Clostridium perfringens and Rhodobacter
              sphaeroides.  The groESL and dnaKJ operons encode molecular chaperones that are
              conserved in prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms and play a critical role in
              the folding of proteins in cells.  In C. perfringens, a food-borne pathogen,
              the research will combine the study of gene expression with the analysis of
              regulatory sequences and structural investigations of the protein-DNA complexes
              involved in regulation.  By understanding the regulatory mechanisms of these
              systems it may be possible to design therapeutic compounds that inhibit the
              expression of these critical molecular chaperone proteins.  The regulation of
              the molecular chaperone genes in R. sphaeroides is also of interest due to the
              different regulatory sequences present in the groESL and dnaKJ operons.  This
              differential expression is unusual and may serve an important comparison model
              to the regulatory mechanisms of other bacteria.  The combination of genetic and
              biochemical approaches to understand the regulatory mechanism of gene
              expression will complement each other and promote scientific research in both
              departments. 

SUNY Fredonia is a primarily undergraduate institution with
              small master programs in Biology and Chemistry.  The Chemistry and Biology
              Departments jointly administer a new Biochemistry program, started in 1999, for
              which Drs. Fountain and Lee are the primary professors.  The Biology department
              also administers a Recombinant Gene Technology major. These programs serve a
              number of students that are interested in pursuing research in biochemistry and
              molecular biology.  Undergraduate students are encouraged to participate in
              independent research and will collaborate on projects utilizing the Storm
              system.  The departments of Biology and Chemistry emphasize the integration of
              teaching and research in the two programs.  The Storm system will be utilized
              in upper divisional Biochemistry and Recombinant Gene Technology laboratories
              to provide training for students.  This will provide unique opportunities for
              undergraduate students to utilize state of the art equipment.  The Storm
              PhosphorImager will allow for a study of the roles of molecular chaperones and
              the regulation of their expression in C. perfringens and R. sphaeroides.  It
              will also provide undergraduate student researchers the opportunities to
              participate in molecular and biochemical research projects using state of the
              art equipment. 
  
  
  
  


