Title       : Agency Problems and Commitment in Delegation Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a0079786

Award Number: 0079786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Feinberg                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hongbin Cai Cai@econ.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In many economic situations delegates are hired to play games on behalf of their
              principals.  The principal-agent literature has had much success in analyzing
              how optimal contracts should respond to various types of agency problems
              (adverse selection, moral hazard, and combinations of both) in the delegation
              relationship.  However, the agent in most of this literature does not play a
              game with other parties, rather, his actions alone determine the principal's
              payoff subject to perhaps exogenous randomization by nature.  The proposed
              research is a study of  how principals should design the delegation contract in
              order to provide proper incentives for their delegates AND gain strategic
              advantage against the other parties in several classes of delegation games. 
              The findings will likely provide important ramifications to both the
              principal-agent literature and the delegation literature.  The research may
              also throw light on interesting features of real life contracts such as
              holdbacks in car dealer contracts, and allow derivation of certain implications
              that could lead to empirical tests of the commitment effect.

The proposed
              research, largely  joint work with Ph.D. student Walter Cont, is to study a
              delegate bargaining game in which the seller of an indivisible good hires a
              delegate (an intermediary) to sell the good to a buyer.  We show that the
              seller's strategic manipulation of the delegation contract may cause bargaining
              failures between the delegate and the buyer when the seller sets a minimum
              price exceeding some buyers' valuations.   Furthermore, the interaction between
              commitment (through minimum price) and incentives depends on the nature of the
              agency problem.  We would like to extend the basic model in several interesting
              directions and apply the model to car dealership contracts.


