Title       : The movement of elements through ecosystems: Major research instrumentation for
               the integration of research and education.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a0079566

Award Number: 0079566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $625891             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt S. Pregitzer kspregit@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah A. Green  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Burton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Flaspohler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W.Charles Kerfoot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A cadre of ecologists, biologists and chemists at Michigan Technological
              University are actively investigating terrestrial and aquatic ecosystem
              processes.  These faculty will use several new research instruments to advance
              their fundamental studies of element transfers through ecosystems, and to
              integrate their research with the basic science education mission of MTU. Two
              mass spectrometers will be used to help trace isotopes of C, N and trace metals
              within and across atmosphere-land-water interfaces, and through natural
              food-webs.  A portable Eddy-Covariance System will allow the researchers to
              conduct measurements of C, H2O and energy exchange between the atmosphere and
              terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, greatly facilitating the extrapolation of
              experimental global change work to natural ecosystems.

Existing
              multidisciplinary research projects at MTU have the unifying theme of tracing
              the flow of elements and energy through atmosphere, land, and water interfaces,
              with the goal of a more fundamental understanding of the processes that govern
              element transfers, ecosystem stoichiometry, and biological community
              composition and diversity. Elucidation of chemical transformation pathways in
              nature has advanced tremendously in the past decade with the advent of
              instrumentation capable of rapidly measuring elemental and isotopic composition
              of tissues, water, soils and sediments.  The new instrumentation will enhance
              ongoing component projects and allow the separate working groups to link
              together their measurements of element fluxes and studies of processes that
              influence stoichiometry within ecosystem food webs. The instruments will also
              be utilized in classroom activities at MTU, giving graduate and undergraduate
              students an opportunity to use the latest state-of-the-art tools for studying
              ecosystem processes.
To better understand mechanisms that regulate ecosystem
              processes, one must be able to follow compounds from specific sources through
              and between atmosphere-land-water interfaces.  

The new instruments will
              allow the MTU research team to follow compounds and elements at all stages from
              their source to their final destination.  The researchers will be able to
              elucidate the mechanisms involved in the transformation and transport of
              compounds within and across ecosystems.  Such knowledge is crucial in order to
              make the step from describing what has already happened to predicting what will
              happen in a future, changing environment. 


