Title       : Acquisition of a 200kV Field Emission Gun Transmission Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0079578

Award Number: 0079578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1120000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mercouri G. Kanatzidis kanatzid@cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Bass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin A. Crimp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Velbel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Pinnavaia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0079578
Kanatzidis

Many of the research programs at the Michigan State
              University are in need of modern Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging
              and analytical capabilities. This grant provides equipment, which will function
              in support of research as well as the university's teaching and undergraduate
              collaborative research mission. This grant provides for a JEOL 2010F field
              emission transmission electron microscope or equivalent.  The microscope along
              with several requested accessories would provide TEM resolution of 0.19 nm,
              STEM resolution of 0.17 nm, electron holography, magnetic domain imaging, high
              angle annular darkfield imaging, convergent beam electron diffraction, energy
              dispersive x-ray spectroscopy, parallel electron energy loss spectroscopy, and
              energy filtered imaging.  None of these techniques are presently available to
              University researchers.  Numerous new scientific investigations would be
              enabled with the new equipment. The instrument will support research in a
              variety of material systems including semiconductors, ceramics, metals,
              polymers, new materials, biomaterials and mesoporous materials.  The instrument
              will be housed at the Center for Advanced Microscopy, one of the University
              Core Facilities, that serves electron microscopy users from 49 different
              University departments.  One staff academic position will be entirely devoted
              to the TEM to ensure adequate instrument supervision, user supervision,
              instruction, and technique development. Instruction on the TEM will be
              integrated into several existing electron microscopy courses that serve a broad
              range of users. 
%%% 
Michigan State University is host to many scientific
              grants funded by NSF.  Many of these programs are in need of a modern
              transmission electron microscope.  These instruments are used to look at
              structure and interactions within matter.  They are useful in many diverse
              fields such as chemistry, geology, materials science, physics, biology, and
              medicine.  However, the present instruments at the University are in excess of
              15 years old and do not have up-to-date capabilities.  Many new imaging methods
              have been discovered in recent years that enable scientists to see structures
              never seen before and to determine information about matter never available
              before.   Many of the scientists and students at the University could use this
              new equipment to make new discoveries.   These discoveries have practical
              applications in electronics, sensor materials, catalysis, absorbent materials,
              materials for environmental clean-up, petroleum refining and understanding of
              global ecological changes.  It will also significantly impact the discovery of
              new materials. Michigan State University has been given the funds to purchase a
              modern transmission electron microscope and to house it in the Center for
              Advanced Microscopy.  This University Center will have one scientist in charge
              of this new microscope.  That person will teach other scientists and students
              how to use it effectively in their research programs. Acquisition of this
              equipment will allow safe, effective training and research in electron
              microscopy of materials. The impact to the future education of students at MSU
              is expected to last for the next 15-20 years. Students from MSU will receive
              experience in using state-of-the-art instrumentation, whether they are bound
              for academics or a career in the private sector.



