Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for UV Raman Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0079496

Award Number: 0079496
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ram S. Katiyar rkatiyar@upracd.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0079496
Katiyar

This grant supports the acquisition of a UV microRaman
              spectrometer at the University of Puerto Rico, San Juan.  The instrument
              provides means for both fundamental and applied studies in materials where the
              conventional Raman signal is too weak.  Then, it becomes necessary to use
              specialized techniques such as near resonance excitation and the possibility of
              interference enhancement, available in the current instrument along with higher
              scattering efficiency, higher sensitivity, selectivity and spatial resolution. 
              The technique will be used to study ferroelectrics, solid state ionics and
              other wide bandgap materials.  Such a non-destructive technique is also useful
              for the studies of biological systems.  Thus there will be a direct impact on
              the studies of biological molecules at the Medical Campus of UPR.  There will
              be further strengthening of research collaboration with Government laboratories
              and other universities facilitated by the exchange of data in the range of
              submicron to nanometer lengthscales in various materials.

This grant
              supports the acquisition by the University of Puerto Rico, a specialized
              instrument, ultra-violet Raman spectrometer, used to study materials over
              varying resolutions and with tremendous sensitivity.  The materials will be
              examined using ultraviolet lasers and will be studied for a broad range of
              their properties.  The technique can and will also be used to study biological
              materials.


