Title       : Acquisition of Ultra High Precision Low Force Material Test System for
               Micromechanical Measurement of Tissue and Material Constitutive Behavior at
               Small Length Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0079707

Award Number: 0079707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Adams Dadams@nso.uchc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gloria A. Gronowicz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Conn Health Center
	      263 Farmington Ave.
	      Farmington, CT  060302806    860/679-3173

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   High precision measurement of small forces and displacements is
              increasingly important in mechanical testing of tissues and materials. 
              Microelectronic devices have created a need to understand material constitutive
              behavior at nanometer length scales.  Complementary evaluation of mechanical
              integrity in connective tissue structural biology research has been limited due
              to size constraints of tissue available.  Advances in instrumentation now
              provide the means to make direct measurements of mechanical integrity at very
              small length scales.  This award will support the development of novel
              mechanical test methods to measure the mechanical properties of small pieces of
              tissue generated in cell culture, bone and soft connective tissues from mice,
              cartilage slices from larger mammals, miniature biomedical constructs, and tiny
              volumes of material exhibiting size-scale dependence.  Relationships between
              the size or length scale of tissue and material tested and mechanical
              properties will be established, and these experiments will provide data to test
              general theories.  The methods developed for specific tissues or materials with
              specific specimen size constraints will combine to enhance our ability to
              measure mechanical properties accurately and reliably on small length scales,
              and will advance our understanding of the mechanical property dependence on
              these length scales.
     New instrumentation designed for high precision,
              ultra-low force measurement will be used to meet these goals.  Axial force and
              torsion are applied to specimens that can be oriented either vertically or
              horizontally.  The high resolution of the system in position accuracy for both
              axial and rotary motion is suitable for measuring mechanical properties of very
              small volumes of connective tissue, tissue structures, constructs, and
              materials.  Complete computerized control of the instrumentation will allow any
              desired test sequence to be performed with a simplified user interface suitable
              for training users with limited backgrounds in laboratory instrumentation.
   
               The ability to make measurements at these length scales on small specimens
              will complement connective tissue and materials research within several
              research programs at the University of Connecticut and neighboring
              institutions.  Students and teachers in engineering and biological sciences
              from the University of Hartford, Trinity College, and the Bioengineering
              Alliance of Connecticut will participate in research and educational programs
              aligned with the use of this instrumentation and collateral laboratory
              equipment to illustrate the fundamental properties of tissues and materials. 
              These students and teachers will help in further developing our participation
              with The Learning Corridor, a new Hartford campus and program with a focus on
              science, math, and engineering that spans pre-kindergarten, high school, and
              adult education.


