Title       : Improving Forecasts During Heavy Precipitation Events: Model Biases and
               Numerical Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0079425

Award Number: 0079425
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220905             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Lackmann gary@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Forecasting of heavy precipitation events remains one of the most difficult
              challenges in numerical weather prediction.  The ability of numerical models to
              represent precipitation is complicated by the necessity to parameterize some
              precipitation while some is explicitly resolved.  Furthermore, errors in
              precipitation forecasts have the potential to degrade model forecasts through
              latent heat release and other diabatic processes, especially during heavy
              precipitation.  It is important to improve understanding of how errors in model
              precipitation forecasts might influence synoptic-scale forecasts.  

The
              problem of quantitative precipitation forecasting (QPF), in addition to
              significant socioeconomic relevance, holds important implications for the
              problem of atmospheric predictability.  Numerical model QPF errors can promote
              forecast degradation via the influence of diabatic processes such as latent
              heat release on atmospheric dynamics and thermodynamics.  A previous study by
              the Principal Investigator has documented errors in numerical forecasts during
              heavy precipitation, and demonstrated that these errors are consistent with
              model misrepresentation of latent heat release in the vicinity of a convective,
              cold-frontal rain band.  

The Principal Investigator proposes to accomplish
              the following specific objectives:

1) Development of a climatology of
              operational model forecast biases for specific synoptic scenarios in which
              model representation of convection may limit forecast accuracy;
2)
              Documentation of the physical basis for systematic biases in operational model
              behavior that relate to the representation of heavy precipitation;
3)
              Examination of the degree to which model representation of lower-tropospheric,
              diabatically generated potential vorticity (PV) anomalies are sensitive to
              model representation of precipitation processes (both grid-scale and
              sub-grid-scale);
4) Determination of which convective parameterization schemes
              yield the most realistic representation of diabatic PV modifications in both
              the lower and upper troposphere; 
5) Exploration of modifications to model
              representations of precipitation that would improve forecasts of the dynamical
              feedbacks associated with latent heat release.

Successful completion of this
              research could lead to better utilization of current numerical models by
              forecasters as well as lead to quantitative improvements in numerical models
              precipitation forecasts.

