Title       : Information Demand and Dynamic Contests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0079145

Award Number: 0079145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171373             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lones Smith lones@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project in economic theory consists of two parts: information demand and
              dynamic contests.  The first is reasonably well developed while the second is
              in its early stages.  Also included is a discussion of an ongoing but much
              better focused project on bargaining theory, appealing to an established
              psychological fact that individuals' behavior is largely governed by their
              aspirations.

The first two subprojects are part of a greater agenda to
              understand the most basic questions about the nature of information demand,
              namely, does the so-called Law of Demand hold? Well-known counterexamples in
              static environments suggest not.  In fact, we find two separate contexts where
              it does hold, one extremely relevant in applied contexts.  In the most advanced
              sub-project, we find that if information is very cheap, and thus demand very
              large, then the law of demand is eventually true.  Additionally, in this
              context, we show that the fundamental insight provided by Blackwell's Theorem
              largely does not matter.  In fact, when one is permitted to acquire a large
              enough number of independently and identically distributed copies of any given
              signal, then a complete ordering over experiments/signals arises.  That two
              signals are not sufficient for each other in a statistical sense is no longer
              relevant.  What matters is an asymptotic measure of sufficiency.  We extend
              this so far as to deduce a very simple logarithmic formula for the demand for
              information, when prices are low enough.

This part of the work should make
              methodological and substantive contributions to Bayesian decision theory and
              game theory.  For Bayesian decision theory, the centrality of the information
              demand question is manifest.  But the methods introduced from asymptotic theory
              should prove extremely tractable and basic tools for theorists considering
              information in the future. Economists' traditional narrow focus on an overly
              stylized of model of one-shot information purchase (today I buy my signal,
              tomorrow I act) likely owes its roots to Blackwell's Theorem.  In some sense,
              the law of large demand paper starts from a different yet contemporaneous
              foundation (work by Chernoff).

The third project is less developed, being
              still at an early stage.  It proposes a new mechanism design question, namely
              what is the optimal design of a dynamic contest, as a function of the payoff'
              and signaling structure?  The wide range of cited instances of such contests,
              from sports to employment arrangements to television game shows, speaks to the
              importance of understanding this micro market structure.  We have formulated
              this in continuous time, and have proposed some basic features of the nature of
              the contest design.  This work is intended as a first effort on an unconsidered
              problem that is incredibly generic.  The substantive value of such work is
              hopefully clear.  Many of the technical hurdles are as yet unknown.

