Title       : The Impact of Financial System Design: International Patterns in Historical
               Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0079861

Award Number: 0079861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline M. Fohlin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5936,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The fundamental goal of this project is to help determine whether certain
              corporate financing systems perform more efficiently or effectively than
              others.  Modern views of the benefits of universal, relationship banking arise
              largely from observation of the successful industrialization and post-World War
              II reconstruction of Germany.  The German success story, and the supposed role
              of the banking system in that success, has made a deep impression on many
              American economists, economic historians, and policymakers.  Recent work by the
              investigator and others, however, casts doubt on the traditional view of the
              universal banks as the linchpin of German industrialization.  This project
              builds on this foundation with new initiatives for data collection and
              empirical analysis.  NSF funding supports data collection, cleaning and
              translation as well as international travel for collaborative work between the
              investigator and German scholars.
The investigator finalizes a database of
              financial information for 400 German banks and firms between 1895 and 1912 that
              was largely collected under a previous NSF grant.  The project deepens the
              existing firm-level information by comparing published financial data to firm
              records, creating new measures of corporate governance and bank relationships,
              gathering stock market data, compiling in-depth case studies on a subset of the
              database firms, and gathering archival evidence on non-database firms.  These
              new data augment the published financial data and reveal more detailed pictures
              of individual firms. 
The investigator uses the databases to investigate the
              economic impact of universal and relationship banking.  Relationships are
              investigated by comparing bank-affiliated and independent firms within
              Germany-studying rates of return, investment, liquidity constraints, capital
              structure, new securities issues, managerial turnover, and concentration and
              collusion in industry.  Universality is addressed by comparing banking sector
              efficiency, firm financing costs, and long-term patterns of growth and
              investment among three economies with varying degrees of universality: Germany,
              Great Britain, and the United States.  

The project includes funding for
              undergraduate researchers.  Participating in this project offers undergraduates
              a valuable opportunity to learn about the many topics covered-corporate
              finance, banking, corporate governance, industrial organization, economic
              growth, and German history-as well as to gain more general knowledge of the
              methods of scholarly research.  The investigator also plans to collaborate with
              Thomas Gehrig, Professor of Economics at the University of Freiburg, Germany,
              on several parts of the project.  He is concurrently applying for funding from
              the German government in order to permit much more extensive data collection
              and analysis.

