Title       : MRI: Development of a Virtual and Augmented Reality System for Research in
               Intelligent Design and Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2001  
File        : a0079404

Award Number: 0079404
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431401             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ming C. Leu mleu@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Liou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              K Krishnamurthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sanjeev Agarwal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Owen Robert Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this Major Research Instrumentation project is to develop a virtual
              and  augmented reality (VAR) system for research in intelligent and
              collaborative design and manufacturing. The VAR system will be capable of
              providing 3-D visualization of co-existing virtual and real objects. Our
              approach of developing the VAR system is to integrate commercial virtual
              reality systems with image acquisition hardware and software that has been used
              in the past for feature recognition, object identification, and process
              inspection. Various components including the display device, haptic device,
              motion tracker, stereo cameras, etc. will be integrated into a powerful VAR
              system capable of immersing the user in 3-D virtual and augmented environments.
              The system development will address the following issues: 1) calibration,
              characterization, control, and integration of system components, 2) stereo
              video acquisition and depth map calculation, 3) precision registration between
              the virtual and real worlds, and 4) development of fast collision detection and
              response algorithms. The developed VAR system will be used to perform research
              on topics including freeform design model creation, collaborative modular
              fixture design, assembly/disassembly analysis and planning, human cognition and
              collaboration in a VAR environment, web-based collaborative infrastructure
              support for VAR applications, and distributed collaborative product design and
              development.

This project is expected to have significant impact on
              research, education, research training, and infrastructure building at the
              proposal institution. Also, it has high potential of revolutionizing the future
              practice of design and manufacturing, including networked collaboration, for a
              wide range of products.

