Title       : Development of Inelastic X-Ray Scattering Instrumentation for High Pressure
               Research at Advanced Photon Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0079513

Award Number: 0079513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ho-kwang Mao mao@gl.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chi-Chang Kao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell J. Hemley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0079513
Mao
With its myriad recent advances, high-pressure research is
              emerging as a new dimension in physical science. Inelastic x-ray scattering
              (IXS) can provide high-pressure research with an arsenal of analytical
              capabilities for key measurements that were previously unattainable, and high
              pressure research can provide IXS with numerous applications where the
              technique has unique advantages over other methods. The integration requires a
              concerted effort in optimizing IXS instrumentation specifically for
              high-pressure experimentation at the third-generation synchrotron source. A
              facility will be developed for high-pressure investigations using non-resonant
              IXS, resonant IXS, nuclear resonant IXS, and x-ray emission spectroscopies with
              energy resolutions of 100 meV to 1 eV for the study of electronic transitions,
              and 1 to 10 meV for phonon studies. The impact of the facility will be truly
              multidisciplinary. By pressure-tuning materials over a wide range, it will be
              possible to investigate fundamental physics of the electron gas, strongly
              correlated electron systems, high-energy electronic excitations, and phonons in
              energy and momentum space.  The results will impact materials applications as
              well as provide basic information for the deep interiors of the Earth and other
              planets.  

With its myriad recent advances, high-pressure research is
              emerging as a new dimension in physical science.  The award will allow
              scientists to harness the enormous x-ray power of the newly established
              Advanced Photon Source at Argonne, IL for probing materials at high pressures. 
               Inelastic x-ray scattering (IXS) instrumentation will be developed to provide
              high-pressure research with an arsenal of key analytical capabilities that were
              previously unattainable, and will help the U. S. to regain leadership at this
              frontier.  Impact of the facility will be truly multidisciplinary.  Extreme
              pressures impart drastic changes to all materials, some of which may have
              important technological applications, and some may reveal novel scientific
              principles.  For instance, the highest temperature superconductor and the
              strongest superhard material are both synthesized at high pressures.  The
              high-pressure IXS instrument  will enable to "see" the structure of electrons
              and vibration of atoms and understand the fundamental physics under the extreme
              conditions.  Such investigations will also provide basic information for the
              deep interiors of the Earth and astronomical bodies in which the constituent
              materials are under tremendous compressions.  



