Title       : Dietary Specialization in Mammals: Constraints and Costs of Detoxification of
               Plant Secondary Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0079865

Award Number: 0079865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Denise Dearing dearing@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Mammals that consume plants run the risk of being poisoned by naturally
              occurring toxins produced by plants.  Little experimental work exists on the
              mechanisms mammals employ to deal with plant toxins, or how specialized species
              such as the koala are capable of consuming plants that are toxic to other
              species.  The proposed research interfaces with ecology, chemistry, physiology
              and pharmacology to address mechanisms by which herbivores detoxify plant
              toxins as well as the costs of detoxification.   The PI will investigate how
              woodrat herbivores that specialize on one species of toxic plant differ in
              detoxification physiology from generalist woodrats that consume a variety of
              plant species.  Woodrats are a model system for this problem because the
              diversity of specialists and generalists woodrats is unparalleled by any other
              genus of mammalian herbivores.  Thus far, the PI has found that specialist
              herbivores are capable of tolerating higher doses of toxins than generalists. 
              Contrary to conventional wisdom, specialists do not appear to have unique
              detoxification pathways compared to generalists but rather systems with a
              greater capacity.  Preliminary results suggest that specialists are able to
              deal with high toxin loads because they can eliminate toxins faster than
              generalists.  These studies will further investigate how specialists and
              generalists differ in detoxification abilities and will address issues on costs
              and constraints of dietary specialization.  For example, are specialists more
              efficient than generalists in processing toxins?   Do specialist herbivores
              trade-off the ability to detoxify a wide range of toxins in exchange for
              enhanced processing of a subset of toxins? 
	In this century, mammalian
              herbivores will confront profound detoxification challenges.  Novel toxins (eg
              dioxins, PCBs) are being added to the environment at unprecedented rates. 
              Moreover, in the next 50 years, levels of CO2 in the atmosphere are predicted
              to double due to extensive burning of fossil fuels.  Many species of plants
              grown under elevated levels of CO2 are substantially inferior in nutritional
              quality in that they are lower in protein and contain up to twice the toxin
              concentration as plants grown under current CO2 concentrations.  Will mammalian
              herbivores be aversely impacted by such a radical change in the nutritional
              quality of their food, particularly the increase in toxins? The results of this
              research on detoxification processes of wild herbivores will provide vital
              insights on how herbivores will be affected by this change in nutritional
              quality of food. 



