Title       : The Determinants and Consequences of Migration in Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a0079581

Award Number: 0079581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149591             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Lindstrom David_Lindstrom@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-007981
David Lindstrom

The research has two broad objectives. They are
              to (1) identify individual-level and contextual determinants of internal
              migration in Guatemala and  (2) measure the economic and social impact of
              migration on women in rural communities.  The project seeks to help us better
              understand the impact of rural and urban development on the size, composition,
              and direction of internal migration streams.  Also, it will provide insight in
              the role migration plays in raising rural household incomes and in the
              diffusion of urban culture.

To address the first objective, the research
              will analyze the effects of individual 
and place characteristics on the
              probability of recent internal migration, and on the choice of destination in
              Guatemala.   Employment opportunities, amenities, and population pressure will
              be measured to assess the relative attractiveness of alternative locations. 
              Period trends in lifetime internal migration will be examined for evidence of
              the effects of political violence on population redistribution.  Ethnicity is
              an important stratifying variable in Guatemalan society: social, cultural and
              economic differences between indigenous Mayan and the nonindigenous populations
              are well documented and pervasive.  The study will investigate alternative
              explanations of ethnic differences in migration patterns that make reference to
              culturally based consumption preferences and economic
              marginalization.

Secondly, the research will determine the impact of
              temporary migration and social ties to internal and U.S. migrants, on the size
              and composition of household consumption.  The investigators will also analyze
              the effects of individual-, household, and community-level measures of
              migration on experience on married women's levels of autonomy in decision
              making, an important dimension of modern, urban culture.

Data will be
              analyzed from the 1994 Guatemalan Census and the 1995 Guatemalan Survey of
              Family Health.  The 1994 census collected information for all household members
              on the number of years in current place of residence, place of prior residence,
              place of residence in 1990 and place of birth.  The Guatemalan Survey of Family
              Health interviewed 2,872 randomly selected women age 18 to 35 in 60 rural
              communities.  Nested-conditional logit and discrete-time logit models will be
              used to analyze recent and lifetime migration.

The study is unique in that
              it uses individual level census data to analyze internal migration in a
              developing country and in its incorporation of ethnicity as an explanatory
              factor in location decisions.  The project will fill a gap in the demographic
              literature on migration in Guatemala.  Also, it will advance our understanding
              of the role of migration in social and economic change in low-income
              countries.

