Title       : Acquisition of Real-time 3D and Confocal Microscopy for Bone Microstructure and
               Life History Studies of Human and Non-Human Primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0079700

Award Number: 0079700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99507              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy G. Bromage tbromage@shiva.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Clement  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen C. Cowin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl J. Terranova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick S. Szalay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4020

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bromage
0079700

The Analytical Microscopy and Imaging Center in Anthropology
              (AMICA), Hunter College, is a unique environment for the digital acquisition
              and processing of images of relevance to the anthropological sciences. Since it
              became operational in 1996 by virtue of an NSF Academic Research Infrastructure
              initiative, AMICA has remained true to research, the dissemination of
              knowledge, and educational opportunities at several levels. We propose now to
              implement microscopy technologies that advance a three-dimensional (3D) imaging
              and reconstruction capability in AMICA. We have three primary research
              objectives concerned with applications of real-time 3D and confocal microscopy
              to human and non-human primate bone microanatomy and life history. These
              research activities will take place in the context of an imaging sciences
              training program to include undergraduate and graduate students at all points
              in their academic careers. This will include a well established peer mentoring
              program in AMICA.

The first objective is to examine the relationship between
              the 3D disposition (i.e. distribution and orientation) of secondary (Haversian)
              remodeling events in the human mid-shaft femur. Our study sample consists of an
              autopsy collection of known age individuals from 1-95 years for which
              information on weight, height, and cause of death are preserved. Knowledge of
              the age-related variability in the 3D conformation of Haversian systems,
              inasmuch as this variability may be affected by bone growth processes and
              mechanical history, is expected to provide insights into human life history
              (e.g., an individual's age, health status, and mechanical loading
              history).

Second, we have the objective to the measure the 3D volumetric
              density of osteocyte lacunae in primate bone, as hypothesized to vary as a
              function of ontogenetic age and body size. A variety of primate taxa will be
              investigated, including some with known individual life history and
              representing various ages and a large range of body sizes. The primary
              significance of this work is that bone cell density may be found to vary in
              respect to the life histories characterizing these primate taxa and to be
              useful, in combination with other techniques, for the reconstruction of body
              size and/or age in extinct taxa.

Third, we aim both to compare the
              proportions of bone tissue types, that provide information about relative
              growth rate, as well as to quantify the widths of populations of contiguous
              bone lamellae in order to have some relatively objective criterion for the
              determination of bone growth rate variability and life history in Macaca and
              Ernthrocebus. Our sample derives from juvenile animals of known life history,
              some of whom have received vital labels necessary for the calculation of bone
              growth rate. This work is significant as a potential means of finessing high
              resolution information about growth rate variation in two Old World Monkey's
              specifically, and for appreciating relationships between aspects of bone
              microstructural organization and primate life history generally.

AMICA's
              conventional two-dimensional (2D) microscopy has been, and always will be, our
              first point of access for information about bone microstructure relating to
              bone tissue organization and growth. Despite this, the visualization, data
              capturing (i.e. image acquisition), and measurement of bone microstructural
              features in the third dimension using 2D microscopy is an intractable task for
              reasons having to do with the superimposition of both in focus as well as out
              of focus information derived from the full thickness of histological sections.
              This makes 3D interpretations and measurements difficult. We propose to acquire
              three microscopes to address these deficiencies and to meet our research
              objectives: the Edge 8400 and H160 Real-Time 3D microscopes, and the Technical
              Instrument K2-S BIO Confocal microscope. In addition to their visualization
              potential, images acquired from these microscopes will be reconstructed to
              provide 3D data sets of histological structures for accurate
              measurement.

The 8400 is dependent upon multiple oblique illuminating light
              sources to obtain very high (i.e. higher than conventional 2D compound light
              microscopy) resolution transmitted light 3D visualization. This microscope
              enables one to image with clarity in real-time, and at magnifications offered
              by a compound microscope, high resolution imagery of the 3D relationships
              existing between objects within histological thin sections, such as the
              arrangement of Haversian systems, networks of osteocyte lacunae, and bone
              lamellae.

The H160 emulates a fluorescence microscope but its operating
              principle relies on splitting of the reflected light image into left- and
              right-eye views which are interpreted in real-time, correctly, as a 3D image by
              the eyebrain complex. The distribution of fluorescing label as a result of the
              administration of vital label in bone growth research, is precisely visualized
              at optical planes distinct from all others within a histological thin section.
              This is essential for the unambiguous localization of label to specific bone
              lamellae in our growth rate variability research.

The K3 Confocal microscope
              is able to image very thin (e.g. 0.35 micron) optical "sections" deep to the
              surface of intact, bulk bone as well as in all such optical planes contained
              within typical histological thin sections. These very high resolution 2D images
              allow unambiguous interpretations of deep histological structures particularly
              once these have been understood in their third dimension.


