Title       : High Pressure Experimental Facility for Study of Dynamic Processes in Earth's
               Interior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0079827

Award Number: 0079827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $542500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc M. Hirschmann Marc.M.Hirschmann-1@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shun-ichiro Karato  (Principal Investigator former)
              David L. Kohlstedt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0079827
Karato

This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation
              (MRI) Program, provides partial support of the costs of acquiring high
              pressure, high temperature experimental equipment for studies of dynamic Earth
              processes and materials properties at the University of Minnesota.. The
              equipment to be acquired includes (1) a multianvil apparatus, (2) a rotational
              Drickamer apparatus and (3) modifications to our existing Paterson apparatus
              including a pore fluid module, a torsion module and a physical properties
              module. The new facility will enable experiments over a greatly expanded array
              of temperatures, pressures, deformation conditions, and fluid pressures for
              research on dynamic processes in the upper mantle, lower mantle and core.  A
              central theme of the research will be determining materials properties related
              to the dynamics and evolution of the Earth.  Key research areas will include
              (1) rheological properties under deep Earth conditions, including the study of
              plastic deformation and deformation-fabrics.  These parameters are crucial for
              understanding the dynamics of the interior of the Earth, and experimental
              investigations require a multianvil apparatus for reproducing deep Earth
              conditions.  (2) Microstructural evolution during deformation, which is
              critical for the interpretation of seismic anisotropy, requires a deformation
              apparatus that can create a range of deformation geometries including torsion. 
              (3) Transport of fluids including melt, molten iron and water, which must be
              investigated to understand the chemical evolution of the Earth, require an
              apparatus with controlled pore pressure.  (4) Phase equilibria properties of
              mineral-silicate liquid equilibria are needed for the understanding partial
              melting in deep portions of magma source regions and for calibrating high
              pressure thermodynamic models of magmatic processes.   Another component of
              activities in the facility will be collaborations with Materials Scientists
              from within the university and from industry for investigations of synthesis
              and properties of technological materials.  Finally, graduate students and
              postdoctoral researchers will be trained using these state-of-the art
              experimental techniques and the new facilities will also allow expanded
              education and outreach activities including undergraduate research experiences,
              workshop courses on experimental methods, and the development of CD-ROM modules
              distributed nationally with undergraduate textbooks and modules for teaching
              petrology using thermodynamic models of magmatic processes refined from
              projected experiments.
***

