Title       : DFT and DFT/MM Investigations of the Fe(III) Center in Nitrile Hydratase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  2000    
File        : a0079008

Award Number: 0079008
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel G. Richards richards@qtp.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nigel Richards of the University of Florida is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program  and the Molecular Biophysics Program to
              perform a series of quantum mechanical studies on nitrile hydratase (NHase), a
              non-heme, Fe(III)-containing enzyme of commercial significance.  The project
              has three specific aims: (1) to evaluate the utility of density functional
              theoretical (DFT) methods in predicting the spin-state preferences of Fe(III)
              complexes that are models for the NHase metal center, (2) to model the
              UV-visible spectroscopy of Fe(III) complexes that are models of the NHase metal
              center using a combination of the INDO/S semiempirical  model and hybrid
              DFT/molecular mechanics (MM) force field methods, and (3) to investigate the
              utility of DFT/MM calculations in probing the electronic structure of the NHase
              Fe(III) active site and the enzyme mechanism.  The theoretical description of
              NHase is expected to impact research in several areas.  First, NHase has
              potential applications in the "green" synthesis of stereochemically complex
              compounds, particularly if substrate specificity can be re-engineered on the
              basis of structural and mechanistic information.  Next, insight into the role
              of the metal center in catalysis, and its interactions with the protein, are
              expected to stimulate the rational discovery of novel inorganic catalysts for
              the hydration of commercially important nitriles.  Finally, modeling the
              structure and reactivity of the non-heme Fe(III)-center in NHase will be a
              robust test of the utility of modern hybrid quantum mechanical molecular
              mechanics methods and density-functional theory techniques for modeling
              metalloenzymes.  

Recent advances in theoretical methods have opened the
              possibility of new computational studies into the structure, reactions, and
              catalysis of transition metal-containing enzymes, which often mediate critical
              steps in the biosynthesis of both primary and secondary metabolites.  In this
              project, modern computational approaches will be used to calculate the
              properties of these enzymes, which are expected to have future importance in
              pharmaceutical discovery using metabolic engineering, and industrial chemical
              synthesis using biotechnological methods.
