Title       : Acquisition of a 300KeV FEG Energy-Filtered Liquid Helium-Stage Electron
               Microscope for Three-Dimensional Analysis of Supramolecular and Cellular
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0079441

Award Number: 0079441
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1077035            (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Agard   (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Sedat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A state-of-the-art Philips Tecnai F30 Helium Electron Microscope with an
              attached Gatan Imaging Energy Filter (GIF) and 2Kx2K CCD detector will be used
              for high-resolution biological imaging at both the atomic and cellular levels.
              Increasingly, the frontiers of cell biology focus on elucidating the control of
              cellular shape and organization, the nature and function of cellular
              organelles, and the role of complex protein machines. Such project areas also
              define a new frontier for structural biology where the goals are to determine
              not the structures of individual molecules, but structures of supramolecular
              complexes as large as entire cellular organelles. Embodied in this goal is a
              switch from the largely reductionist approach of the past to one that is, at
              its heart, integrative. Electron microscopy (EM) is uniquely poised to meet
              this challenge. Single particle reconstruction methods (SPR) hold the promise
              of near atomic resolution structures of very large complexes while Intermediate
              Voltage EM Tomography (EMT) provides the unique ability to integrate this
              information into the context of the whole cell. 

The combination of
              Intermediate voltage (300kV) and Field Emission Gun provide optimal imaging for
              both thin and thick samples. Liquid helium cooling of the sample significantly
              reduces the effects of beam damage as well as the completely redesigned tilting
              stage provides unprecedented sample stability and freedom from drift. Addition
              of an imaging energy filter will revolutionize thick-section imaging and
              improve cryo imaging by removing inelastic electron scatter. The large area CCD
              will provide optimal on-line digital image recording. The result will be a
              facility unique in the US.  Goals are to reach 25 angstrom resolution on EMT
              reconstruction of samples > 200nm thick and to reach 4-7 angstrom resolution
              from SPR of particles larger than 500 KDa. The combination of the capabilities
              of this microscope with automated data collection methods being developed,
              should enable near atomic resolution reconstruction of single macromolecular
              complexes to become a reality.

This instrumentation will empower major
              advances in cell biology and polymer science. A core user group of scientists
              from UCSF, Stanford, Berkeley, as well as the more distant Harvard and U. North
              Carolina has substantial tomography expertise and focuses on fundamentally
              important problems in biology and polymer science. Projects range from the
              understanding mechanisms controlling actin and microtubule cytoskeletal
              organization, the structure of chromosomes and mitotic spindle, the structure
              of the transcriptional initiation complex, the organization of the
              neuromuscular junction, and the guiding principles of organization in complex
              plastics.

The equipment will be in the existing Electron Microscope
              Laboratory in the UCSF Biochemistry Department and in August 2002 will be moved
              to the new Mission Bay campus. This facility is available to the entire campus
              as well as to outside users. A center for electron microscope tomography will
              act as a magnet to attract and train top students and postdocs. The UCSF
              programs in Biophysics and Cell Biology provide excellent opportunities for
              training graduate students and actively seek to attract minority students to
              campus.

