Title       : Acquisition of an 800MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer for Structural
               Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0079604

Award Number: 0079604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1505000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter G. Gettins pgettins@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The research to be conducted on the new instrument funded by this award
              relates to solution structural studies on biomolecules using nuclear magnetic
              resonance (NMR) spectroscopy.  It will be directed at aspects of protein
              structure and dynamics in solution and will involve determination of structures
              of medium to large proteins, both alone and in complex with small peptides, DNA
              oligonucleotides or other proteins, and will include examination of dynamics of
              regions important for recognition of other proteins or DNA.  These studies are
              of a basic nature and will provide mechanistic understanding of processes of
              ligand recognition and mode of action.  Four principal research groups at the
              University of Illinois at Chicago and  an investigator in the chemistry
              department at nearby Loyola University of Chicago  will be the major users of
              the instrument.    Projects include (i) understanding the specificity of
              binding of the multiple protein ligands of the broad specificity clearance
              receptor LRP that is involved in metabolism of proteases and lipoproteins, (ii)
              understanding the molecular basis for recognition of regulatory DNA sequences
              by a transcription factor protein family, (iii) determination of the structure
              of domains from the erythrocyte skeletal protein spectrin that are responsible
              for the shape and flexibility of red blood cells (iv) examination of the
              mechanism of infection of cells by HIV.
     The award will be used to
              purchase a state-of-the art narrow bore 800MHz NMR spectrometer fully equipped
              for multinuclear, multidimensional, gradient enhanced solution structural
              studies on bio-macromolecules.  The instrument will be housed in
              custom-designed space.  This instrument will complement an existing 600MHz NMR
              spectrometer that is currently available on campus for determination of protein
              solution structures, but that lacks the capabilities of the higher field
              instrument for tackling the very challenging problems described.
     The
              800MHz NMR spectrometer and the studies to be carried out on it will be of
              great benefit both for improving the research infrastructure of the university
              and of the Chicago structural biology community and for enhancing the training
              opportunities for the area students.  State-of-the-art highest field NMR
              instrumentation, as represented by the awarded equipment, will be unique in
              metropolitan Chicago and will permit the continued development of already
              active NMR programs into the more challenging, but also most exciting and
              rewarding areas.  This will contribute significantly to the competitiveness of
              these research programs, their success and hence visibility, which in turn will
              help both in recruitment of additional structurally-oriented faculty, postdocs
              and students and in fostering collaborations between faculty within the
              university and Chicago.  All of the investigators currently train both graduate
              students and postdocs and so offer training opportunities in use of NMR to
              examine protein structure; an area that is already of the most fundamental
              importance to all biological sciences, and that will continue to grow in the
              post-genomic era.  The acquisition of an 800MHz spectrometer will enable such
              students to work and train on the most challenging projects and so acquire
              skills that will be needed for careers in the critical biotechnology,
              pharmaceutical, and molecular medicine industries.

