Title       : Acquisition of an Automated Digital Transmission Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0079002

Award Number: 0079002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $620000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Aindow m.aindow@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Suib  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas M. Pease  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nitin P. Padture  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond Joesten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0079002
Aindow

This grant supports the acquisition of an automated digital
              200-kilovolt transmission electron microscope (TEM) by the Institute of
              Materials Science at the University of Connecticut. The new TEM will be
              operated as a central user facility and will offer greatly enhanced
              capabilities as compared with the existing TEM at University of Connecticut
              including: ultra-high resolution objective lens (Cs<0.6mm) giving better than
              0.19 nanometer a point-to-point resolution; image filter for parallel electron
              energy-loss spectrometry (PEELS) and electron spectroscopic imaging (ESI);
              multi-scan charge-coupled device camera enabling images to be acquired
              digitally; and fully automated microprocessor control allowing remote
              operation.  Five key research programs have been identified which will make
              most use of the instrument. The research areas are: interfacial structure and
              defect-mediated interfacial processes in engineering alloys, kinetic studies of
              mineral reactions and textural evolution in silicate rocks, microstructural
              evolution in tough ceramics, PEELS/ESI as a probe of magnetic structure in
              metals and alloys, and synthesis and characterisation of inorganic helices. 
              The instrument will also revolutionise classroom teaching of TEM and related
              topics at the University of Connecticut by allowing faculty to combine
              conventional teaching materials with live output from the microscope via remote
              operation over the campus network.
%%%
This grant supports the acquisition of
              a state-of-the-art automated digital transmission electron microscope by the
              Institute of Materials Science at the University of Connecticut.  The new
              microscope will serve as a central user facility and will offer the following
              key features to researchers: imaging at atomic resolution allowing the crystal
              structure of materials to be studied directly, energy filtering which will
              reveal the distribution of elements in materials, and fully automated computer
              control allowing the instrument to be used across the internet.  The new
              instrument will have a dramatic impact on a wide variety of research programs
              at the University of Connecticut.  These include development of new materials
              such as aerospace alloys, tough ceramics, and porous semiconductors, studies of
              nanostructured magnetic materials and of reactions in minerals.  Remote control
              capability of the instrument will also have a revolutionary impact on teaching
              and outreach.  The use of live output from the microscope in the classroom will
              enable professors at University of Connecticut to teach this challenging topic
              more effectively.  Similarly, when operated over the internet in presentations
              to high school students and others, the instrument will act as a powerful
              visual aid which will assist in the ongoing efforts to promote diversity by
              attracting graduate students from under-represented groups.


