Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for Multidisciplinary NMR Upgrade for Polymer Science
               and Chemistry/Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0079450

Award Number: 0079450
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $638000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lon J. Mathias lon.mathias@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Y. Lochhead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Jarrett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stella D. Elakovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              NMR is the single most important analysis tool in the Departments of Polymer
              Science and Chemistry-Biochemistry at the University of Southern Mississippi
              (USM).  This award will allow upgrade of five existing spectrometers to current
              technology (new consoles, electronics and probes for 3 solution and 2 solid
              state instruments) plus allow purchase of a much-needed 500 MHz instrument for
              determining primary and secondary structures of natural polymers such as
              peptides and poly(amino acids) that cannot be done now at USM.  These new
              capabilities will greatly enhance hands-on educational efforts for on-campus
              and summer students (REU programs in both departments), and those that
              participate in summer activities and professional development workshops (for
              industry and for college and K-12 teachers).  Research projects address a broad
              range of fundamental questions on polymer diffusion and relaxation, morphology,
              enzyme-substrate interaction and structure-property behavior.  Most important
              is the capability these upgrades will provide for expanding previous efforts at
              USM in developing new methods for understanding solid state behavior of
              synthetic and natural materials using a wide-range of isotopic labels 
              including carbon, nitrogen and deuterium.
%%%%
Public
              Abstract

Understanding how atoms and molecules are joined together, and how
              they pack and move in solutions and in the solid state, helps solve problems in
              medicine, and in the aerospace and automotive areas.  One technique that is
              unique in providing this fundamental knowledge uses NMR or nuclear magnetic
              resonance spectroscopy.  This method, which is similar to Magnetic Resonance
              Imaging (MRI) used in looking inside the human body, actually looks at the
              atoms in plastics and enzymes to provide information on what those atoms are
              doing undergo strain or when they interact with other molecules like drugs. 
              This award for upgrading and extending the NMR capabilities at the University
              of Southern Mississippi makes available state-of-the-art instruments for doing
              this type of analysis.  Basic problems being addressed with this equipment
              include, for example, ways of improving the properties of polymers like nylon
              so it can be used in the automotive and aerospace industries to reduce weight
              and increase fuel efficiency.  In the biomedical area, studying the natural
              polymers that make up the human body and keep us healthy will help us
              understand the problems such aging and cancer.  This information also gives
              clues on how to develop new drugs and new materials that can repair or replace
              worn out and diseased organs.    Most important is how the award will help
              educate students in Mississippi in basic science that will help them in careers
              in education, technology and medicine that will benefit all of America.

