Title       : Collaborative Research: Quantiative Trait Loci (QTL) and Field Selection Studies
               of Parental Effects on Seasonal Dormancy in Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0079932

Award Number: 0079932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228404             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa A. Dorn Lisa Dorn@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Johanna M. Schmitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The seasonal timing of seed germination may have critical consequences for plant
              survival and reproduction.  In many plant species, seasonal seed dormancy and
              germination timing are strongly influenced by the environment experienced by
              the parental plant. This study will investigate the genetic control of seed
              dormancy and parental environmental effects on dormancy in the annual weed
              Arabidopsis thaliana, a species widely used for molecular genetic studies.
              Genetic mapping will identify chromosomal regions (quantitative trait loci or
              QTL) associated with variation in seasonal dormancy, parental environmental
              effects, and fitness under field conditions. Experimental manipulation of
              parental day length and the seasonal germination environment will investigate
              how parental environmental effects on seasonal dormancy influence survival and
              reproduction in the field.  

This study will be among the first to identify
              genes associated with seasonal dormancy, parental effects, and fitness under
              natural conditions.  It will provide an important ecological context for
              numerous molecular genetic studies of development in A. thaliana.  The results
              will elucidate the molecular basis and ecological context of a plant character
              crucial to survival and performance in variable environments.  Appropriate
              germination responses to environmental cues  may contribute to the persistence
              of  plant populations in a variable environment or their expansion into novel
              habitats. The results of this study will be therefore be relevant for
              understanding the evolutionary dynamics of agricultural weeds and invasive
              plant species, as well as the management of rare or endangered plant
              populations in changing environments.

