Title       : Quasi-Experiments in Health and Environmental Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0079081

Award Number: 0079081
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198412             (Estimated)
Investigator: William N. Evans evans@econ.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project uses exogenous variation generated by quasi experiments to isolate
              some important relationships in health economics.   The following two broad
              questions are examined:

What is the impact of income on mortality? A large
              body of literature that spans many disciplines has established that those with
              lower incomes have poorer health outcomes and higher mortality rates. However
              it has been difficult isolating income as the causal element in this
              relationship.  This project uses what is frequently termed the "benefits notch"
              in Social Security as an exogenous source of variation in the income for the
              elderly. Concerned with rapidly increasing benefit payments, in 1977, the
              Federal government changed the way benefits were calculated for new
              beneficiaries, substantially decreasing payments for recipients born after
              December 31, 1916. As a result of these changes, two people with identical life
              histories but different birth dates would receive very different retirement
              incomes.   The project plans to compare mortality rates for people born in the
              last quarter of 1916 and the first quarter of 1917. If income does impact
              mortality, there should be elevated death rates among those with lower monthly
              benefits. The notch experiment is an excellent opportunity to examine the
              income/mortality link for four reasons. First, the benefits notch reduced
              monthly payments by a substantial amount. Second, mortality rates in the
              impacted groups are relatively high, making it easier to detect an impact of
              income on mortality if one exists. Third, the incomes of the elderly are
              routinely changed by the Federal government and subsequently, there may be
              important policy implications if income causally impacts mortality. Fourth, for
              narrowly defined cohorts, the notch benefits appear to be close to randomly
              assigned in that workers born just before and after the notch had identical
              observed characteristics prior to the passage of the legislation establishing
              benefit differences.

What are the benefits of prenatal care? While it is
              easy to establish that women with more prenatal care visits have better birth
              outcomes, it is hard to attribute all of these differences to prenatal care.
              Women who would otherwise have an uneventful pregnancy (married, older, more
              educated mothers, for example) also have the highest prenatal care use. Because
              of the potential omitted variables bias, constructing a convincing test that
              can falsify or confirm the link between care and outcomes has proven to be
              difficult.  This research program uses field variation in prenatal care visits
              to isolate the benefits of prenatal care.  Black women and city residents rely
              heavily on public transportation to get to health care providers. Shocks in the
              access to transportation can therefore be used as a way to isolate the impact
              of reduced prenatal care.  A number of possible quasi experiments can be used
              in this context including public transportation strikes in Allegheny County
              (Pittsburgh) and Philadelphia. Preliminary evidence from Pittsburgh suggests
              that women pregnant at the time of the strike had substantially lower prenatal
              care visits than women pregnant at other times. If prenatal care improves birth
              outcomes, then the reduction in visits generated by strikes should produce
              worse birth outcomes.

