Title       : Collaborative Development of a Heavy-ion Trap Electron Diffractometer for
               Structure Determination of Nanoparticles, Biomolecular Assemblies, and Aerosol
               Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0079678

Award Number: 0079678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $485083             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Whetten robert.whetten@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Uzi Landman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rodney Weber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Loren D. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter A. De Heer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9184,9198,AMPP,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
              Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Programs, Robert L. Whetten of
              Georgia Institute of Technology and Joel H. Parks of the Rowland Institute for
              Science will develop a heavy-ion trap electron diffractometer, which will
              combine the advantages of mass spectrometry (sensitivity, efficiency,
              mass-selectivity) with those of electron diffraction (direct structural
              determination).  A prototype instrument has been developed by Parks and
              coworkers.  Whetten and Parks will significantly extend the capabilities of the
              existing prototype instrument by extending the range toward heavier ions (~100
              kDa), to small-angle scattering and to shorter collection-time; developing
              interfaces to existing sources of heavy ions.  As the instrument is developed,
              faculty members at Georgia Institute of Technology will exploit the instrument
              to carry out research on the following topics: a) iron-sulfur clusters; b)
              small proteins, solvation, salt-complexation, and folding; c) nucleic acids and
              bioconjugates; d) melting phase transition and alloy formation of metal
              clusters; e) atmospheric aerosol particulates; and f) synthetic macromolecules.
               

A severe limitation of current mass spectrometric-based instrumentation is
              that it does not include any general means of direct structure determination. 
              The heavy-ion trap electron diffractometer (HITED) will provide a
              state-of-the-art instrument that will enable researchers to address many
              outstanding problems  in materials sciences, atmospheric chemistry and
              biochemical sciences.


