Title       : Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope for Neural and Cell Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0079794

Award Number: 0079794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. David Heathcote rdh@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane L. Witten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Heather A. Owen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chaoyang Zeng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A confocal microscope will permit state-of-the-art light microscopy and analysis
              for neuroscientists, cell biologists and microbiologists at the University of
              Wisconsin-Milwaukee. The microscope will be housed in the high-resolution
              microscopy facility in the Department of Biological Sciences and will be
              available to all campus researchers.  It will provide a valuable resource to
              researchers that currently must travel to use a confocal microscope and provide
              excellent opportunities for other scientists to expand their research in
              directions that are not currently possible.

The confocal microscope will be
              readily adaptable to a wide variety of biological questions that are addressed
              in a multi-user facility.  It will provide the capability for high-resolution
              localization of fluorescent probes and other markers in fixed and living cells.
               It will also enable the simultaneous detection of multiple probes in cells and
              allow the visualization of structures stained with multiple labels.  Finally it
              will provide the capability for three-dimensional reconstruction of tissues
              containing multiple cellular and molecular markers. The Leica TCS SP confocal
              microscope is well suited for a multi-user facility.  It has a prism to allow
              users to select the emission bands for specific fluorophores and optimize the
              wavelengths being used to minimize bleed-through.  This permits the use of dye
              combinations that cannot be used with other systems and provides flexibility
              for use with future dyes and combinations that are not yet available. The
              three-laser system will provide for the diverse needs of many users.  The
              design of the instrument provides shift-free illumination through a multi-laser
              merge module that permits the simultaneous detection of three different
              fluorophores.  In addition, the scanhead is designed to be alignment-free.
              These characteristics make it extremely valuable for a multi-user facility in
              which many different applications will be performed on a single
              instrument.

The 13 laboratories that will use this instrument currently
              house over 50 postdoctoral and graduate students and 20 undergraduate
              researchers.  The facility will also serve as an educational tool in
              laboratory-based courses and provide unique research opportunities for women
              and underrepresented minorities at the undergraduate, graduate and faculty
              levels. The microscope will provide users and students with access to
              state-of-the-art equipment for the acquisition and processing of confocal
              images.

