Title       : Acquisition of a High-Performance Parallel Computer for Mathematical Sciences
               and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0079719

Award Number: 0079719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Knyazev Andrew.Knyazev@cudenver.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Mandel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn S. Bennethum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Russell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen C. Billups  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Denver
	      Campus Box 129 PO Box 173364
	      Denver, CO  802173364    303/556-4060

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Acquisition of a High-Performance Parallel Computer for Mathematical Sciences
              and
Applications

The Center for Computational Mathematics (CCM) at the
              University of Colorado at Denver

(CU-Denver) engages in mathematical
              sciences research and applications covering diverse areas of scientific
              computation, including model development, discretization methods, numerical
              linear algebra, optimization algorithms and applied statistics.  Because the
              frontiers in each of these computationally intensive research areas continue to
              advance, it is essential to maintain high performance computing facilities
              capable of meeting ever increasing demands.  The CCM is the only specialized
              site on campus for large-scale parallel computations.  In addition to
              supporting research activities, the CCM also fulfills a critical role in the
              teaching mission of the University. Numerous advanced courses in Computer
              Science and Applied Mathematics rely heavily on the CCM computers.  And the CCM
              facilities are vital to the success of our Mathematics Clinic Program. Research
              and teaching activities in computationally intensive areas are becoming
              increasingly limited by the CCM's outdated computational servers.  There is
              therefore a pressing need to upgrade the computing capabilities of the CCM. 
              This proposal aims to demonstrate the need for a new parallel computer by
              describing the following research projects and applications that will result
              from its use by faculty and students:

Numerical Solution of Extremely Large
              Eigenvalue Problems; 
Acoustic Scattering, Domain Decomposition and
              Substructuring, and Distributed Parallel
Programming;
Parallel
              Eulerian-Lagrangian and Mixed Methods for Deterministic and Stochastic
              Subsurface
Flows;
Groundwater Modeling for Environmental
              Restoration;
Validating New Mathematical Models for Swelling Porous
              Media;
Numerical Solutions of Nonsmooth Equations;
Estimation of the Value of
              Options;
Atmospheric Models;
Statistical Methodology for Massive Data
              Sets;

Development of Accurate Finite Element Methods for Fluids Problems. 
              We have identified the 64 processor Beowulf Intel-based cluster system to meet
              our computing needs.  Each its 32 nodes has two PIII 733MHz processors and 2 GB
              of RAM.  This powerful cluster with 64 GB total memory will handle not only the
              cross-disciplinary research described in the proposal, but will also be
              available to other users of CCM, including all faculty, postdoctoral scholars,
              visitors and students from the Department of Mathematics as well as affiliated
              faculty and students in the Department of Computer Science and the School of
              Engineering at CU-Denver.

