Title       : Collaborative Research: The Differential Impact of Morbid Diseases on the
               Productivity of Black and White Labor in the Agricultural South
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0079179

Award Number: 0079179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip R. Coelho 00prcoelho@bsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ball State University
	      
	      Muncie, IN  47306    317/289-1241

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The efficiency and profitability of American slavery have been subject to
              extensive debates in economic history.  In comparing the agricultural outputs
              of free and slave farms, the modern economic history literature has ignored the
              disparate effects of diseases on different ethnic groups.  Yet there is ample
              evidence, empirical, scientific, and historical, that populations of different
              ethnic heritages have different responses to many disease pathogens.  In
              particular, people of tropical West African ancestry tend to have much milder
              reactions to the "warm weather" diseases that are endemic to tropical West
              Africa than do most people of European ancestry.  These "warm weather" diseases
              became endemic to the Americas as a result of the African slave trade.  The
              present study examines the role that the differential ethnic reactions to
              disease played in American economic history.  The study models and estimates
              the impact of a specific disease, hookworm, on human productivity and its
              disparate effects on peoples of different ancestry.  The disparate ethnic
              effects of hookworm differentially affect human productivity, and consequently
              raise questions about the existing analysis of the economics of slavery in
              Antebellum America.  The study examines the interactions of the biological
              environment with the human economy and society, integrating biological science,
              history, and economic analysis.

Specifically, the study estimates the
              differences in total factor productivity between white and black farms in the
              American South that can be attributed to the impact of endemic hookworm on
              white and black agricultural labor.  To accomplish this, it employs data on the
              prevalence and intensity of hookworm in a specific area in the early
              twentieth-century South.  The data on the hookworm burden of whites and blacks,
              and agricultural inputs and outputs on white and black farms are employed in
              the productivity estimates.  With the data, estimates are made for the impact
              that hookworm had on differences in productivity between farms that employed
              labor of African ancestry and farms that employed labor of European ancestry. 
              The study employs estimation techniques that control for other potential
              confounding variables.  The estimates for the impact of hookworm on black and
              white productivity in the early twentieth-century agricultural South are used
              to assess the relative efficiency and productivity of slave and free farms in
              the Antebellum South.


