Title       : Near-Field Scanning Optical Microscopy (NSOM)System for Research and Research
               Training in the Optical Characterization of the Surface of Materials in Air and
               in Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0079747

Award Number: 0079747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srini Raghavan srini@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James B. Hiskey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph H. Simmons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Supapan Seraphin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nasser Peyghambarian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1058,1189,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The characterization of materials that possess a complex hierarchical
              organization and are composed of multiple constituents, is an important problem
              in materials science and engineering.  To obtain a comprehensive understanding
              of such materials, a direct imaging technique that will allow chemical contrast
              and spatial resolution on the nanometer scale would be extremely useful.
              Near-Field Scanning Optical Microscopy (NSOM/SNOM), a relatively new technique,
              is showing great potential for the topographic and spectroscopic imaging of the
              surfaces of metals, polymers, semiconductors and biological materials in air as
              well as in liquids at a submicron scale.

The objective of this grant is to
              set up a NSOM system at the University of Arizona for research and research
              training in the optical characterization of the surface of materials in air as
              well as in liquids. The major components of the instrument system are (i) a
              NSOM with Atomic force microscopy (AFM) capabilities, (ii) a micron Raman
              spectrometer, (iii) a fluorescence 
spectrometer and (iv) a laser source.  A
              team of researchers from a variety of disciplines such as materials science and
              engineering, optical science, mechanical engineering and surgical biology will
              be able to use this equipment system for advanced research and research
              training.  It is also proposed to use the NSOM system for training and
              educating undergraduates, especially through the NSF supported Research
              Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program that has been active in the
              department of materials science and engineering  since 1989.  The acquisition
              of the system will tremendously benefit K-12 outreach activities as well as the
              recruitment of under represented and minority students.  It is also planned to
              use the NSOM facility as the core of a more comprehensive Arizona Major
              Analytical Center (AMAC) for instrumentation and materials
              characterization.


 
