Title       : Fundamentals of Protein Transport in Charged Gels for Chromatography and
               Membrane Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0079334

Award Number: 0079334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249951             (Estimated)
Investigator: Giorgio Carta gc@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-0079334
Giorgio Carta
University of Virginia 
Fundamentals of Protein
              Transport in Charged Gels for Chromatography and Membrane
              Applications
Abstract

This project examines protein transport in charged
              hydrogels prepared for chromatography and membrane applications. The focus is
              placed on supported gels made by synthesizing them in situ within porous
              matrices and other rigid structures. The following properties are being
              investigated: (i) Size exclusion, hydrodynamic permeability, and electrical
              properties of supported ionic gels; (ii) Protein and electrolyte partitioning
              and mobility in ionic gels measured through isotope exchange and
              autoradiography methods; and (iii) Interdiffusion rates for single-protein
              adsorption and for multicomponent systems in ionic gels stabilized in
              capillaries and in porous particles using both direct microscopic visualization
              methods and macroscopic measurements.  The experimental data are being used to
              develop rate models to describe transport of proteins in ionic gels, and the
              rate theories are incorporated in models for column chromatography to predict
              and optimize separation performance with practical media. An additional goal is
              to develop novel membranes based on supported ionic gels to effect protein
              separations.

The overall goal of this research is a fundamental
              understanding of protein transport in oppositely charged ionic polymeric
              hydrogels to serve as a basis for the rational development of effective media
              for biotechnological applications. Polymeric hydrogels have many current and
              potential uses in this field. While neutral hydrogels serve as size-exclusion
              media, incorporation of a fixed charge, bound to the polymer backbone
              introduces the ability to accumulate macromolecules reversibly from dilute
              solutions. Ionic hydrogels can thus be used in chromatographic and membrane
              processes for protein separations, for the transdermal delivery of drugs, as
              implantable vehicles for the long-term delivery of therapeutic agents, and as
              elements in diagnostic instruments.  Understanding the transport properties of
              charged macromolecules is a key to the optimum design of these materials. The
              research will also have significant impact on education and development of
              human resources through the involvement of students and will enhance the
              development of biotechnology. Separation and purification are generally thought
              to be the costliest steps in industrial bioprocessing. Hence, the development
              of improved chromatographic stationary phases and membranes for separations and
              the education of scientists and engineers in this field are crucial.  


