Title       : Acquisition of Mass Spectrometry Equipment for In Situ Measurements of
               Trace-level Organic Compounds in the Ambient Atmosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a0079558

Award Number: 0079558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $421400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric P. Grimsrud grimsrud@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Lamb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Halvor H. Westberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter B. Knighton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Reinhold A. Rasmussen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1524,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Major Research Infrastructure (MRI) award will provide support for the
              purchase and development of instrumentation for the in situ and real-time
              analysis of trace-level organic compounds in air. This will enable studies of
              the emissions, reactions and transport of organic substances throughout the
              Earth's atmosphere, in particular hydrocarbons and oxygenated hydrocarbons that
              are biogenically emitted into the atmosphere by forests and plants. 
	The
              instruments will be based on Drift Tube Reaction Mass Spectrometry (DTRMS).
              This technology is sensitive, selective, and can be used for high frequency
              measurements, which makes its application to flux measurements above forest
              canopies possible. One of the DTRMS instruments will be purchased from the
              original developer fully operational and will be deployed immediately to
              ongoing laboratory- and field-based research projects on biogenic emissions to
              the atmosphere. These projects are being carried out in collaboration with
              Washington State University and the Oregon Graduate Institute. A second
              instrument will be developed at Montana State University. This instrument will
              be based on a triple quadrupole which will make it more versatile and
              selective. Additional types of measurements will be possible with that
              instrument, including the measurement of organic nitrates. 

