Title       : Acquisition of a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) System for Cognitive
               Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2000 
File        : a0079540

Award Number: 0079540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $929890             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen J. Neville neville@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick W. Dahlquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Neville
0079540

There is virtually universal agreement that the 21 st
              century will be a time of unprecedented and unimaginable discoveries about the
              fundamental mechanisms that give rise to human thought and behavior.
              Catapulting us to this threshold have been key advances in cognitive science
              that have identified and specified interactions between the essential
              components of mental processes, and dis-coveries and technical advances within
              neuroscience that have made it possible to describe mechanisms of neuronal
              activity at cellular and molecular levels. - The previously ephemeral interface
              between these disparate levels of analysis has been strengthened by focussed
              efforts during this decade of the brain that have made comprehensive and
              noninvasive brain imaging a reality. Knowledge about the biology of cognition
              brings a perspective that is critical to understanding mental phenomena just as
              knowledge of the computations essential to cognition reveals constraints on how
              the brain performs its essential functions. An understanding of how
              functionally specialized brain systems develop is now within our grasp. The
              fundamental significance of these research enterprises lies in illuminating our
              mental capacities and vulnerabilities and in the benefits that such
              understanding will confer upon human society in the form of guidance in the
              design and implementation of educational programs to take advantage of the
              multiple, specific and limited time windows in human development when
              environmental input is most effective.
Scientists at the University of Oregon
              (UO) have made significant and pioneering contributions to the componential
              analysis of cognition, to characterizing single neuron and population
              electrophysio-logical responses in animals and humans and from the conjunction
              of these strengths have established one of the world's foremost research and
              training programs at the interface of cognitive science and neuro-science, i.e.
              in Cognitive Neuroscience. UO scientists have also performed foundational
              studies using techniques that image blood flow and oxygenation in the brain iii
              studies of human cognition. However, since facilities for these studies are not
              available locally, such investigations have been severely limited in number,
              are conducted by only a few scientists and students and have been extremely
              expensive in time and funds because they have been conducted at sites distant
              from the UO. This application seeks support for the purchase of an MRI System
              so that each of the faculty and students within the many research and training
              programs that comprise cognitive neuroscience at UO can access this powerful
              new technique which has so recently defined a new level of analysis in the
              study of the human mind.
This facility will be employed in basic studies
              investigating the brain systems and mechanisms important in selecting,
              localizing and attending to particular events in complex, ecologically valid,
              auditory environments (Takahashi et al.), the processing cascade involved in
              transforming visual signals into veridical perceptions and conscious experience
              (Dassonville, Sereno), systems important for motor control, sensory-motor
              integration and learning (Mayr, Woollacott, van Donkelaar), the pharmacological
              and anatomical analysis of covert orienting (Marrocco et al.), the interface
              between and mechanisms of spatial attention and spatial working memory (Awh),
              the architecture and encoding mechanisms of working memory and the dynamics of
              retrieval and forgetting (Awh, Anderson), the neurobiology of emotions and
              motivational influences on cognition (Tucker), the organization, plasticity and
              development of sensory and language relevant neural systems in adults and
              children (Neville, Canseco-Gonzalez, Corina) and the changes in neural
              circuitry underlying high level cognitive skill acquisition in adults and
              children (Posner, Rothbart). A unique feature of our research with MRI will be
              integration of its high spatial resolution with the high temporal resolution of
              state of the art electrophysiological recordings from humans and with the very
              high spatial and temporal resolution of single unit studies in non-humans, in
              which we have unique research strengths.
Interdisciplinary research training
              has long been recognized as a keystone of education at the UO where
              interdisciplinary research institutes and training programs were established
              over two decades ago. The proposed facility would build on this unique strength
              of the UO and will bring it to a new level by providing powerful opportunities
              for the integration of information about cognition and the brain from multiple
              levels of analysis. Since there are currently no comparable MRI research
              facilities in the Northwest, user support from the regional science community
              will be strong.

