Title       : Development of An Instrument for Aerosol and Bacteria Analysis by Laser
               Desorption FTMS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a0079240

Award Number: 0079240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402343             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Wilkins cwilkins@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Prof.
              Charles Wilkins of the University of Arkansas will develop a state-of-the-art
              laser desorption Fourier-transform mass spectrometer (FTMS) for aerosol and
              bacteria analysis.  This new analytical tool will employ multiple lasers for
              aerodynamic sizing and laser desorption of particulate samples.  For mass
              analysis, a 3 Tesla ion trapping FTMS will be used.  The combination of an
              aerosol source with FTMS will make possible the acquisition of size-correlated
              laser desorption mass spectral data from single particles, allowing correlation
              of chemicals identified with the sizes of particles upon which they are found. 
              Because of the trapping features of the FTMS, structural elucidation of
              unknowns using multiple stage mass spectrometry will be possible.  Thus, it
              will be possible to apply powerful MS/MS structure elucidation methods to
              species desorbed from single particles of known sizes, sampled in real time
              from inhomogeneous sources.  

Knowledge of the detailed chemical composition
              of individual aerosol particles is essential for understanding such diverse
              topics as the chemistry and dynamics of the atmosphere, how to control small
              particle contamination in microelectronic fabrication facilities, and the
              health implications of particulate exposure as a function of size.  The new
              aerosol FTMS will allow high sensitivity-high resolution mass spectral analysis
              of particles with sizes determined simultaneously.  Potential applications to
              bacterial and small organism analysis also will be explored.  The instrument
              developed in this project will also serve as a prototype for field portable
              versions, which will allow application of the new technology to a wide range of
              practical analytical problems.
