Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Dynamic Impact of
               Preferential Trade Arrangements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a0079150

Award Number: 0079150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2005               (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. McKeown tim_mckeown@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Are preferential trade agreements (PTAs) "building blocks" or stumbling blocks"
              on the road to global free trade?  That is, do such arrangements help or hinder
              the process of multilateral trade liberalization (MTL)?  This "dynamic
              time-path" question has taken on greater salience due to the recent
              proliferation of PTAs.  Of the 40 or so now in existence, over half-including
              the North American free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), Asia-Pacific economic
              Cooperation (APEC) and the Southern Cone common Market countries now belong to
              PTAs.  Pundits and politicians have welcomed this development as a sign of
              progress toward a freer global economy.  The unconditional embrace of PTAs
              should raise some concern, however, because in fact we know very little about
              these arrangements' dynamic effects.

There are two views on the dynamic
              time-path question.  Some scholars believe that PTAs speed MTL and are thus the
              building blocks of a liberal trade order.  Others view PTAs as stumbling
              blocks, i.e. impediments to MTL.  Although arguments on both sides abound, the
              debate remains unresolved.  One reason is that the impact of PTAs may depend on
              a variety of circumstances; hence a clear, non-parametric answer to the dynamic
              time-path question may not exist.  A second reason is that few claims on either
              side have been subjected to rigorous empirical testing.

This Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Support project addresses these issues in two ways. 
              First, the researchers have developed a formal model which allows them to
              examine the impact of PTA formation on politicians' trade-policy preferences
              under different institutional and economic conditions.  The model indicates
              that PTA formation can either increase or decrease members' political support
              for MTL, depending on the interaction of three factors:  PTA type, the pattern
              of trade flows among members, and members' initial tariff levels.  The model
              thus advances the currently polarized dynamic time-path debate by identifying
              conditions under which PTAs help and hinder global trade
              liberalization.

Second, the researchers will conduct extensive quantitative
              research on PTAs' dynamic time-path effects.  This will proceed along two
              paths.  First, they will test the model's hypotheses to determine whether it
              accurately identifies the conditions under which PTAs help and hinder MTL. 
              These tests will indicate not only the model's accuracy but also whether and
              how the theory needs to be revised.  Second, they will inductively examine the
              impact of PTAs on trade and trade policies within individual countries,
              regional groups. PTAs, and the universe of cases.  The research will thus
              advance our understanding of the dynamic time-path question regardless of the
              formal model's success and will introduce much-needed empirical content into
              this now-theoretical debate.


