Title       : Characterization of Rab Interacting Proteins in S. cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0079045

Award Number: 0079045
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $479488             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth N. Collins rnc8@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Eukaryotic cells are distinguished by the presence of a number of
              intracellular membrane-enclosed organelles. All eukaryotic life depends on the
              transport of material into, out of, and between compartments of the cell. The
              movement of proteins and lipids between these organelles is mediated by small
              membrane containers or vesicles which form from one donor compartment and then
              travel to and fuse with a second target compartment. This traffic must be
              selective in order to maintain the identities of organelles as well as allow
              traffic between them. Thus, each stage of transport; the budding, movement,
              docking and fusion of transport vesicles is subject to regulatory controls. A
              variety of experimental strategies, using different cell types, has begun to
              converge onto a common set of elements which appear to be conserved in all
              eukaryotic cells. These conserved elements include members of the Rab GTPase
              family, SNARE proteins, NSF/Sec18p, SNAP/Sec17p, Sec1 proteins and docking
              complexes that represent Rab effectors. The Rab family represents a distinct
              sub-group of the Ras superfamily of small GTPases. Each stage of membrane
              traffic through both the constitutive and regulated secretory pathways of all
              eukaryotic cells is associated with a distinct Rab protein which regulates the
              cascade of events that lead to SNARE-mediated membrane fusion. This project is
              designed to yield insights into the mechanisms by which Rab proteins are
              recruited onto membranes. Recruitment onto the surface of a particular
              subcellular membrane is a crucial step prior to activation of the Rab GTPase.
              It is clear that a protein machinery exists to recruit the Rabs onto their
              donor organelles although no component of this process has been identified to
              date. The recruitment machinery is an essential part of membrane transport
              because it determines the site on the membrane where the Rab protein exerts its
              activity. The prenylated Rabs are found in the cytosol bound to the protein GDP
              Dissociation Inhibitor (GDI) and it is the soluble GDI-Rab heterodimer that is
              delivered to the recruitment machinery.  Recently, Dr. Collins has identified a
              protein in yeast, Yip1p which may play a role in regulating Rab protein action.
              Yip1p is a membrane protein that binds Rabs in a non-specific manner. YIP1 is
              an essential gene which is highly conserved in evolution. The goal of this
              proposal is to exploit molecular genetics in yeast together with biochemical
              approaches to gain information that can be used to test the physiological roles
              of this factor. Interestingly, it was found that the requirements of Yip1p
              interaction with Rabs are the same as the features of Rab protein required for
              GDI interaction. This suggests that the role of Yip1p could be the mirror image
              of the role played by GDI,which is also a pleiotropic factor. While GDI
              retrieves Rabs from membranes into the cytosol, Yip1p acts to retrieve Rabs
              from the cytosol onto membranes.  Yip1p may represent a pivotal intervention
              point that higher eukaryotic cells use to control membrane transport. Regulated
              membrane transport is essential for many cellular processes in plants and
              animals, including the secretion of extracellular materials such as enzymes,
              hormones, extracellular matrix components and neurotransmitters. In addition,
              the pleiotropic nature of Yip1p implies the existence of other factors that
              impart organelle specificity into the recruitment process. Dr. Collins has used
              Yip1p to identify a novel membrane protein termed Yop1p that physically
              interacts with Yip1p.  The possibility will be explored that Yop1p also plays
              an important role in mediating the action of Rab proteins.  The result of these
              studies are expected to provide important new insights into the fundamental
              mechanisms underlying the regulation of Rab proteins and their role in
              intracellular trafficking and secretion.

