Title       : Excited-State Coordination Chemistry; A Different Quenching Encounter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a0079040

Award Number: 0079040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry D. Gafney hgafney@qc1.qc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic program supports
              research on the acid-base properties of excited-state transition metal
              complexes by Professor Harry Gafney of the Department of Chemistry at Queens
              College of the City University of New York. The work will delineate the factors
              which result in the formation of bimetallic complexes from monomeric components
              or in the formation of a dissociative excited state from a bimetallic complex
              that relaxes to reform the original compound. These are the factors that
              produce excited state acid-base chemistry rather than the more usual energy or
              electron-transfer reactions. The photoinduced formation and dissociation of
              various complexes of Ru(II) containing the bipyridyl and other ligands with
              trivalent Rh, Ir and Co will be examined by means of excited-state and
              time-resolved methods. Transient absorbtions will be identified through their
              spectral and kinetic characteristics, while quenching and photochemical
              reactivity will be correlated with excited-state energies, redox potentials and
              acid dissociation constants to identify the reaction mechanisms.

The goal of
              this research is to determine how the acidic and basic properties of transition
              metal complexes, specifically of ruthenium, change when illuminated by light
              and converted into their excited states. Most of the known net photochemistry
              of molecules of all types involves the transfer of either energy or electrons
              rather than protons. The development of excited-state acid-base chemistry will
              open new avenues for its utilization in a variety of areas. There are potential
              near-term medical applications which include photodynamic therapy and
              radioisotope cancer treatment by means of a chemically-loaded endoscope.  Both
              graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in this project and will
              learn a breath of skills in both synthetic and photochemical methods which will
              leave them well-prepared to pursue a variety of industrial, medical or
              industrial career paths.   
  

