Title       : Acquisition of an Analytical Transmission Electron Microscope and Cryo Scanning
               Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a0079505

Award Number: 0079505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $683963             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Farmer farmer@cb.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              An analytical transmission electron microscope (TEM) and a cryotransfer system
              (to complement a field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM) and expand
              its capabilities) will be placed in the Center for Advanced Ultrastructural
              Research at the University of Georgia. For nearly 50 years transmission
              electron microscopy (TEM) has been making significant contributions to our
              understanding of cell structure and function, crystal structure, systematics,
              microbial community structure, materials analysis, and countless other fields.
              Today TEM plays a crucial role in biological research especially in the areas
              of biomolecular localization (e.g. immunogold labeling) and structural cell
              biology.  Likewise SEM plays an essential role in the characterization of
              minerals and other materials.  

The new TEM will be equipped for the
              research needs of biologists and non-biologists and will serve as the primary
              research TEM for the University of Georgia. In order to provide the greatest
              benefit to the largest and most diverse number of researchers a TEM must be
              able to do more than take high magnification images.  It must be capable of
              performing electron diffraction, X-ray microanalysis, and high tilt imaging for
              tomography and be adaptable for techniques such as cryoTEM. Similarly the
              cryotransfer system will complement the Center's three-year-old field emission
              SEM.  The LEO 982 is one of the highest resolution (1.5 nm at 20KeV) SEMs on
              the market.  Equipped with a light element EDS X-ray microanalysis system,
              backscatter detector, and in-lens secondary electron detector for high
              resolution, the Center's SEM is able to meet the research needs of many
              University of Georgia scientists. The cryotransfer system will allow for the
              examination of hydrated specimens.  During conventional specimen preparation,
              samples must be dehydrated using organic solvents and critical point drying or
              freeze-drying.  Highly hydrated specimens such as polysaccharide matrices,
              oils, and clay slurries are often significantly altered during this process. 
              Likewise samples that are easily disturbed or are hard to preserve in their
              natural state (e.g. bacteria or fungal hyphae on a substrate) can be washed off
              during the process and thus the data acquired from the images can be
              significantly altered.  A cryotransfer system allows one to rapidly freeze a
              sample and examine it directly in the SEM.  While this technique is not
              appropriate or even necessary for many routine specimens it is often the only
              method by which certain specimens can be examined.  The addition of
              cryotransfer capabilities to the LEO 982 will significantly increase the
              utility and versatility of this instrument and allow for many new applications
              that cannot presently be attempted by Georgia researchers.


 The Center
              plays an essential role in the development of graduate training and research
              programs for 20 different departments and more than 150 individual
              laboratories.  In recent years, the Center's role has expanded to include
              confocal, quantitative fluorescence, and digital imaging and analysis, and the
              Center now functions as a core microscopy and imaging facility for the
              University. This equipment is available to researchers from the University of
              Georgia as well as other regional institutions and incorporated into the
              student-training program of the Center, which includes formal courses in
              microscopy, cell biology, geology, food sciences, as well as informal tours.

