Title       : Acquisition of a 600 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0079750

Award Number: 0079750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $615000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard S. Harbison harbison@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This award will fund the acquisition of a 600 MHz solids-capable nuclear
              magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer for research projects that span a
              diversity of problems, from materials science through the chemistry of
              signaling events to the determination of macromolecular structure.  NMR uses
              the principle that the nuclei of most atoms act as tiny magnets. These magnets
              line up parallel or anti-parallel to a magnetic field, and emit or absorb
              radio-frequency energy when they do so. The amount of energy emitted, and
              therefore the sensitivity of the technique, depends on using the highest
              possible field. Because most nuclei are magnetic, NMR is a technique that can
              be applied to a broad range of materials, ranging from minerals to human tissue
              (as in MRI). This award will enhance nine identified research projects: to
              understand the responses of crop-plants to light, the mechanism of important
              industrial catalysts, the bacterial enzymes that generate methane, potential
              materials for new, organic magnets, the mechanisms by which proteins bind to
              DNA, how vitamin B6 works, the structural principles of new classes of drugs
              incorporating fluorine atoms, how disease-causing fungi signal to each other,
              and the role of chloride and zinc in protein structure and function.

    
              The requested spectrometer is a state-of-the art instrument capable of carrying
              out the full repertory of modern, multidimensional gradient-assisted NMR
              experiments, on small molecules and proteins in solution, and on solids. The
              instrument will have a field of 14 Tesla.  It will be a major improvement on
              existing instrumentation at the University of Nebraska, and it will be the most
              powerful NMR spectrometer in the state and the region.

     The new
              instrument will enable the hiring of a new faculty member in the area of
              biological chemistry. The presence of this faculty member at the University of
              Nebraska will create synergistic interactions with other faculty researchers in
              the areas of biochemistry and synthetic chemistry, will provide a significant
              training opportunity for graduates students in biophysical chemistry, and will
              complement the structural biology research efforts of David L. Smith (mass
              spectrometry) and Gerard Harbison (solid state NMR). The integration of
              undergraduate and graduate students, particularly those from hitherto
              underrepresented groups, fulfills one of the major goals of NSF's strategic
              plan, and is a central aspect of research at the University of Nebraska and of
              this award.  The Department of Chemistry has 20 faculty members active in
              research and a graduate student population of approximately 100.  Most of our
              graduates work in the chemical industry; an increasing number have found
              employment in biotech and pharmaceutical companies.  The University of Nebraska
              also has a vigorous undergraduate research effort. Typically, five chemistry
              majors and about an equal number of biochemistry majors continue into graduate
              research in chemistry or biochemistry.  The Department of Chemistry hosts a
              summer REU program, in which undergraduates from other universities gain
              research experience.  Of the 22 participants in last year's program, four were
              African-American, two were Hispanic and one was Native American. At the
              community college level, UNL has growing ties with Nebraska Indian Community
              College and Little Priest Tribal College at Winnebago, NE. Investigators at
              these institutions have the opportunity to conduct summer and/or sabbatical
              research at UNL, and will benefit from the instrumentation.

