Title       : Acquisition of Acoustical Instrumentation and Computer Systems for Research in
               Hearing and Speech Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0079468

Award Number: 0079468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157319             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary R. Kidd Kidd@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry E. Humes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles S. Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane Kewley-Port  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kidd
0079468

This proposal seeks funds to equip two laboratories to be used
              as shared resources for a wide range of experiments in speech and hearing
              sciences. The two facilities are: (1) the Multi-station Auditory-Visual
              Laboratory (MAV Lab) and (2) the Anechoic-Echoic Laboratory (AEL). Both
              laboratories are to be equipped with networked computers with flexible
              experiment-control software for stimulus presentation and data collection. The
              MAV Lab will also serve as a general purpose multi-station testing facility for
              evaluation of speech and language abilities and for speech recording. The
              requested equipment will allow a very productive group of researchers to
              conduct a wider range of research with much greater efficiency.

The
              Multi-station Auditory-Visual Laboratory (AM FLab) will be constructed to house
              up to ten study participants in two large double-walled, sound-treated booths
              that will permit computer presentation of auditory and visual stimuli at each
              of ten independent testing stations. The large sound-treated rooms will enable
              threshold-level sound intensities to be presented via headphones in various
              experiments while concurrently allowing for the testing of up to ten
              participants simultaneously. The use of two separate booths in this space will
              provide more flexibility in the use and scheduling of the facilities. Each
              testing station will be equipped with a 17" highresolution color monitor,
              keyboard and mouse, as well as a microphone for voice recording. These
              components from each testing station will be connected to separate Pentium III,
              600-MHZ computers with accompanying electronic equipment needed for
              sophisticated listening experiments (programmable attenuators with >96 dB
              signal-to-noise ratios; multi-channel, 16bit, digital-to-analog converters with
              signal-processing array processors). The ten computers (one per testing
              station) will be housed in a separate room outside the double-walled booth to
              minimize internally generated noise in the test area. The MAV Lab will enable
              state-of-the-art testing in the areas of auditory perception, speech
              perception, visual perception, combined auditory-visual perception, language
              development, and general cognitive function.

The Anechoic-Echoic Laboratory
              (AEL) will be housed in a facility that was refurbished by Indiana University
              approximately seven years ago. It is a unique facility with a large anechoic
              chamber immediately adjacent to an equally large echoic room, both specially
              constructed to eliminate outside noise and vibration. The facility, however,
              has seen very little use because of the lack of appropriate test equipment.
              This proposal requests funds to equip both the anechoic and echoic chambers
              with a computer-based stimulus-delivery and response-collection system, a
              computer dedicated for use in making complex acoustical measurements. A
              computer-controlled loudspeaker system that will permit precise, quiet movement
              of a loudspeaker at specified velocities along a circular path surrounding the
              human listener will be installed in the anechoic chamber. This system will be
              used to study the localization of sound, the perception of speech in background
              noise under real-world conditions, and the perception of the movement of sound
              sources in space.

These two facilities will be used by several investigators
              in the Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences and their colleagues in other
              departments at Indiana University and at other universities. Several of the
              investigators will use the facilities for multidisciplinary projects that
              include a wide range of populations (e.g., infants, grade-school children,
              young adults, and the elderly) and many different disciplines (including
              physics, engineering, and architectural acoustics). These new laboratories will
              also provide state-of-the-art facilities for research training of students in
              Speech and Hearing Sciences. Additionally, the special capabilities of the AEL
              will be used for collaborative research with hearing aid manufacturers and
              engineers in the evaluation of new directional microphone technologies.

