Title       : Redox Mediated Chiroptical Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0079072

Award Number: 0079072
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $535000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Canary james.canary@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award to Professor James Canary of New York University is supported by the
              Advanced Materials and Processing Program in the Chemistry Division. With this
              award, copper coordination complexes and their derivatives with electrochemical
              and chiral properties will be studied as molecule-based switches. Synthesis of
              electrochemical chiral materials and determination of optical properties of
              these materials after one-electron oxidation and reductions are parts of this
              award.   One outcome of these studies will be development of molecular switches
              in place of molecular assemblies as in liquid crystals.  Molecular switches
              will make the electronic devices very efficient, lightweight and compact.  In
              addition, the research program will have substantial impact on undergraduate
              training and education of students in Materials Chemistry in general and
              electrochemical chiral materials in particular.

Under this award,
              electrochemical chiral materials will be synthesized and their optical
              properties determined after one-electron oxidation and reductions.  Molecular
              switches developed from the electrochemical chiral materials if incorporated in
              electronic devices such as computers will make them efficient, lightweight and
              compact.  Undergraduate and graduate training programs under the award will
              enhance the overall standard of the Material Chemistry Program and will provide
              future scientists and engineers in this field.
