Title       : Dynamics in Complex Systems: Computer Simulation of the Migration of Ions and
               Neutrals in Zeolites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a0079215

Award Number: 0079215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Horia Metiu metiu@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Horia Metiu of UC Santa Barbara is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to perform computer simulations of forces
              acting on ions and water molecules inside a zeolite, and to use these results
              to explore how the species move through the zeolite.  Also, proton transfer
              rates will be calculated, and complete kinetic descriptions and mechanisms will
              be evaluated.  Rigorous methodology will be applied to small unit cell
              zeolites, with specific studies of sodium ion and water migration through
              sodalite and the reaction of ammonia with acidic chabazite.  These processes
              are widely used in industrial applications, yet very little is known about them
              at an atomic level.  All energy calculations will be performed with density
              functional theory, which considers the full unit cell of the solid.  Rate
              constants of the important processes will be calculated using correlation
              function theory or transition state theory.  The results will be used in a
              kinetic Monte Carlo program to simulate migration and kinetics over very long
              time and space scales.  It is anticipated that the ability to calculate the
              properties of molecules inside zeolites will be improved to the point that this
              methodology will assist in the rational design of industrial processes. 
              

Zeolites are crystalline, porous solids that have the ability to absorb
              inside them a variety of molecules.  This absorption is selective (certain
              molecules are preferred to others) and the selectivity can be used to separate
              various gases, to remove noxious products from a gas stream, or to replace
              undesirable ions with benign ones.  Zeolites and their absorbed guest molecules
              interact strongly enough to induce unusual chemical reactions within the
              zeolite frame.  This property has practical importance and is exploited to
              modify the hydrocarbon content of various products in the oil industry.  The
              outcomes from this computer simulation project will improve the understanding
              of how fast molecules move inside a zeolite, what determines absorption
              selectivity, and what causes changes in the chemical behavior of the absorbed
              species.
