Title       : Social Networks, Financial Markets, and Household Organization in a Developing
               Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0079115

Award Number: 0079115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202583             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher R. Udry christopher.udry@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research uses data collected by the PI in Ghana to examine social
              networks, financial markets and household organization in a rural economy
              characterized by rapid technological innovation and stress on land resources.
              Over a two year period, we collected detailed plot level data on inputs,
              outputs, land tenure and soil chemistry, information on learning interactions,
              financial flows and labor transactions between individuals in the sample, plot
              level GIS data, and individual level data on economic activities (including
              panel data on consumption, non-farm income and time allocation) and
              socioeconomic background.
The proposed research consists of three major
              components. The first is an investigation of social learning and network
              formation. In the survey region, the farming system is rapidly changing from a
              cassava-maize intercrop to production of pineapples for export as fresh fruit.
              This shift involves a set of new technologies including a transformation of the
              fallow system that had been used to maintain soil fertility, the use of new
              output markets and, particularly, intensive use of agricultural chemicals where
              none had been used in the previous farming system. I propose a method for
              identifying the transmission through the social network of information derived
              from farmers' experiments with these new chemicals. Preliminary results provide
              evidence that the level of a farmer's use of the new chemicals is sensitive to
              the outcomes of the experiments with these chemicals by others to whom the
              farmer is directly or indirectly connected in the network. Given these results,
              I propose modeling the process of network formation in these villages. The
              hypothesis to be tested is that an individual is more likely to set up network
              connections with others who are likely to posses information valuable to that
              individual.
Second, pineapple cultivation is both much more profitable and
              much more costly than the cultivation of alternative crops. This raises the
              possibility that the process of adoption is influenced by the characteristics
              of financial markets in the study area. Preliminary evidence is that variation
              in wealth (treated as endogenous) is an important determinant of pineapple
              cultivation. I propose to use the data on financial flows, along with the
              expenditure, assets and time use panel data to explore the hypothesis that
              capital constraints influence adoption decisions. Farmers simultaneously make
              decisions regarding the management of soil fertility.  Since this is an
              intertemporal allocation problem it is intimately related to each individual's
              position vis-a-vis capital markets. In informal interviews, some farmers stated
              that they were drawing down soil fertility in order to expand production. The
              second goal is to examine decision making with respect to soil fertility (using
              the panel data on soil chemistry) and to relate this to adoption decisions and
              to the financial markets available in the study area.
Finally, there is
              evidence in Ghana that the mechanism of intrahousehold resource allocation
              corresponds to neither the unitary household model nor the more general model
              of a collective household. In particular, the allocation of risk within
              households is not Pareto efficient. There is evidence of important information
              asymmetries between spouses. This aspect of the research program will examine
              the hypothesis that the endogenous structure of production relations within the
              household is a determinant of intrahousehold information flows and hence
              intrahousehold allocation decisions.

