Title       : Internal vs. External Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0079176

Award Number: 0079176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186083             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Scharfstein dscharf@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is a theoretical and empirical investigation of the differences
              between internal and external product, capital and labor market transactions
              and the implications of these differences for firm behavior.  The first project
              seeks to understand why some new business ventures are undertaken by
              established firms, while others are undertaken by start-up firms.  The model
              presents an answer based on a key difference in the functioning of internal and
              external labor markets, namely the ability of internal labor markets to
              redeploy workers in the firm to other projects in the firm if the new venture
              fails.  The model will then be used to analyze the level and efficiency of new
              firm formation; the characteristics of employees at new and established firms;
              and the type of work employees undertake at the two types of firms.

The
              second project (joint with Sendhil Mullainathan, Department of Economics, MIT)
              seeks to understand the effects of vertical integration.  If integration has no
              real effects, integrated and non-integrated firms should respond in the same
              way to external market shocks.  This study examines whether this is indeed the
              case by analyzing the investment behavior of integrated and non-integrated
              petrochemical producers using a comprehensive 25-year database of over 4000
              U.S. petrochemical plants.  The preliminary results suggest that capacity
              investments by integrated firms are less sensitive than non-integrated firms to
              market shocks.  The project considers several competing explanations of these
              findings, and outlines an empirical strategy for distinguishing among them.

