Title       : Programmatic Risk Analysis for Critical Engineering Systems Under Tight Resource
               Constraints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0079872

Award Number: 0079872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226666             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Elisabeth Pate-Cornell mep@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin Dillon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROGRAMMATIC RISK ANALYSIS FOR CRITICAL ENGINEERING SYSTEMS UNDER TIGHT RESOURCE
              CONSTRAINTS

ABSTRACT
Engineering projects are continually expected to
              accomplish more with fewer resources, and the dependencies among these projects
              are increasing.  At NASA, for example, faster-better-cheaper (FBC) projects are
              being managed as programs to enhance the benefits of synergies among smaller
              projects, and to attenuate the risks of single large missions.  Under tight
              resource constraints, FBC project managers must balance several types of
              failure risks including the effect of their project's performance on future
              missions.  Existing risk analysis models generally focus on the quantification
              of either technical or management risks.  Since it is difficult to balance
              simultaneously cost, schedule and performance of a given project as well as
              their effects on other projects, managers who face these problems can benefit
              from an integrated programmatic risk analysis.  
The goal of the proposed
              study is to develop a theoretical framework to integrate the analysis of both
              technical and management risks.  It will be designed to quantify the tradeoffs
              among these two types of risk and to optimize a project's technical design and
              budget allocation.  We will then incorporate into the model the effects of
              various amounts of testing and reviews, partial mission failures, and project
              dependencies within programs.  Also, since current management decisions are
              often made based on intuition and an implicit reward system, we will capture
              these preferences in an illustrative example with a utility or valuation
              function that represents the objectives of the organization and its managers. 
              This generic framework for modeling programmatic risks will be developed to
              support the management of interdependent projects within programs in different
              industries.  An illustration will be provided based on the management of
              unmanned space missions and programs, and data available at NASA/JPL and its
              contractors.  

