Title       : US-Czech Collaborative Research on Nuclear Myosin I
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0079298

Award Number: 0079298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49220              (Estimated)
Investigator: Primal de Lanerolle Primal@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5930,5979,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               
This award will support a US-Czech collaboration on studies of a recently
              discovered novel nuclear myosin.  The funds (provided from the Division of
              International Programs) will be used strictly to promote and facilitate the
              international component of the research.  

Dr. de Lanerolle and his
              collaborator, Dr. Pavel Hozak in Prague, Czech Republic have already
              demonstrated the presence of a myosin I like protein in the nucleus.  This
              protein has an apparent molecular weight of 120,000, it is associated with
              K+-EDTA ATPase activity, it binds calmodulin, it is photoaffinity labelled with
              ATP, it binds actin in the absence, but not the presence, of ATP and it is
              recognized by an antibody to myosin I purified from adrenal glands. 
              Microsequencing of the 120 kDa protein has positively identified it as a member
              of the myosin I-beta subfamily of the myosin superfamily of actin based
              molecular motors.  The microsequencing data was used to clone the cDNA for this
              protein.  Both methods have demonstrated the presence of a 16 amino acid
              N-terminal extension that is unique to the 120 kDa protein.  Other data suggest
              that the unique 16 amino acid extension is responsible for the nuclear
              localization of nuclear myosin I and that nuclear myosin I associates with RNA
              polymerase II and is involved in transcription.  

Drs. de Lanerolle and
              Hozak now propose to continue this international collaboration to explore these
              findings further.  Co-localization and functional assays will be performed in
              Dr. Hozak's laboratory in Prague, using plasmids, antibodies  and other
              reagents developed in Dr. de Lanerolle's laboratory in Chicago.  To facilitate
              this collaboration, Dr. Hozak's students will be trained in molecular biology
              methods in Dr. De Lanerolle's laboratory and Dr. de Lanerolle's students will
              be trained in advanced microscopy and microinjection methods and in situ
              transcription assays in Dr. Hozak's laboratory. 


