Title       : Acquisition of a Tunable, Ultrafast Laser Facility for Studies in Materials
               Science and Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0079774

Award Number: 0079774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322759             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Thomas Dickinson jtd@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark G. Kuzyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kelvin G. Lynn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Citrin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan L. Dexheimer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0079774
Dickinson

This award is for the acquisition of a tunable, ultrafast
              laser facility to extend existing capabilities in materials physics and
              chemistry research at Washington State University (WSU).  The instrumentation
              will be used by eight productive faculty from WSU, their students, and their
              postdoctoral fellows who are all working in areas of advanced materials
              research.  The instrument will also be used by one additional researcher from
              the University of Idaho.  The new instrument provides a complete, versatile
              light source that ranges in pulse duration from picoseconds down to 100
              femtoseconds over a wavelength range from 250 nanometer (5 electron volts) to 3
              mm (0.4 electron volts). These wide variations in photon energy and pulse width
              are of considerable interest for materials research because it allows
              scientists to probe both ground and excited electronic structure of many modern
              and model materials.  Research benefiting from this instrumentation includes
              efforts to understand laser desorption and ablation as applied to thin-film
              synthesis and chemical analysis, laser damage and surface modification,
              fundamental laser-surface interactions, nonlinear spectroscopic studies, and
              nonlinear propagation in waveguides, cavities, and bulk materials, ultrafast
              all-optical switching in polymer optical fibers, and theoretical studies that
              relate directly to the experimental efforts.

This award is for the
              acquisition of a tunable, ultrafast laser facility to extend existing
              capabilities in materials physics and chemistry research at the Washington
              State University.  The instrumentation will be used by eight productive at WSU,
              their students, and their postdoctoral fellows who are working in areas of
              advanced materials research.  A scientist from the University of Idaho will
              also use the equipment.  The new instrument will provide a complete, versatile
              light source that ranges in pulse duration from a 80 picoseconds down to 100
              femtoseconds over a spectral range from the ultraviolet to the infrared. 
              Research benefiting from this instrumentation includes efforts to understand
              laser desorption and ablation as applied to thin-film synthesis and chemical
              analysis, laser damage and surface modification, fundamental laser-surface
              interactions, nonlinear spectroscopic studies, and nonlinear propagation in
              waveguides, cavities, and bulk materials, ultrafast all-optical switching in
              polymer optical fibers, and theoretical studies that relate directly to these
              experimental efforts.



