Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Development of a Laboratory in Environmental
               Biogeochemistry and Groundwater Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a0079542

Award Number: 0079542
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386371             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie M. Holland mholland@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. O'Haver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregg R. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lidija Halda-Alija  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred Thomas Mikell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A suite of instruments for a new laboratory (The University of Mississippi
              Laboratory for Environmental Biogeochemistry and Groundwater Analyses) will be
              used for studies of the biogeochemistry of groundwater. Instrumentation
              includes: (1) a Finnigan Delta Plus isotope ratio mass spectrophotometer, (2) a
              Perkin Elmer Optima 3300 DV inductively coupled plasma spectrometer, (3) a
              Dionex GP 50 ion chromatograph, and (4) a sample preparation line for isotope
              samples. Analysis of the acquisition, utilization, and transformation of water
              through natural systems is at the core of many fields within the environmental
              sciences, including hydrology, biogeochemistry, microbe and plant physiology,
              and ecology.

A laboratory in environmental biogeochemistry and groundwater
              analyses in the Center for Water and Wetland Resources at The University of
              Mississippi Field Station will complement a growing program on The University
              of Mississippi (UM) Oxford campus in: (1) plant ecology, microbial ecology, and
              conservation biology in the Department of Biology; (2) hydrology and
              geochemistry in the Department of Geology and Geological Engineering; and (3)
              chemical ecology and groundwater remediation in the Department of Chemical
              Engineering. 

The equipment will be used for analyses of soils, groundwater,
              sediments, and porewater in research and training of undergraduate, graduate,
              postdoctoral, and visiting scientist collaborators at The University of
              Mississippi. The UM laboratory in environmental biogeochemistry and groundwater
              analyses will be a catalyst for both faculty research and research training for
              students pursuing careers in any area of environmental science. It will attract
              talented individuals of all ethnic and cultural backgrounds to careers in the
              environmental sciences. 


