Title       : Acquisition of Structural Mechanics Testers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0079429

Award Number: 0079429
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm Ray mhray@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1058,1189,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This grant funds the development of a structural mechanics impact laboratory at
              Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI). Knowledge about how structures behave
              during impacts is an important feature of many engineering problems including
              vehicle crashworthiness, roadside safety, aircraft crashworthiness, human
              trauma research and packaging design.  Research in the area of the impact
              response of structures ideally requires analytical modeling, finite element
              modeling, dynamic physical testing of components and dynamic testing of
              full-scale structures.

The WPI research team has an established record of
              accomplishments in analyzing and designing impact resistant structures. Much of
              this work has been accomplished using analytical methods, finite element
              analysis and full-scale crash testing.  This proposal is for the development of
              an impact laboratory that can be used to perform dynamic impact tests of
              components and materials in support of a wide range of existing impact research
              projects.  Currently, WPI researchers are limited to using quasi-static testing
              to determine material properties and failure mechanisms of structural
              components under impact loading.  An impact laboratory would significantly
              improve the research team's ability to determine material properties and
              failure mechanisms at the low and moderate energy levels and strain rates
              typical in vehicle impacts.  Such information would dramatically improve and
              simplify the development of finite element models and reduce the number of
              expensive full-scale crash tests required to demonstrate the impact performance
              of a structural system.

WPI has recently dedicated space in Kaven Hall for
              use as an impact laboratory.  An Instron drop tower impact tester has been
              purchased using funds from a grant from the Keck Foundation and has just
              recently been installed in the laboratory.  What remains is to expand the
              capabilities of this laboratory so that a wider range of impact events can be
              tested and a wider range of data can be collected.  This proposal involves the
              development or acquisition of four major systems: (1) a bench-top pendulum
              impact tester, (2) a high-velocity gas-gun impact tester, (3) a large ballistic
              pendulum impact testers and (4) a universal data collection system that can be
              used with these three impact testers as well as the existing Instron drop-tower
              tester.  The resulting laboratory, with four different types of impact testers
              and a general purpose data collection system, would be a powerful and unique
              facility for impact research.

The bench-top pendulum impact tester is an
              off-the-shelf device that can be used to perform a number of standard dynamic
              material characterization tests like Charpy and Izod ASTM tests as well as
              standard biomechanics tests like dummy head form impacts.  The gas-gun impact
              tester is a unique device that will be developed by the research team.  This
              device allows for higher velocity impacts with small masses and can be used to
              test scale models of structures as well as determine higher strain rate
              material properties.  The device proposed herein is based on a similar device
              developed and built by Carney and Villette at Vanderbilt University.  The
              ballistic pendulum will be developed by the research team based on several much
              larger devices built by the Federal Highway Administration, Southwest Research
              Institute and Texas A&M University.  A ballistic pendulum provides the
              capability to perform low-velocity impacts with larger mass and can be used to
              test scale models or materials.  These three devices and the existing drop
              tower will allow the research team to explore impacts at a wide range of
              velocities using a wide range of masses while still working in a laboratory
              environment.  The universal data acquisition system consists of a computer
              interfaced to all the impact testers and high-speed video cameras that can be
              used with all of the impact test stands.  The impact testers have all be
              designed such that they can use the same types of data acquisition equipment
              and software which will greatly simplify the task of integrating all the impact
              testers into a single fully functional laboratory.

The research team has a
              demonstrated ability to perform meaningful research as shown by the team's
              current and pending research activities.  Developing an impact laboratory would
              help provide a broader well-balanced approach to studying impact problems by
              incorporating dynamic laboratory experiments with classroom instruction,
              graduate research and sponsored research.  The ability to perform dynamic tests
              would compliment the team's existing expertise and capabilities in analytical
              and finite element analysis and structural design.  The development of such a
              lab would enhance the research team's ability to perform important basic
              graduate research in the area of impact mechanics as well as attract additional
              funding from sponsors interested in the performance of structures during
              impacts.

 
