Title       : Acquisition of a Scanning Probe Microscope for Temperature-Dependent, Nanometer
               Scale Surface Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a0079655

Award Number: 0079655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Lederman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. Myers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohindar S. Seehra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charter D. Stinespring  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0079790
Salano

This grant makes possible the acquisition of a new instrument
              capable of producing 20nm patterned line widths, 10nm scanning electron
              microscopy (SEM) and 20nm scanning Auger microscopy (SAM), all while
              simultaneously providing atomic resolution with a scanning tunneling microscope
              (STM/AFM). The new instrument will be attached to the present molecular beam
              epitaxy (MBE) growth facility to provide expanded research opportunities with
              semiconductor quantum dots and wires for scientists and engineers at the
              University of Arkansas.
Initial investigations are on the use of patterned
              substrates to produce laterally ordered self-assembled quantum dots and how to
              engineer strain to produce quantum dots. The project  explores the underlying
              science important to the homogeneity of quantum dots, single electron spin
              dynamics in a quantum dot, and the optical behavior of a single quantum dot and
              the interaction between them. There will be an investigation of the possibility
              of forming photonic band structures from quantum dot arrays.  While the new
              instrument is aimed at enhancing the research capability of faculty and
              students at the University of Arkansas, it will also play a significant role in
              a new Ph.D. degree program in electronic-photonic materials and devices
              supported under the NSF IGERT program. 

Nanotechnology is a new field,
              centered on the study of nanometer-sized materials. One nanometer, or one
              billionth of a meter, is one thousand times smaller than the smallest
              electronic devices that exist today. As a result, progress in scientific
              understanding on the nanoscale will play an important role in realizing future
              electronic and optoelectronic devices. This project makes possible the
              acquisition of a new instrument which when attached to the present molecular
              beam epitaxy growth facility at the University of Arkansas will provide the
              opportunity for scientists and engineers to explore and advance our current
              understanding of nanosize semiconductor quantum dots and wires. It will also
              play a significant role in a new Ph.D. degree program in electronic-photonic
              materials and devices, supported under the NSF/IGERT program. The educational
              goal of our program is to produce graduates that are fully prepared to drive
              the advancement of nanostructures. We will accomplish this goal by utilizing
              our molecular beam epitaxy facility, coupled with the newly acquired diagnostic
              and device fabrication tools made possible by this award, as a novel
              educational tool.
 

