Title       : Acquisition of a cell-sorting flow cytometer and a storage phosphor imager for
               environmental and biological studies at Florida International University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a0079490

Award Number: 0079490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264765             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald D. Jones serc@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria Guerrero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher D. Sinigalliano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1228,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Instrumentation will be acquired that will provide the core for a new
              Molecular Imaging Facility at the Southeast Environmental Research Center
              (SERC) of  Florida International University (FIU).  An Epics Altra flow
              cytometer equipped for cell sorting and detection of submicron particles will
              be purchased from Beckman-Coulter Corporation, and a FLA 3000-G phosphor imager
              will be purchased from Fuji Medical Systems.  Both of these instruments will be
              part of an interdisciplinary multi-user facility that will be used for research
              and research training by the FIU scientific community.   The flow cytometer to
              be acquired has the resolution to visualize even the smallest bacterial cells,
              and with the cell-sorting option it can rapidly and automatically isolate and
              collect specific cells from liquid samples, based on those cells particular
              light scatter or fluorescent properties.   Therefore, this instrument not only
              provides an incredibly powerful tool for characterization/enumeration but also
              for the collection of specific  populations (such as specific types of
              bacterial cells, phytoplankton, or spores).  The phosphor imager system to be
              acquired is a multi-label system, which can detect and digitally record  images
              of samples labeled by radioactivity, fluorescence, and chemiluminescence.  It
              will be used to image electrophoresis gels, blots, labeled tissue, etc.  The
              FLA 3000-G phosphor imager was chosen because of its sensitivity, resolution
              and versatility since it will also permit the use of other non-radioactive
              labeling strategies.  
There are a wide variety of projects that will utilize
              either or both of these instruments. Typically, the phosphor imager will be
              mostly used for in vitro analysis (in vitro hybridization, genetic
              fingerprinting, differential display of gene expression, incorporation studies,
              etc.) while the flow cytometer will handle the in situ or in vivo
              characterization of whole cells/particles by their scatter and fluorescent
              properties.  Most of the in vivo intact cell analyses by flow cytometry  will
              be used to  reveal their numbers, activity, and autofluorescent properties.  A
              variety of other investigations will use intact cells that have been
              fluorescently labeled based on their specific genotype or phenotype. 
The
              acquisition of this instrumentation and the establishment of an Environmental 
              Molecular Imaging Facility at SERC will significantly advance research and
              educational opportunities at FIU.  The instrumentation acquired through this
              grant will be combined with particle counters, epifluorescent microscopes,
              digital imaging systems, and other molecular biology resources to provide a
              concentration of expertise and equipment to the research community within FIU
              and SERC for molecular biology imaging.  This facility will help the faculty
              and students to adapt and develop appropriate molecular imaging applications to
              enhance their research.


