Title       : Role of gp130 in Dictyostelium Phagocytosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0079967

Award Number: 0079967
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389855             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine P. Chia cchia@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A major goal in membrane biology is to understand how transmembrane signals
              trigger rearrangements of the cytoskeleton that effect cell movement and
              changes in cell shape. Phagocytosis, a specialized form of endocytosis
              dependent on the actin-based cytoskeleton and its connections to the plasma
              membrane, is performed by free-living single-celled organisms such as the soil
              amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum.  This phylogenetically primitive mechanism
              also is used by specialized ameboid cells (macrophages and leukocytes) of
              immune systems of animals for host defense as well as for tissue repair and
              morphogenetic remodeling.

Phagocytosis is a process that requires local
              alterations in the cytoarchitecture and thus is a controlled remodeling event. 
              The long-term goal of these studies is to understand cytoskeletal-membrane
              interactions during the formation of the phagocytic cup and during phagosome
              processing in Dictyostelium. Because D. discoideum amebae perform the same
              motile activities, such as phagocytosis and chemotaxis, as macrophages and
              polymorphonuclear leukocytes, the molecular mechanism of phagocytosis in D.
              discoideum likely will resemble the mechanisms of phagocytes in other cell
              types, including animal immune systems.  Importantly, and in contrast to
              macrophages and leukocytes, molecular genetic approaches to the study of motile
              functions such as phagocytosis are feasible in D. discoideum with its haploid
              and pliable genome.

Previously, a cell-surface glycoprotein gp130 of D.
              discoideum was identified as a candidate phagocytosis receptor.  Based on the
              amino acid sequence deduced from the recently acquired gene sequence, gp130 is
              postulated to have an adhesive function and a glycosylphosphatidylinositol
              (GPI) anchor that links it to the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane of
              vegetative cells.  Although not novel, this GPI anchor raises intriguing
              questions about the function of gp130 and its interactions with the
              cytoskeleton.  Gp130 is also one of the few identified plasma membrane proteins
              known to be internalized during phagocytosis and thus it may serve as a useful
              marker for the endo-lysosomal membrane network in a cell type with high
              membrane turnover.

 Through either gene disruption or antisense methods
              using the cloned cDNA for gp130, the in vivo function of gp130 will be explored
              by generating mutant cell lines lacking the gene.  The pinocytic and phagocytic
              activities under different growth conditions, and adhesive properties of
              gp130-minus cells will be tested and compared to the parent strain. 
              Biochemical analyses, aided by gp130 antibodies, will determine whether gp130
              is GPI-linked or an integral membrane protein.  The antibodies also will be
              used to examine the distribution patterns of gp130 during different endocytic
              activities to determine its fate after internalization.  In addition, a role of
              gp130 in cell-cell adhesion during development will be tested by assaying the
              ability of gp130-minus cells to aggregate, and with binding assays using
              purified native protein.  To augment localization studies, a green fluorescent
              protein (GFP)-gp130 fusion protein will be introduced into both normal and
              cells already containing other spectrally-distinct GFP-cytoskeletal proteins,
              such as actin, involved in the formation of the phagocytic cup.  The ability to
              monitor gp130 and these other proteins in live cells during phagocytosis will
              provide temporal and spatial information at the molecular level about this
              dynamic process that could not be acquired through traditional biochemical and
              microscopy methods.  Finally, actin polymerization kinetics will be measured
              and compared between normal and gp130-minus cells engaged in phagocytosis to
              determine if there is a functional linkage between gp130 and the actin
              cytoskeleton.  Because gp130 may be signaling to the cytoskeleton, it likely
              interacts with other proteins. Future studies will focus on the identification
              and activities of these associated proteins because they will provide
              information about the signaling mechanism(s) between cell-surface molecules and
              the cytoskeletal network responsible for activities, such as cell motility,
              cell-cell adhesion and cell substrate adhesion that are fundamental to tissue
              and organ development.

