Title       : The Theory of Dynamic Public Investment Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0079352

Award Number: 0079352
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217017             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Matthews stevenma@ssc.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The project develops a theory of dynamic public investment games. These games
              are intended to model dynamic environments in which current actions have
              external effects that irreversibly alter future incentives. A canonical example
              is a fund drive to provide the capital that will produce a future public
              benefit such as public television programming or a new church complex.
              Important features of such a drive that characterize a public investment game
              are: (1) an individual's contribution affects (generally positively) all the
              other participants; (2) this benefit is irreversible, assuming contributions
              are nonrefundable; and (3) the contribution alters the incentives of future
              contributors by enlarging the amount of the public good to which they will
              contribute.

Environments with similar features, and which hence may be
              usefully viewed through the lens of a public investment game, are far more
              pervasive than just charity fund drives. They include the following. Firms in
              an oligopoly invest over time in their own capital stocks, which thus grow and
              affect all firms via their effect on marginal cost and hence prices. Bargaining
              when there is no third party to enforce agreements, as in international
              negotiations over trade, peace, or pollution abatement treaties, often takes
              place piecemeal over time with future concessions depending on the affirmative
              steps taken at earlier dates. Payments made over time by lobbyists to
              legislators generate a bundle of public goods, the legislative outcomes. In a
              patent race, a firm's current R&D expenditures irreversibly affect the state of
              knowledge about an innovation that will affect all firms. In a strategic
              learning environment, the result of an agent's current action provides an
              informational externality to all agents, irreversibly changing beliefs and
              hence future incentives. Thus, very abstractly, a dynamic public investment
              game is intended to model any situation in which "social capital" is created by
              individual efforts, investments, contributions, or other influence activities
              that can be taken incrementally over time.

This research formulates an
              appropriate general definition of such dynamic games. It characterizes as much
              as possible the sequential equilibria of these games, with the goal being to
              obtain results that rival in completeness those we now have for repeated games.
              The overall goal is to increase our understanding of these environments, and to
              provide guidance for how to alter them, e.g., by modifying the governance of
              lobbying, patents, or charity drives. The central issues to be addressed
              concern the inefficiencies caused by free riding and coordination failure that
              these environments exhibit. 

