Title       : Materials Science and Engineering Research Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0079992

Award Number: 0079992
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14008661           (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis J. DiSalvo director@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil W. Ashcroft  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the Cornell
              University supports a broadly based interdisciplinary research program on
              control of advanced ordered and disordered materials at the nanoscale.  The
              research is carried out in five interdisciplinary research groups with
              appropriate seed projects.  IRG A Nanostructured Materials:  Electron and Spin
              Transport will exploit uniquely nanostructured materials to elucidate
              fundamental issues of electron and spin transport in systems whose electronic
              structure have considerable technological potential; IRG B Nanoscale
              Polymer-Inorganic Hybrid Materials will combine synthesis, physical
              characterization, and modeling to control the properties of new generations of
              industrially important polymer-inorganic nanoscale hybrid materials; IRG C
              Oxide Glasses:  Surfaces and Thin-film Interfaces will develop fundamental
              knowledge of the chemistry and nono- and intermediate length scale structure at
              and near the surfaces and key interfaces in silicate glasses crucial to
              emerging thin-film-on-glass technologies; IRG D Fundamentals of Energetic
              Surface Processing will develop further the means to improve thin film
              deposition using novel energetic supersonic and hyperthermal ion beams; and IRG
              E Dynamic Mechanical Properties of Nanoscale Materials will strive to
              understand and control energy dissipation and the non-linear response of
              nano-mechanical oscillators to assist in enabling new GHz technologies.  The
              MRSEC includes a comprehensive educational outreach programs targeting K-12;
              undergraduate; graduate; school teachers and the general public.  It places
              special emphasis on outreach to rural school districts.  The Center maintains a
              significant set of shared experimental facilities that provide state of the art
              instrumentation for the entire University; act as a focal point for graduate
              education and for knowledge transfer to industry.  Participants in the Center
              include 44 senior investigators, 8 postdoctoral associates, 41 graduate
              students, 20 undergraduates, and 18 technicians and other support
              personnel.
Professor Neil Ashcroft directs the MRSEC. 

