Title       : On-the-Job Search and Short-Term Employment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0079345

Award Number: 0079345
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154959             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Shimer shimer@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project explores the importance of two related assumptions in the standard
              macroeconomic theory of the labor market: the equilibrium search and matching
              model. The first assumption is that workers can only search for jobs when they
              are unemployed. The Principal Investigator will follow the lead of some other
              researchers and explore the implications of allowing for "on-the-job" search. 
              The second assumption is that firms can only hire workers when they have a job
              vacancy. The PI will explore the implications of allowing for "short-term
              employment" a situation in which a firm hires a worker knowing that it will try
              to find a better one in the near future. This possibility has not previously
              been examined.
Preliminary research indicates that on-the-job search and
              short-term employment may qualitatively affect the behavior of the labor
              market. For example, in the standard equilibrium search model, all increase in
              the labor force growth rate (e.g. due to the baby boom) or an increase in the
              job separation rate (e.g. due to business cycle fluctuations) causes an
              increase in the unemployment rate.  In a model with both on-the-job search and
              short-term employment, the effects may be reversed.  More generally, it appears
              that any activity that increases the flow of workers between employment and
              unemployment has the potential of reducing the unemployment rate.
The first
              objective of this project is to explore the sensitivity of this result to the
              model specification. In the course of this project, the PI will endogenize wage
              determination and search behavior and will introduce heterogeneous workers and
              jobs into the basic model. He will then examine the properties of the resulting
              economy.
The second objective of this project is to explore the macroeconomic
              implications of the theory of on-the-job search and short-term employment. The
              theory will shed light on the large flow of workers between jobs. It also
              predicts that the probability of a worker losing her job should get smaller as
              the worker stays in the job for longer, which is consistent with the available
              evidence. The PI will explore the implications of this for the persistence of
              individual unemployment spells and of aggregate unemployment. The PI will also
              examine whether labor market rigidities such as hiring costs may he responsible
              for high levels of unemployment in Europe. This possibility is suggested by the
              basic result that a large flow of workers between employment and unemployment
              is important for maintaining a low unemployment rate
The last objective of
              this project is to test the theory using a variety of empirical evidence. For
              example the PI will use fluctuations in birth rates 16-24 years earlier to
              identify anticipated changes in the growth rate of the labor force. The theory
              of on-the-job search and short-term employment makes strong predictions
              concerning the impact of these fluctuations on unemployment rates, wages, labor
              force participation, and the flow of workers between jobs. Thus empirical
              evidence will ultimately refine or reject this theory.

