Title       : A Multiscale Framework for Spatial Modeling in Geography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0079077

Award Number: 0079077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249410             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric D. Kolaczyk kolaczyk@math.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sucharita Gopal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Scale dependency is an inherent property of geographic phenomena, and the
              increasingly pressing importance of better understanding the effects of scale
              has been highlighted in a number of recent public forums.  So-called multiscale
              models can be particularly appropriate for this task, that is,
              mathematical/statistical models in which the overall structure of an object
              under study is decomposed according to its component structures at different
              scales of spatial and/or temporal resolution.  In this project, work will focus
              on the development and implementation of a multiscale statistical modeling
              framework recently introduced by the principal investigators specifically for
              geographic data structures.  The framework underlying these models is that of a
              set of hierarchically defined partitions (or aggregations) of a data space. 
              The effects of scale are captured through a fundamental decomposition (or
              factorization) of the data likelihood, induced by this hierarchy, into
              individual components of local information at all possible spatial resolutions.
               Upon combining these multiscale likelihoods with an appropriately defined
              Bayesian prior probability structure, a powerful inferential framework results.
               The specific aims of this project are three-fold: (i) further develop and
              extend the original, general modeling structure, so as to (ii) tailor it to two
              specific class of problems in geographical analysis, those of remote sensing
              and census geography, and finally (iii) produce formal tools of statistical
              inference for characterizing the influence of scale effects in standard tasks
              such as prediction, classification, knowledge discovery, and decision
              making.

Broadly speaking, this research is aimed at fully developing an
              inferential statistical framework for the study of scale effects in geographic
              phenomena, with particular emphasis on problems in remote sensing and census
              geography.  As such, it is expected to have implications in areas such as
              geographical theory, knowledge discovery and spatial data mining, and theory
              and methods for database generalization.  The resulting framework will be
              sufficiently flexible and computationally efficient to allow for integration
              into geographic information systems (GIS), such as those arising in the context
              of environmental, epidemiological, and agricultural applications.

