Title       : Research Equipment Proposal: Acquisition of a Fourier Transform Infrared
               Spectrometer with a Microscope Attachment.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2000  
File        : a0079677

Award Number: 0079677
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76442              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Couzis acouzis@che-mail.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M Lane Gilchrist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Rumschitzki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Maldarelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0079677
A. Couzis
CUNY @ City College


This is an
              engineering equipment proposal for the acquisition of a Nicolet Nexus-670
              Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer.  The instrument is an advanced FTIR
              device with features that allow operation in the near, mid and far regions of
              the IR and infrared sources, and an infrared microscope (Nicolet Continum
              infrared microscope) which will allow surface mapping experiments with minimum
              x-y resolution of less that .1 um.  the total cost for this instrument is
              approximately $115,000 of which City College has agreed to a one third cost
              share, thus the requested amount from NSF is approximately $76,500.

The
              Instrument will be used by four faculty (A. Couzis, C. Maldarelli, D.
              Rumschitski and L. Gilchrist) all of the Department of Chemical Engineering at
              City College in a series of five projects, some of which are collaborative. 
              These projects are:

Water restructuring and monolayer phase behavior of
              surfactants at the hydrophobic solid - aqueous interface (Couzis).
              

"Superspreading" trisiloxane surfactant systems allow water to spread on
              hydrophobic surfaces.  How these systems work is unknown.  We have posited a
              mechanism in which the siloxane displaces water as it adsorbs onto the
              hydrophobic/water interface to form a dense hydrophobic domain adjacent to the
              solid, which lowers the solid/water tension and facilities spreading.  Total
              internal reflection in the infrared will be used to follow restructuring and
              chain coherence in an effort to establish this mechanism, and this information
              will be used to design mixed hydrocarbon surfactant systems with superspreading
              ability.


The direct measurement of the surfactant equation of state of the
              air-aqueous interface (Maldarelli).

The equation of state describes the
              dependence of the surface tension on the surface concentration.  For soluble
              surfactants this equation has not been measured directly since surface
              concentrations are unknown.  Infrared reflection adsorption spectrometry will
              be sued to obtain directly the surface concentration by measuring the infrared
              adsorbance and suing a calibration with an insoluble
              surfactant.

Nano-engineered templates for a controlled crystallization
              (Maldarelli and Couzis)

Functionalized self-assembled monolayers on a solid
              support are being designed to serve as template foe selective crystallization
              of one polymorph over another.  The templating is a form of epitaxy in which
              the functionalized template surface mimics a face of the desired crystal
              polymorph.  Total internal reflection in the infrared will be used to follow
              structural changes in the template as crystallization proceeds providing
              insight into how to optimize the epitaxy.

Characterization of biomimetic
              surfaces (Gilchrist)

Biomimetic surfaces will be constructed form cellular
              components such as polypeptides, structural proteins and phospholipids. 
              Internal reflection spectroscopy in the infrared will be used on IR tags on
              these components to study the structure of the assembling surface.

The
              dynamic of protein folding (Rumschitski)

The process of protein folding
              involves a series of kinetic paths in a transition from a random coil to a
              native configuration.  Folding times are usually complete in times well below a
              millisecond.  Structural studies of the folding process provide insight into
              the relationship between the protein's sequence and its native conformation,
              but are currently difficult to obtain because of the long scan times of
              techniques such as x-ray crystallography and solution state NMR.  We propose a
              new technique in which the protein folding is initiated in a miniature
              well-mixed flow cell at steady state, with different ages or protein
              intermediates states present.  IR spectroscopy, together with a kinetic model,
              is used to identify these states.

