Title       : Acquisition of a Quadrupole-Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0079773

Award Number: 0079773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242508             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison Butler butler@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Mass spectrometry has recently become one of the most powerful techniques
              for structural characterization of biological molecules, including peptides,
              proteins and nucleic acids.  Tandem mass spectrometry is particularly useful
              for sequencing these molecules, especially when only small amounts of material
              are available. The quadrupole time-of-flight tandem mass spectrometer will be
              used for routine fragmentation and unequivocal daughter fragment identification
              and characterization.  Specific projects which will use this instrumentation
              include 1) investigations of the molecular mechanisms of iron acquisition by
              marine microorganisms in order to understand the role of iron in regulating the
              global carbon cycle and climate change; 2) the search for biological molecular
              markers of autism, 3) the synthesis and characterization of polymeric peptide
              adhesives with industrial and medical applications, 4) the development
              biological nanofabrication processes of new high performance composites and 5)
              investigations of amphiphilic peptides to control the cell response,
              particularly on biologically active material surfaces.

     The quadrupole
              time-of flight mass spectrometer will include a high pressure liquid
              chromatograph to separate compounds before analyzing their masses and
              fragmentation patterns.  The mass spectrometer will consist of a quadrupole as
              the first mass analyzer, followed by a quadrupole collision cell and a
              time-of-flight detector as the second mass analyzer.  The system will also be
              configured with nanospray and micro ion spray capabilities to allow for a range
              of flow rates and to permit the small amounts of biological samples to be
              analyzed.  The system will use electrospray ionization (ESI) for soft
              ionization of proteins and peptides or atmospheric pressure chemical ionization
              (APCI) for analysis of polar organic molecules.

     The quadrupole time-of
              flight mass spectrometer will significantly enhancing the research
              infrastructure at the University of California, Santa Barbara by extending the
              mass range and sensitivity capabilities of the UCSB Mass Spectrometry Facility
              which is housed in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry.  For example,
              this instrument provides the capability to elucidate the structures of
              peptides, proteins and nucleic acids, which is required by the research groups
              that will use this instrumentation.  This mass spectrometer will also
              significantly enhance student training, by providing exposure to and training
              in modern structure determination methodologies, which will certainly be useful
              in the emerging areas of proteomics, genomics and bioinformatics. 

