Title       : An Experimental Study of Strategic Complementarity, Asynchronicity and Mechanism
               Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0079001

Award Number: 0079001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yan Chen yanchen@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This program of research in experimental economics incorporates bounded
              rationality and learning into the mechanism design framework. The project has
              two parts.   The first consists of three experimental studies of
              incentive-compatible public goods mechanisms. The presence of public goods
              seriously challenges traditional or "natural" solutions for the allocation of
              private goods. Incentive-compatible mechanisms align individual self-interests
              with the group interest. The investigator's previous work and others' work have
              shown that among these incentive compatible mechanisms those which are
              supermodular, i.e., when players' strategies are strategic complements,
              converge robustly well to the Nash equilibrium prediction, and those which are
              not supermodular do not converge as well. This project examines whether the
              degree of strategic complementarity could have a significant effect on the
              convergence of a mechanism, i.e., whether the process is gradual. Experiments
              are conducted on three supermodular mechanisms for public goods provision with
              varying degrees of strategic complementarity to study this effect. Convergence
              is an important criterion for selecting a mechanism to solve a particular
              problem because at the end of the learning process we would like the mechanism
              to yield the desired outcome.

The second part consists of two experimental
              studies of mechanism design in distributed systems, such as the Internet, which
              are characterized by asynchronicity and limited information. In a wide variety
              of real world situations a group of agents share a common production process
              transforming input into output. A salient example is provided by the Internet,
              which has becoming increasingly important in global telecommunications. In the
              context of several agents sharing a network link, the cost to be shared is
              congestion experienced. In the network context, traditional solution concepts
              such as Nash equilibrium or the serially undominated set might not apply.
              Friedman and Shenker (1998) propose new solution concepts for distributed
              systems.  This project runs experiments to examine these new solution concepts.
               The project also conducts experiments to study the average cost pricing and
              the serial cost sharing mechanisms under complete information and synchronous
              moves, as well as distributed settings with limited information and varying
              degrees of asynchrony. This study will provide information on what types of
              mechanisms should be selected in distributed systems.


