Title       : Developing a Taxonomy of Decision Modes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0079664

Award Number: 0079664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159531             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elke U. Weber euw2@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
 ***
000079664 (proposal number)
Elke Weber

Recent work in
              decision making has expanded the notion of how people make decisions.
Many
              researchers now look beyond the rational choice framework used by economists
              or
the cognitive information integration framework traditionally used by
              psychologists.
With the expansion of the traditional notion of decision-making
              as a cost-benefit
analysis, researchers are finding that decision makers act
              in a variety of ways that
cannot be described in terms of costs and benefits
              (Beach & Mitchell, 1990;
Gigerenzer, Todd, & Group, 1999; Hammond, 1996;
              Klein, 1998; Yates & Lee, 1996).  In
some cases, these alternative
              decision-making modes are even designed to prevent
cost-benefit calculations
              (March, 1994; Prelec & Hernstein, 1991). Yates and Lee
(1996) coined the term
              decision modes to describe qualitatively different strategies
for arriving at
              a decision.

Given the new plurality of views on the ways that people make
              decisions, it is time to
take a look at the bigger picture and to carefully
              examine the range of decision modes
that people use.  In the current climate
              of decision making research, the careful
development of a taxonomy of decision
              modes will be an important contribution to the
field.  A central objective of
              the proposed research is to develop a comprehensive
taxonomy of decision modes
              and a common vocabulary that can be used to identify and
distinguish decision
              making processes that fall within each mode.  The proposed
taxonomy includes
              four decision modes, i.e., cost-benefit-based,
              recognition-based,
affect-based, and reason-based.  Each mode is characterized
              in terms of its
attentional focus, primary cognitive and affective processes,
              and mental
representations.  The further development of this decision mode
              taxonomy will involve
more precisely characterizing the distinguishing
              attributes of different decision
modes and developing experimental procedures
              able to demonstrate more unequivocally
the existence of these qualitatively
              different modes.

  A second objective is to establish a better understanding
              of the factors that
determine when a particular mode will be used and why. 
              This requires the development
of a model of implicit decision mode selection
              that is directly related to the
decision mode taxonomy.  Which decision mode
              is used in a given situation is
hypothesized to depend both on person-centered
              factors (i.e., cognitive and affective
processes) and on situational factors. 
              Identifying and characterizing the factors
that influence decision mode
              selection will be important not only because it is
theoretically interesting
              to better understand the decision making process, but also
because the
              selection of one or the other decision mode is hypothesized to influence
the
              final decision outcome.

 The proposed research has the potential to
              integrate existing knowledge about human
motivation, the nature and function
              of cognitive and affective processes, and mental
representation into an
              adaptive decision making framework.  The proposed framework is
far broader
              than its precursors in both its specification of the criteria on which
people
              are trying to optimize and its specification of the strategies and processes
              at
people's disposal.   Such a framework has the potential to guide and focus
              new
research in the field.



