Title       : Comprehensive Upgrade of a Shared Campus Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0079461

Award Number: 0079461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150803             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Smith gmsmith@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerd N. La Mar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey H. Walton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey S. de Ropp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thorsten Dieckmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This award will fund a cryoprobe for state-of-the-art nuclear magnetic
              resonance (NMR) studies of biological macromolecules and natural products.  The
              cryoprobe will be used at the UC Davis NMR Facility by researchers in the
              fields of chemistry, biochemistry, and structural biology.  Specific examples
              include studies of the molecular structure and dynamics of proteins, nucleic
              acids, carbohydrates, lipids, and natural products from a variety of sources. 
              The high sensitivity cryoprobe dramatically increases experimental sensitivity,
              reduces experimental run times, and lowers the minimum amount of sample needed
              for study, thus opening new areas of productive research.

     The cryoprobe
              package consists of a cryogenically cooled NMR probe, a mounting platform,
              associated cryogenic pumps and tubing, and a cryogenically cooled preamplifier.
               The probe will be a triple resonance type, with proton observation and both
              carbon and nitrogen decoupling channels.  A Z-field gradient coil is also part
              of the probe.  The probe sensitivity is approximately two to four times that of
              non-cryogenic probes for the same sample volume and concentration.  This
              increase translates into reductions in run time of approximately four to
              sixteen fold.  Such a drastic savings in run time effectively provides another
              entire spectrometer at a fraction of the cost. The probe will be capable of
              multi-resonance, multi-dimensional solution studies of biological
              macromolecules and natural products.

     The instrumentation will become
              part of the UCD NMR Facility.  The Facility is utilized annually by over 40
              faculty members (in approximately 20 departments of the Davis campus).  These
              research groups have approximately 140 students and 50 postdoctoral fellows, of
              whom approximately 40 individuals are regular hands-on users of the
              instrumentation. The NMR spectrometers are an ancillary part of 14 classes
              annually with an average total enrollment of over 100 students.  The
              spectrometers also serve as a state of the art resource for student and faculty
              recruitment. The cryoprobe will thus make a significant contribution to the
              research and educational infrastructure at the University of California,
              Davis.

