Title       : CSEDI: Reconciling Geophysical and Geochemical Observations of Mantle Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0079975

Award Number: 0079975
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. White white@geology.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald L. Turcotte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              White and Turcotte 

0079975 



This study will critically evaluate
              models of mantle structure in light of geochemical observations. Any successful
              model of mantle structure and dynamics must simultaneously explain both
              geochemical and geophysical observations. The model of mantle structure
              proposed by Kellogg et al. [Science, 283: 1881-1884, 1999] appears promising in
              this respect. A major objective of this study will be to determine whether this
              model is actually consistent with geochemical observation. Specifically, the
              investigators will carry out the following studies: (1) Mass Balance and Heat
              Flow. For refractory lithophile elements, such as Sr, Ce, Sm, Nd, Lu, Hf, U,
              and Th, the crust plus mantle should sum to give chondritic relative
              abundances. Mantle heat flow is largely due to decay of U, Th, and K and hence
              provides a further constraint on the abundances of these elements. Since both
              the heat flow and incompatible element and isotopic composition of the crust
              and depleted mantle are known within limits, the composition and size of other
              mantle reservoirs can be constrained. The investigators will evaluate
              crust-mantle mass balance using refined estimates of crustal and depleted
              mantle composition and incorporating the constraint of heat flow. (2) Isotope
              evolution models. This work will examine the evolution of radiogenic isotopes,
              particularly the U-Th-Pb-He system, in a multi-reservoir system where residence
              times of elements are short. Alternative configurations of reservoirs will be
              considered with both steady-state and episodic recycling of material between
              reservoirs. The objective will be to constrain the sizes of and fluxes between
              mantle reservoirs. (3) Models of convective mixing. The investigators will
              model mixing and homogenization within reservoirs using parameterizations of
              mixing times versus temperature and viscosity based on available numerical
              simulations. The analyses will be divided into two parts. First, variable rates
              of interchange, including strongly time-dependent interchange, between major
              terrestrial reservoirs will be considered to determine whether a
              self-consistent model can be obtained that satisfies the geochemical
              constraints. The second part will consider isotopic evolution within a
              reservoir. 



