Title       : Workshop on Landscape Change Bringing Together Research Scientists and Design
               Professionals; Fall 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0079979

Award Number: 0079979
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Goodchild good@ncgia.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Landscapes constitute an intriguing and important area of interface between
              scientists who study the composition and dynamics of landscape change and
              designers, planners, and other professionals whose jobs include the
              manipulation and management of landscapes.  Advanced technologies like
              geographic information systems now are being used by both groups, enabling both
              researchers and professionals to identify more areas and topics of common
              experience and interest.  Using a model developed and used successfully by the
              National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis, this award will
              provide support to conduct a workshop focusing on landscape change.  The
              workshop will bring together representatives of the investigative scientific
              disciplines interested in landscape change and the design disciplines.  The
              purposes of the workshop are to promote the building of a collaborative
              research community; to develop a joint research agenda; and to facilitate the
              exchange of ideas.  The workshop steering committee will be chaired by a
              geographer and a landscape architect.  The workshop will address its major
              objectives in the context of four themes:  information technologies, decision
              making, landscape perception and assessment, and environmental and social
              sciences.  The workshop will be structured as a series of plenary
              presentations, breakout discussions, and plenary discussion.  Findings of the
              workshop will be published in the form of a report and other materials using
              both traditional publications and electronic media.  This workshop will provide
              an excellent opportunity for professionals in the design disciplines to
              directly interact with the investigative scientists interested in landscape
              change.  The workshop will facilitate exploration of the advances in
              understanding that have been made possible by new technologies like remote
              sensing and geographic information systems, and it will foster greater
              appreciation for benefits that may be realized when basic science interacts
              with normative implementation in the exploration of important topics and issues
              like "smart growth," "sustainable communities," and "liveable communities."

