Title       : The Relationship Between Sleep and Developmental Outcomes in Young Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2001   
File        : a0079435

Award Number: 0079435
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105908             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Joe Olmi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Rabian  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research project investigates the role of sleep in the behavioral
              and psychosocial development of preschool children. The preschool age was
              selected for study because: a) it is a time of explosive development in all
              areas important to normal functioning and b) it is during this time that
              children are learning to adjust their sleep habits to changing biological and
              social pressures. The primary objective of the proposed research is to show
              that a child's social, emotional, and cognitive functioning are related to the
              quantity and quality of his/her usual pattern of sleep. This relationship is
              expected to be strong for preschool children as both sleep problems and
              behavioral problems are common at this age. A representative sample of
              approximately 300 three- to five-year old children of varying SES and ethnic
              background will be selected for enrollment in the study from a tri-county area
              in Mississippi. Behavioral sleep quality and its determinant factors will be
              assessed using a newly constructed questionnaire/interview. This questionnaire
              will permit a more comprehensive assessment of the relationship between sleep
              and psychosocial functioning. In this way, the proposed research addresses
              limitations of existing research on sleep and daytime functioning in young
              children, which has been stalled by inadequate measurement tools. The
              investigators believe that this project will act as a building block for
              extended data collection in this sample to test the prediction that the level
              of a child's functioning during the early school years will be related to the
              overall amount and quality of his/her sleep during preschool years. This
              prediction is based on the proposition that sleep is a fundamentally important
              activity for developmental processes shaped by a child's level of alertness,
              emotional/behavioral stability, and attention capacity. 
