Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Theories of Legislative
               Organization and the Development of U.S. State Legislative Committee Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a0079928

Award Number: 0079928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8100               (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Hamm hamm@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Over the course of the twentieth century, the committee systems of U.S. state
              legislatures have undergone major transformations in their structure and
              procedure.  The purpose of this Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project
              is to assess these changes using three well-known theories concerning the role
              of the committee system in the U.S. Congress.  These theories are the
              distributive, informational, and partisan theories.  While each theory views
              the committee system as an agent of some principal group associated with the
              legislature, and assigns committees a very specific and different role/purpose
              in the legislative process, none of these theories have directly addressed the
              conditions under which committee procedures and structures will change and how
              they will change.

The goal of this Doctoral Dissertation Research Support
              project is to delineate and empirically test expectations about changes in
              committee system structure and procedure based upon the distributive,
              informational and partisan theories of legislative organization.  First, why
              will committee systems change?  Second, how will the committee system be
              changed?  Will these changes be structural, procedural or both?  Specifically,
              with respect to procedure, when will the committee system be strengthened
              relative to the floor of the chamber and when will it be weakened?  These
              questions need to be addressed both theoretically and empirically, and will be
              the focus of this project.  Data collected from all 50 states for the period
              1955-1996 will be used to address these questions.

