Title       : Infants' Individuation of Physical Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0079917

Award Number: 0079917
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382511             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Leslie aleslie@ruccs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cognitive processing in infants has been shown to span a small set of
              concurrently individuated objects, allowing infants to attend to relations
              between objects and, within limits, to attend to object numerosity. Some
              current findings from the study of infancy seem to parallel findings in
              object-based attention in adults. These parallels have inspired the "object
              indexing" framework for studying aspects of the infant object concept which, in
              turn, has yielded a set of hypotheses concerning how infants might attend to
              physical objects. One general and long term aim of this research is to draw
              together the study of the "object concept" in infants and objectbased theories
              of attention in adults.

Using standard familiarization-test looking times
              measures, a series of experiments will probe processes underlying infant object
              individuation and identification. A key process in object cognition is object
              individuation - the representation of a specific numerosity of objects in a
              scene. There is evidence that infants in the first year can individuate up to a
              small number of physical objects in a given scene but it remains unclear what
              is the representational basis of this ability. Two mutually compatible
              possibilities are investigated here: the representations may be numerical in
              character; the representations may be indexical (and non-numerical) in
              character. Attempts will be made to gather evidence for both types of
              representational mechanism. 

A second specific aim is to investigate the
              relation between object individuation and object identification in infants. If
              individuation is the initial establishment of a distinct object representation,
              then identification addresses whether the object is one that has been
              encountered before. Although these processes are closely related, it is, useful
              to distinguish them. Current work shows that under some circumstances infants
              can individuate objects without subsequently being able to (re)identify them.
              This gives rise to seemingly paradoxical cases where featural information used
              as the basis for individuation decisions fails to be used for identification
              decisions. The object indexing model accounts for these cases by linking
              identification to the key process of feature binding. Drawing inspiration from
              object-based theories of attention in adults, the object indexing model
              requires that featural information be attached to object indexes by a
              non-default process of binding. Experiments are proposed to reveal the nature
              of the infant object representation and to probe the development of feature
              binding in infants from 6 to 13 months of age.

Finally, experiments are
              proposed for an initial investigation of the hypothesis that working memory
              systems are the location for the construction of object indexes and for the
              binding of featural information to indexes. Data on the early development of
              these processes will provide the foundations for building a detailed cognitive
              model. Such a model would be a landmark accomplishment in developmental
              cognitive science.
This proposal will advance our knowledge of one of the
              fundamental structures of human thought by exploring connections between the
              infantile ability to track persistent individual objects in a changing world
              and object-based mechanisms of selective attention.


