Title       : A Fluorescence Deconvolution Microscope at the University of Maryland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0079518

Award Number: 0079518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210545             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Wolniak sw36@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wenxia Song  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Mount  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric H. Baehrecke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles F. Delwiche  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A Fluorescence Image Deconvolution-Reconstruction Microscope will be used for a
              variety of different applications with living cells. Use will be restricted to
              observations of living cells that are present singly, or in thin specimens.
              This microscope generates a stack of fluorescent images at different focal
              planes, and then employs a set of sophisticated algorithms to determine
              point-spread functions for sources of fluorescence in the specimen. Out-of
              focus noise is subtracted from the signals in the image slices, and the slices
              are restacked to generate a three-dimensional reconstruction of the object at
              high resolution. Since small, bright objects placed against a dark background
              are detected as spots, it is possible to image fluorescence sources that are
              smaller than the theoretical limit of resolution for the microscope. 

During
              the last twenty years, developments in the design of novel indicator
              fluorescent probes have enabled biologists to attack formerly intractable
              problems in cell biology and cell physiology. The cellular processes that have
              been amenable to this kind of analysis include photoreception, neuronal
              transmission, animal development, hormonal signaling, triggered gene
              expression, mitotic regulation, and chemotaxis. The developments in fluorescent
              dye design have moved in parallel with improvements in our ability to visualize
              and measure low light intensity signals from small numbers of molecules in
              living cells, with newly-designed optical microscopes and large pixel array CCD
              camera detectors. It is reasonable to expect that a significant expansion of
              analysis of processes in living cells will result from combined developments of
              reporter molecules and digital imaging technologies. It seems clear that the
              convergence of developments in photochemistry, biochemistry, cell biology,
              physiology and microscopy are all about to intersect within the living cell,
              and when accurate assessments of changing abundance and activity of a variety
              of molecules can be made in vivo and through time. 

This microscope will be
              placed in an imaging facility that provides faculty, postdocs, graduate and
              undergraduate students with access to several high performance microscopes
              equipped with the capacity to view small quantities of fluorescent reporter
              molecules in living cells. 


