Title       : Middle Holocene Sea-Level Change and Coastal Response, Texas Gulf Coast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0079343

Award Number: 0079343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Blum mblum1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,9150,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Recent NSF-sponsored research has resulted in a new model for middle Holocene
              sea-level change along the Texas Gulf Coast.  This model suggests sea level
              reached present elevations 6800 years ago, and was slightly higher than modern
              for 2000 years after that.  This view contrasts sharply with traditional
              interpretations, as well as recent and ongoing work by another research group,
              which would place sea level 6-10 m below present at that time, with present sea
              level not reached until 3000 years ago.  This new phase of research will test
              these alternative models through documentation of middle Holocene sea-level
              change and the response of coastal geomorphic systems.  Geomorphological,
              sedimentological, micropaleontological, and geochronological techniques will be
              used to examine a series of newly-recognized landforms that may hold the key to
              testing these alternative views of sea-level change and coastal
              evolution.

The Texas Gulf Coast has long served as a natural laboratory for
              the study of coastal processes and landforms and their evolution in response to
              post-glacial sea-level rise.  Several well-known models for coastal landscape
              evolution have been developed here, but within the context of the traditional
              view of continued sea-level rise until 3000 years ago.  Documentation of a
              middle Holocene highstand would have significant implications for
              interpretations of coastal landscape evolution at the regional scale, as well
              as global-scale ice volume and sea-level signatures.  Moreover, the
              petrochemical, shipping, fisheries, and tourism industries are linked to the
              present distribution of environments and resources, so past and future sea
              level changes in this area are of more than academic interest.  Documentation
              of a higher sea-level position, and attendant coastal response, may provide an
              analog for sea-level rise scenarios that have been predicted for the near
              future due to anthropogenic and natural climate changes. 

