Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Automated Cell Screening and Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0079864

Award Number: 0079864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $668009             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia M. Schmidt-Dannert schmi232@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A suite of instruments will establish a high-throughput screening and cell
              characterization facility for microbial functional genomics at the University
              of Minnesota. The equipment consists of an automated, computer-controlled
              workstation and a colony pick-robot for the isolation of individual cell types.
              Isolated cells can be automatically propagated and analyzed by a
              high-throughput liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry analysis station. If
              distinguishing cell markers are present, rapid cell isolation will be
              accomplished using the cell sorting capability of a flow cytometer. For
              detailed cell characterization, the flow cytometer is interfaced with a
              bioreactor equipped with off-gas analysis instrumentation. The set-up will
              enable screening of a large number of cells. In addition, the detailed
              characterization of the growth physiology of selected cells will provide data
              for the quantitative analysis of cell metabolism within the framework of
              metabolic control theory. 

This high-throughput screening and cell
              characterization facility will considerably extend the research capabilities of
              a significant number of research groups at the University. It will be used for
              a variety of research applications by over twenty research groups originating
              from five different colleges and ten different departments involved in basic
              and applied research at the University. Examples of research projects
              include:(i) the study of the ecology and population dynamics of microbial
              cells, (ii) the microbiology and symbiotic interactions of soil bacteria, (iii)
              the molecular breeding of carotenoid and tetrapyrrole pathways in Escherichia
              coli , (iv) the combinatorial creation of novel compounds involving modular
              polyketide systems, (v) the pathway engineering of polyhydroxyalkanoates, and
              (vi) the development of novel biocatalysts for the implementation of novel
              metabolic routes in microorganisms.

The proposed facility will be integrated
              into and take advantage of the infrastructure of existing research facilities
              which includes the Pilot Plant Facility of the Biological Process Technology
              Institute, the Mass Spectrometry Facility, the Imaging Center, the Advanced
              Biology Computing Center and the DNA Sequencing Facility. All facilities are in
              very close physical proximity and support the University of Minnesota effort in
              microbial genomics. 

