Title       : Acquisition of a Workhorse Electron Beam Lithography System for Microstructured
               Materials and Devices Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0079628

Award Number: 0079628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xinsheng Sean Ling xsling@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0079628
Ling 

This projects involves the acquisition of a workhorse Electron
              Beam Lithography (EBL) system using the latest nanopositioning technology for
              microstructure materials and devices research and education at Brown
              University.  The acquired system consists of a state-of-the-art scanning
              electron microscope and a Burleigh Inchworm Nanopositioning System as the
              sample stage. The system offers many of the capabilities, such as the
              generation of submicron features in a field of view of 25 mm, currently only
              offered by the multimillion-dollar EBL machines at a small fraction of the
              cost. A large group of experimentalists at Brown University conduct
              experimental research at the frontiers of  microstructured materials and
              devices. This workhorse EBL instrument will greatly enhance the research
              productivity for the existing research programs in condensed matter physics,
              liquid crystal display technology, small semiconductor devices, novel
              magnetoelectronics, semiconductor lasers, and experimental cosmology, and open
              up new exciting research directions, will have a major impact on the materials
              research and education and will benefit a large number of graduate and
              undergraduate students at Brown University. 

This project involves the
              acquisition of a workhorse Electron Beam Lithography (EBL) system using the
              latest Burleigh Inchworm nanopositioning technology for micro and nano
              structured materials and devices research and education at Brown University. 
              The EBL is the state-of-the-art nanotechnology which has revolutionized many
              areas of science and technology. A large group of experimentalists at Brown
              University conduct experimental research at the frontiers of  microstructured
              materials and devices.  Graduate and undergraduate students at Brown will use
              the EBL system to fabricate artificially designed patterns for fundamental
              studies of colloidal crystallization, for applied research in ultrafast
              transistors and novel magnetoelectronic devices, and for exploring novel liquid
              crystal materials and for developing sensors for cosmology experiment. The
              acquired EBL system offers many of the capabilities, such as generating
              submicron features in a large field of view, currently only offered by the
              multimillion-dollar EBL machines at a small fraction of the cost.  This
              low-cost EBL system will be housed in the Barus-Holley Building where all
              physicists and engineers at Brown are working.  This instrument will greatly
              enhance the research productivity for the existing research programs, and open
              up new exciting research directions, will have a major impact on the materials
              research and education at Brown and will benefit a large number of graduate and
              undergraduate students. 



