Title       : Development of Instrumentation for Combined Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry,
               Cathodoluminescence Spectroscopy, and Chemical Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0079438

Award Number: 0079438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $789000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard J. Brillson brillson.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0079438
Brillson

The combined secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS),
              cathodoluminescence spectroscopy (CLS), and high temperature/pressure
              processing (HTP) instrumentation will provide coupled chemical and electronic
              analysis of solid state materials.  It will operate at the state-of-the-art in
              detection of trace elements and their influence on electronic properties in
              solids.  It will enable: (1) topographical mapping and chemical identification
              of elements in one step with spatial resolution of 100 nanometers and
              detectability of less than 10-100 parts per billion, (2) chemical analysis as a
              function of depth below a material's surface to detect buried layers,
              impurities, and products of chemical reactions with a detectability of less
              than 10 parts per billion, (3) cathodoluminescence mapping and electronic
              identification of localized states and band structure of the same volume of
              material with spatial resolution of 20 nanometers and detectability of less
              than 10 parts per billion, (4) fabrication and analysis of advanced
              microelectronic, optoelectronic, and electrochemical materials structures by
              controlled heating and surface chemical reactions under ultrahigh vacuum
              conditions.  The instrument will be used to train students to perform
              fundamental and interdisciplinary research in areas as diverse as electronic
              materials, ceramic sensors, metal corrosion, carbon-based electrochemistry, and
              light emitting organic materials.
%%%
The electronic, chemical, and
              mechanical performance of many solid materials can depend sensitively on the
              presence of particular atoms on or near their surfaces. For example, even trace
              amounts of such atoms can dramatically change how a computer's semiconductor
              transistors switch, how a car's ceramic sensors detect gases, how resistant an
              aircraft's turbine blades are to corrosion, or even how efficiently a plastic
              film can emit light.  The SIMS-CLS-CP instrument will be able to detect and
              identify all the atoms present in solid materials, even if a particular
              element's concentration amounts to only 10 atoms out of a billion.  To
              accomplish this, the instrument bombards the material with charged atoms to
              eject and analyze other atoms from the target solid. The instrument will
              provide three-dimensional maps of each element present and its concentration. A
              beam of electrons will bombard the same target area to produce maps of light
              whose wavelengths reveal electronic properties, especially how well the solid
              carries electricity and transforms one form of energy into another.  The
              feature size of these overlapping chemical and electronic maps is less than a
              few hundred atoms square.  The instrument will shuttle materials between
              analysis and processing stations for heating materials in different gases,
              producing chemical reactions, and measuring the new physical properties that
              result. Besides research, the instrument will also serve to train students in
              materials science and technology.


