Title       : Acquisition of Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0079329

Award Number: 0079329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165273             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charlotte L. Ownby carla@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Biao Ding  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren T. Ford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeanmarie Verchot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A confocal laser scanning microscope will support research projects at Oklahoma
              State University (OSU).  This instrument will be housed in the University's
              central Microscopy Laboratory and used in the research of three major projects
              as well as numerous smaller projects by OSU faculty, students and staff.   In
              addition, graduate students will be trained in the use of the new microscope to
              broaden and enhance their research training.

Access to a confocal microscope
              will allow OSU investigators to enhance their research capability in the
              biological sciences as well as the materials sciences.  In biology, they will
              obtain real time images of dynamic processes occurring in plant and animal
              cells.  Specific projects in which the confocal microscope will be used include
              the study of interactions between plants and microbial organisms, the movement
              of large molecules between cells in plants, the movement of small molecules
              inside of plant and animal cells, and research in synthetic materials designed
              to create new forms of matter which can be used as catalysts or as optical
              materials. 

Recently there have been major breakthroughs in several areas of
              research at Oklahoma State University and these advances have relied on many
              advanced techniques including molecular biology and electron microscopy.  To
              continue to play a leading role in these fields, a confocal laser scanning
              microscope is needed. Current trends in science in academia as well as industry
              in the United States have placed an emphasis on advanced methods including
              microscopy to analyze genes and their products in living cells. Confocal
              microscopy is one of the latest advances in cell biology, and its addition to
              existing equipment will allow OSU faculty and students to remain competitive in
              the national and international 

