Title       : Development of: High Resolution, High Sensitivity Scanning Josephson Junction
               Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a0079583

Award Number: 0079583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajeev J. Ram rajeev@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is for the development of a high resolution, high
              sensitivity
magnetic field imaging microscope.  This instrument will allow for
              the
measurement of minute magnetic fields (10-5 G) generated by currents
              in
mesoscopic devices, the magnetic properties of quantum structures and
              the
spin states of electrons inside devices.  The instrument will be the
              first
scanning Josephson junction microscope (SJM).  It will have six orders
              of
magnitude higher field sensitivity than conventional magnetic
              force
microscopy and an order of magnitude better spatial resolution
              than
scanning SQUID microscopy.

In order to build this tool, the expertise
              of several groups at MIT must be
brought together.  The Josephson junction
              (JJ) that forms the critical
sensing element must be integrated on an atomic
              force microscope tip in
order to be in sufficient proximity to the sample. 
              This process will
require the development of a micromechanical silicon
              submount onto which
the JJ will be processed.   Once the sensing element has
              been fabricated it
must be integrated into a larger instrument composed of
              cryogenically
cooled piezo-stages and circuits to monitor and amplify the
              signals from
the  JJ.  When completed, the combination of high field
              sensitivity and
high spatial resolution will allow for the study of vortex
              states in
superconductors, charge transport in circuits and biological
              systems, the
magnetic state of mesoscopic magnets, and the spin state of
              electrons in
devices.

Finally, the development of a new scanning probe
              microscope offers exciting
opportunities for interdisciplinary education. 
              Already, students working
on device processing, circuit design, mesoscopic
              device physics and
materials science have all participated in the development
              of the core
technologies.



