Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Consensus and Conflict:
               Interest Group Strategies in the Policy Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0079621

Award Number: 0079621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5990               (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Scholz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support investigation analyzes the
              strategies competing interest groups use to influence implementation of public
              policy.  Specifically, the student investigates group's choice to cooperate in
              the implementation of Section 10(1)  of the Endangered Species Act (Habitat
              Conservation Planning).  The student argues that the political and structural
              environments shape this choice by determining the relative advantages of
              conflictual versus cooperative strategies available to groups.  Decisions
              regarding strategy choice are conditional upon the external political context,
              group resource capacity, and underlying nature of the problem.  By focusing on
              group behavior at implementation, the analysis will contribute to our
              understanding of the policy process, and cooperation and political
              behavior.

The Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project proceeds in
              several stages.  In-depth case study analysis of selected HCPs will allow
              refinement of the hypotheses and enhance the study's validity.  The analysis of
              the model using a broader, existing study, spanning multiple policy areas
              proceeds.  The primary data collection strategy includes an electronic mail
              survey of group behavior.  The data collected allow assessment of those
              contextual factors that influence the choices groups make.

