Title       : Collaborative Research: Strategic Defiance of the U.S. Supreme Court
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0079963

Award Number: 0079963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51244              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee Epstein epstein@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research examines deviation from the principle of stare decisis, or
              following precedent, by appellate courts in the federal system.  Deviation can
              take subtle forms, including distinguishing, limiting, or avoiding precedents. 
              The goal of the research is to determine why lower courts defy (or comply with)
              higher courts. The research plan is to: (1) generate a random sample of U.S.
              Supreme Court decisions; (2) track the responses of lower courts to these
              decisions (the dependent variable for all the hypotheses); (3) collect data
              necessary to animate the independent variables; and (4) implement statistical
              models, testing for the influence of theoretically-critical variables. Data
              come from a variety of sources, including biographical materials, NSF-supported
              databases, judicial decisions, and periodical guides-with the final data base
              archived on the PI web site and with the ICPSR.  The empirical findings
              generated here will show how specific features of the design of the federal
              judiciary advance or retard vertical stare decisis, revealing, at least
              partially, the institutional foundations of the rule of law in American courts
              and showing the effect of various structural incentives created by the design
              and operation of organizations.
