Title       : Implementation of Deep Reactive Ion Etching Technology for the Advancement of
               MEMS and Micro/nanotechnology Research at the University of Louisville
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0079650

Award Number: 0079650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin M. Walsh   (Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Naber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Cohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Keynton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Baldwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               

This MRI proposal enhances and expands upon the active MEMS and
              Micro/Nanotechnology research program at the University of Louisville through
              the acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) Deep Reactive Ion
              Etching (DRIE) System. The proposal builds upon (a) existing competitive
              research facilities in micro/nanotechnology, (b) an interdisciplinary
              collection of research-oriented faculty from engineering and science
              departments across the campus, and (c) a significant commitment by the
              University.  The requested DRIE System will provide the enabling technology
              needed to realize the promise of MEMS and micro/nantechnology over the next
              decade and to train the engineers and scientists who will use this technology.
              The specific research activities addresses in this proposal can be grouped into
              the following concentration areas and are consistent with the expertise of the
              PIs: 1) Novel DRIE Processing Methodologies, 2) RF MEMS, 3) DRIE-fabricated
              Sensors and Detectors, 4) Optical MEMS (MOEMS), 5) Microfluidics and
              Lab-on-a-Chip Systems, 6) Diamond MEMS, 7) CVD Processing of High Aspect Ratio
              DRIE-fabricated Micromolds, and 8) Application of ICP RIE to Nanolithography.
              While the heart of this proposal is the development and application of exciting
              new research opportunities, an education and outreach program will be developed
              with both updated and new courses that implement DRIE technology, MEMS, and
              micro/nanofabrication and an associated new Certificate Program. Involved
              students and industrial professionals will graduate after immersion in an
              environment with sound science, state-of-the-art technical expertise, and
              applications to real world problems.



