Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Macromolecular Crystallography at the
               Dupont-Northwestern-Dow Collaborative Access Team Beamlines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0079340

Award Number: 0079340
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $411000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy C. Rosenzweig amyr@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne F. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas M. Freymann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alfonso Mondragon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore S. Jardetzky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This award supports the purchase of a CCD detector for X-ray data
              collection at the Dupont-Northwestern-Dow Collaborative Access Team (DND-CAT)
              beamlines at the Advanced Photon Source.  The detector will be used by
              crystallographers at Northwestern and by independent investigators to determine
              the high resolution X-ray structures of proteins and nucleic acids.  Knowledge
              of the three dimensional structure of biological macromolecules is essential to
              a comprehensive understanding of chemical and biological processes.  The
              research problems being addressed cover a wide range of fundamental problems,
              including the structure of ribonucleic acids, proteins involved in DNA
              modification and replication, the biology of copper trafficking, mechanisms of
              the immune recognition and virus infection, the transport of proteins across
              membranes, and mechanisms of cellular signal transduction. 
     The requested
              instrumentation will be used to outfit a new experimental station (the 5-BMB
              station) at DND-CAT.  This station is designed to meet the expanding scientific
              needs of the Northwestern crystallographers, and only requires the equipment
              described in this proposal to become operational.  The requested detector, a 3K
              x 3K Mar CCD detector, will have an active surface area greater than twice the
              size of the current detectors.  The larger size is required to collect high
              resolution data from crystals with large unit cell dimensions.  Since the
              structural biologists are pursuing more and more ambitious projects, such as
              the structures of protein-protein complexes, large unit cell dimensions are
              becoming common.  This detector will be absolutely necessary to obtain high
              resolution data.  In addition, the award will support the purchase of a cryo
              cooling system for low temperature data collection, a table to house the
              detector, a computer for data processing and storage, and a fluorescence
              detector for multiwavelength anomalous dispersion (MAD) phasing experiments. 
              The CCD detector, combined with these items, will render the 5-BMB station a
              state-of-the-art macromolecular crystallography facility. 
     The 3K x 3K
              CCD detector will provide a unique data collection resource and enable both the
              Northwestern structural biologists and outside users to tackle previously
              unfeasible projects.  In addition, it will strengthen the Northwestern training
              program in biophysics.  Approximately 25 graduate students and postdoctoral
              fellows will use the equipment regularly.  The inclusion of outside users will
              increase the number of potential trainees significantly.  The new facilities
              will also allow more undergraduate students to be introduced to structural
              biology and participate in research projects at the forefront of modern
              science.  Finally, the instrumentation will help efforts to recruit new
              graduate students and minority students, thus strengthening all the
              Northwestern research programs.

