Title       : Development of Effective Tools for Cluster Computing and Applications to
               Problems in Materials Chemistry and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a0079742

Award Number: 0079742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312891             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Gordon mark@si.fi.ameslab.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brett M. Bode  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce Harmon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ricky A. Kendall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Halstead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
              Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Programs, and the Division of
              Experimental and Integrative Activities (EIA), Prof. Mark S. Gordon of Iowa
              State University, in collaboration with IBM, Myricom and Packet Engines, will
              design and build a cluster computer. This computer will look and perform
              logically like a moderately sized MPP system, but at a fraction of the cost. 
              Key to the development of a successful machine is optimal inter-node
              communications, and the PI will utilize a) the expertise of the Iowa State
              University Scalable Computing Lab together with the theoretical chemistry and
              condensed matter physics groups; b) access to AIX source code via his
              partnership with IBM; and c) optimization of communications technology via
              interactions with Myricom and Packet Engines.  Gordon will focus on
              optimization of throughput, reduction of latency, scalability of real
              applications beyond 64 nodes, cluster heterogeneity, distributed file systems,
              development of more effective message passing tools, system management and
              scheduling, and applications in materials science.  

Computational science
              and engineering is positioned to play a leading role in solving grand challenge
              problems that we face in the next decade.  These important problems include the
              design of new materials and catalysts with desirable properties, the
              elucidation of biological processes, the search for the origin of life, and the
              development of viable methods for environmental remediation.  Solution of such
              compelling and complex problems requires not only state-of-the-art
              computational hardware, but also the development of the necessary models and
              algorithms to take optimal advantage of modern computers.  This work will lead
              to the development of a cluster environment that will enable grand challenge
              applications that require scalable high-performance computing.  
