Title       : The Politics of Supranational Legal Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a0079084

Award Number: 0079084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86072              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Gabel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford J. Carrubba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	As international adjudicating institutions, such as the Court of Human Rights,
              the World Trade Organization, and others, multiply, we want to understand to
              what degree these institutions provide and maintain a legal order independent
              of, and superior to, national governments.  The development of European Union
              (EU) law provides a valuable forum in which to explore these issues of
              international laws and national sovereignty.  Over the past forty years, the
              European Court of Justice (ECJ) has established a supranational legal order
              superior to national law and to which national governments are subject.  This
              supranational legal integration has generated a vigorous scholarly debate
              concerning whether the ECJ is a tool of the member states or a truly
              independent judiciary.  This question is the focus of our proposal.
	The
              extant literature on the politics of EU legal integration divides essentially
              into two groups.  The pro-Court camp assumes that the ECJ can enforce its
              judgments and that its rulings constrain national governments and push European
              integration beyond that intended by national governments.  The
              Intergovernmentalist camp assumes that the ECJ is beholden to the member states
              and, thus, concludes that member states constrain legal integration.  The
              debate between these two camps is based largely on informal arguments about
              government-ECJ relations, which obscure the basis of the theoretical debate. 
              Also, the empirical evident consists largely of case studies over which the two
              camps offer conflicting interpretations.  Thus, to resolve this debate, the
              proposed project provides:  (a) a clearer theoretical exposition of the
              theoretical debate so as to identify testable hypotheses that discriminate
              between the two camps, and (b) a rigorous empirical analysis of these
              hypotheses.
	First, the project generates the intuition behind, and the
              implications of, two formal models of government-ECJ interaction, each of which
              is designed to formalize the two extent informal arguments, Beyond the two
              traditional camps, the formal models also integrate recent arguments about
              public legitimacy into the formal model.  The results demonstrate that the
              extant empirical evidence does not discriminate between the competing theories.
               These formal models also generate a set of testable hypotheses that
              discriminate between the two positions.
	The proposed project then provides a
              strategy for data collection and statistical analysis to test these hypotheses.
               The Intergovernmentalist model predicts that the political costs of compliance
              with EU law should affect ECJ behavior in the following five ways:  (1) whether
              a government is ruled against; (2) how frequently a government is taken to
              trial; (3) whether the ECJ makes an effort to distinguish a case from
              potentially precedence-forming previous cases; (4) how many judges sit on an
              ECJ-adjudicating panel; and (5) how long the judges take to decide a case. 
              Political costs are measured through both systematic components, such as the
              number of years until an election must be called and the number of seats that
              the ruling party controls, and random political shocks, such as a government
              defeat in a by-election or a political scandal.  The first two of these tests
              are presented in detail, including descriptions of the data, their sources, and
              statistical issues regarding the actual regressions.  The remaining three tests
              are mentioned briefly.
	This analysis helps to further an already fruitful
              debate about the role of the ECJ in EU legal integration.  Not only does the
              analysis clarify and discriminate between the two extant camps, but the data
              collections also facilitates tests of future theoretical developments.  In
              addition, the results of the analysis have implications for the conditions
              under which transnational institutions in general constrain national
              governments and, thus, inform our broader understanding of supranational
              adjudication.      
	
