Title       : What Do Voters Know about Cabinet Formation?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0079094

Award Number: 0079094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49752              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randolph T. Stevenson stevenso@ruf.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	In the United States, the process of allocating executive power after an
              election is usually straightforward -- the candidate with the most votes wins. 
              However, this in not the case in parliamentary democracies that do not produce
              usually a majority of legislative seats for a single party (so-called
              coalitional systems).  In these systems, a period of inter-party negotiations
              follows each election.  This negotiation determines who becomes the prime
              minister and what other parties have a share of executive power.
	Little is
              know about ho voters manage the greater complexity of these systems.  Do they
              simply vote for the party that they most prefer, or are their voting strategies
              more complex?  Do they worry about wasting their vote on a party that has
              little change of getting into the cabinet?  Do they even know whether different
              parties are more or less likely to get into the cabinet?  Most previous work
              ignores these questions and simply assumes that the post-election bargaining
              over cabinets is simply too complex for voters to understand, and, thus, has
              little impact on how they vote.
	In this project, the investigator uses
              national election surveys to ask voters in coalitional systems questions that
              reveal what they understand and do not understand about the coalition-formation
              process and its results.  This inquiry is motivated by a specific theoretical
              model (developed in Stevenson, 1997) that suggests that voters are actually
              quite capable of making sense of coalitional systems and using this
              understanding to modify the way that they vote (that is, to use their vote to
              try to affect who gets into the cabinet).  They gain this understanding, not
              through knowledge of the details of the coalition-formation process, but by
              relying on informational shortcuts in the form of empirical regularities that
              tend to characterize the output of this process in their countries.  For
              example, although voters in a country may not know the rules that govern how
              proposals for different governing coalitions are put forward, they may know
              that the largest party in the legislature normally holds the position of prime
              minister.  Stevenson's theoretical model simply suggests that this kind of
              information is useful to voters and (along with some other empirical
              regularities) allows them to cast rationally votes that are intended to affect
              the composition of the cabinet.
	These theoretical claims, of course, depend
              on the idea that voters actually perceive the empirical regularities that
              researchers can identify about the system (for example, that the largest party
              holds the prime ministership, or that the prime minister tends to pick
              ideologically compatible parties as partners).  However, it is not necessarily
              the case that this is true.   Voters may be ignorant of these simple facts. 
              The survey instrument that the investigator uses in this project helps to
              settle this question by revealing whether voters:  1) perceive the simple
              empirical regularities that characterize coalition formation in their
              countries, and 2) whether they use these regularities to structure their
              expectations about the likely results of the coalition-formation process.  If
              the answer to these questions is positive, then researchers can have more
              confidence in the specific theoretical model of voting in coalitional systems
              put forward by the investigator.  Moreover, and perhaps more importantly, such
              a result can revise the common view that, in coalitional systems, the process
              of coalition formation is too complicated to affect how individuals vote.      
                 

