Title       : Folding of a Multidomain Ribosomal Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0079406

Award Number: 0079406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347548             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Raleigh draleigh@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0079406
Raleigh
Elucidating  how  the  amino  acid  sequence determines
              structure, the protein  folding  problem, is a central issue in modern
              structural biology.  Recent  developments  have  made  this problem
              particularly timely. Massive genome sequencing efforts have lead to an
              explosion in our knowledge of the primary  sequence  of  proteins. 
              Unfortunately  it  is still impossible to predict  structure  from   sequence. 
                In  principle,  a  more  thorough understanding  of  the  folding  process
              should aid efforts to decipher the code  that  links  sequence  and structure.
              A detailed understanding of the folding  process  will  also  aid  efforts to
              rationally modify proteins to enhance desired properties or confer new
              functions.  

The  research  described  in  this  project  focuses  on
              experimental investigations  of  several  issues in protein folding. The
              hypothesis that chain  topology  is  the  major  determinant  of  folding 
              kinetics will be examined  by conducting studies of the folding of two sets of
              proteins. The folding  kinetics  of  the  C-terminal  domain  of  the  protein
              L9 will be measured  and  compared  to  theoretical predictions. In the intact
              protein, this  domain appears to fold much more slowly than predicted by
              theory. The folding  of  the  isolated  domain  will be studied in order to
              test if the deviation is caused by interactions with the rest of the protein or
              is more fundamental.  The  structure  of  the N-terminal domain of RNase HI is
              very similar  to  the  N-terminal  domain  of  L9 (NTL9) and the folding of
              this protein will be compared to NTL9. The role of the unfolded state in
              protein folding  and  stability will be examined using NTL9 as a model system.
              Each of the six acidic residues in NTL9 with be mutated and the pH dependence
              of the  stability  determined.  These  measurements  provide information about
              electrostatic   interactions  in  the  unfolded  state.  The  formation  of
              electrostatic  interactions  during  the folding process will be studied by
              conducting  kinetic  measurements  with  this set of mutants. These studies
              will  be  complimented  by  experiments  that  probe the development of the
              hydrophobic  core  of  NTL9  during  folding.  Taken  together, the kinetic
              studies will provide a detailed picture of  the folding of NTL9. 


