Title       : Inorganic and Organometallic Charge Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a0079182

Award Number: 0079182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford P. Kubiak ckubiak@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0510303   Kinetics                                
Program Ref : 1966,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Clifford P. Kubiac of the University of California, San Diego is supported by
              the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry program for  research
              on charge transfer in inorganic and organometallic systems. These studies 
              involve experimental characterization of dynamical averaging of infra-red
              spectra by electron exchange in a variety of triruthenium cluster-compounds.
              Differences in electronic interactions among the ruthenium centers in such
              trinuclear molecular ions account for rates of electron transfer that range
              both above and below the vibrational time scale. Systematic study of the
              effects of variation in adjustable parameters (ligands, solvent, etc.) are used
              to test theories of electron transfer (e.g., Marcus-Hush) at the threshold
              between weakly-localized and fully-delocalized behavior.  Other, related,
              studies will involve polysilanes and polychromium
              compounds.

Electron-transfer reactions are of central importance in many
              diverse areas of chemistry and related scientific areas, including biological
              charge transfers of many types. Since the electron is very light with respect
              to atomic nuclei, electron-transfer reactions can be discussed theoretically in
              a level of detail that is impossible for most other kinds of chemical change.
              Powerful theories (e.g. Marcus -Hush) can deal successfully with
              charge-transfer reactions in which the electron-donor and electron-acceptor
              centers are only weakly coupled --- or when these two centers are strongly
              mixed. The intermediate case, in which interaction between donor and acceptor
              centers are neither very strong or very weak, has proved more difficult to
              understand. The PI and his group have shown that the fine details of the
              vibrational (IR) spectra of trinuclear ruthenium complexes are sensitive to
              seemingly small changes in adjustable parameters that influence the rate of
              electron transfer in those complexes. This project uses these changes in IR
              spectra to probe intra-molecular coupling in these species, and to test and
              extend theories of electron-transfer for systems with intermediate
              donor-acceptor interaction. This is a fundamentally important, but previously
              poorly-understood, region of parameter-space.





