Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0079909

Award Number: 0079909
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Carmen I. Huber                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20438000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Klein klein@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University
              of Pennsylvania supports a broadly based interdisciplinary research program on
              complex nanostructures and materials.  The research is carried out in four
              Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRG) with appropriate seed projects.  The
              IRG on Functional Biomolecular Materials focuses on developing engineering
              principles for de novo protein design directed towards creation of novel
              molecular constructs that carry out natural or novel functions with the
              ultimate goal of producing selectively functionalized modular materials and
              devices.  A second IRG focuses on Carbon Nanotube-Derived Materials and
              involves the synthesis, assembly and theory of higher-order  structures created
              from single-walled nanotubes.  The IRG on Microscale Soft Materials harnesses
              theoretical and experimental expertise to design and control the self-assembly
              of new classes of microstructured colloidal systems with tailored optical,
              mechanical, rheological and storage properties.  An IRG of Multifunctional
              Complex Oxides designs, synthesizes, characterizes and models novel materials
              that exhibit highly sensitive responses to external magnetic and electrical
              fields.  The MRSEC is also developing innovative methods of instruction.  It is
              linked to the University of Puerto Rico through a Collaborative to Integrate
              Research and Education.  It hosts a significant program for Research
              Experiences for Undergraduates and it has initiated a program to provide
              Research Experiences for Teachers.  The Center maintains a large set of shared
              experimental facilities that provide state of the art instrumentation for the
              entire University, and act as a focal point for graduate education and for
              knowledge transfer to industry.  Participants in the Center include 36 senior
              investigators, 12 postdoctoral associates, 29  graduate students, 15
              undergraduates, and 5 technicians and other support personnel. Professor
              Michael Klein directs the MRSEC. 
