Title       : Acquisition of an Ultrahigh Vacuum Scanning Tunneling Microscope for the Study
               of Surface Chemistry and Surface Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0079796

Award Number: 0079796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138357             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcus T. McEllistrem mcellimt@uwec.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew M. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Eau Claire
	      Park & Garfield
	      Eau Claire, WI  54701    715/836-2637

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0079796
McEllistrem

The scanning tunneling microscope has done much to
              broaden our understanding of
Semiconductors and metals, providing a unique
              view of material surfaces available by no
other technique. Specifically, the
              microscope's ability to resolve individual surface
atoms has lead to an
              improved understanding of the chemistry and physics of solid
surfaces. How a
              chemical reaction proceeds on a surface, or how different surface
              atoms
diffuse, segregate, or combine can be literally watched on an atomic
              scale. The awarded
instrument will be used to investigate the formation of
              metal silicides on silicon, since
metal/semiconductor interfaces continue to
              impact device fabrication. At a more
fundamental level, understanding the
              processes that lead to metal silicide formation will
allow the controlled
              formation of nanoscale particles, particles that are driven to
              self-assemble
by their reactivity. The instrument will also be used to
              investigate how reactions proceed 
on gallium nitride (from which
              electro-optic devices that emit in the blue/violet can be 
made). In
              particular, the dynamics of hydrogen on the gallium nitride surface is of
              
technological interest, and can also be used as a probe of local surface
              reactivity. 
Since gallium nitride surfaces are also polar (N- vs.
              Ga-terminated), the impact of 
surface polarity on surface reactions will also
              be studied.

Semiconductors are widely used in electronic and electro-optic
              devices. Nearly all
computer chips, for example, are fabricated from silicon.
              Compound semiconductors
(the so-called III-V semiconductors) are often found
              in devices which convert electrical
energy into light, namely light-emitting
              diodes, found in nearly all consumer electronics,
and laser diodes, which form
              the heart of a solid state laser, the engine in laser printers 
and compact
              disc players.  Research into semiconductors has lead to the development of
              
faster, smaller computer chips (and thus computers), and novel electro-optic
              devices. 
The scanning tunneling microscope has done much to broaden our
              knowledge of 
semiconductors and metals, providing a unique view of material
              surfaces unavailable by 
any other technique.  Specifically, this microscope
              is capable of attaining atomic 
resolution images of surfaces.  With it,
              surface physics and chemistry can observed on 
an atomic scale. In short, how
              atoms move and distribute themselves on a surface, or 
how a chemical reaction
              proceeds on a surface, can be imaged directly with a scanning 
tunneling
              microscope. The awarded instrument will be used to further our understanding of
              
how metals interact with silicon, and to investigate the surface chemistry of
              novel 
semiconductor materials used in electro-optic applications.

