Title       : Athermal Annealing of Ion-implanted Compound Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0079363

Award Number: 0079363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkata R. Mulpuri rmulpuri@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alok K. Berry  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at exploring a new, athermal annealing method for removing
              ion-implantation generated lattice damage and activating the implanted dopants
              in important compound semiconductors such as GaAs, SiC and GaN for the first
              time.  In this method a high power (~10 Joules) laser pulse of a few
              nanoseconds duration is focused to a small spot of 1-2 mm size in the center of
              a semiconductor sample.  The laser pulse is expected to launch a shock wave
              that propagates across the wafer, resulting in implant annealing all over the
              wafer, even in areas far from the laser focal spot.  This method is expected to
              minimize impurity diffusion during annealing and preserve surface integrity of
              the semiconductor.

The athermal annealing method will be used to anneal Si-
              and Be- implanted GaAs, N- and Al- implanted SiC, and Si-implanted GaN. 
              Anneals will be performed with various parameter adjustments such as laser
              intensity, spot size, and pulse duration.  Electrical, impurity redistribution,
              and lattice quality characteristics of the athermally annealed material will be
              compared with those of conventional, thermally annealed material.

Implanted
              p-n junction diode and field-effect transistor device structures will be
              annealed by the new athermal annealing method using the optimum annealing
              conditions developed during the early part of the work.  The devices will be
              thoroughly characterized to evaluate the usefulness of the new annealing method
              for device applications.  Results obtained from this basic research work could
              have a profound effect on compound semiconductor device processing technology. 
              This work will be performed in collaboration with federal laboratories.

