Title       : Psycholinguistic Investigations of Discourse-Based Referential Contrast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0079497

Award Number: 0079497
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62821              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie C. Sedivy Julie_Sedivy@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A great deal of work in sentence processing over the years has been preoccupied
              with the question of whether contextual information can influence early parsing
              decisions. There is by now considerable evidence that suggests that at least
              some kinds of information from the discourse context do have such effects. 
              However, the question of how these effects occur and where they come from has
              remained largely ignored.  The possible mechanisms for discourse context
              effects range from very direct ones where classes of linguistic expressions
              trigger certain discourse representations, to ones involving subtle inferential
              mechanisms that evaluate the likely discourse functions of alternative
              linguistic expressions.

The studies in this project focus on the discourse
              properties of modified definite noun phrases.  Work in sentence processing has
              shown that the resolution of ambiguities in which one of the possible readings
              involves noun modification is affected by the availability of a discourse model
              in which the modificational phrase serves to distinguish between two possible
              referents.

A central question is whether such discourse effects found with
              modifiers reflect a general, conventionalized property of modification, or
              whether they are more aptly characterized as a subtle system of expectations
              regarding typical usages.  A series of studies is proposed to investigate the
              hypothesis that a typical default expression exists for neutral (i.e.
              non-contrastive) contexts, and that the use of a more marked or informative
              expression signals a contrastive function in the discourse that has immediate
              processing consequences.  Data from elicited production tasks will be collected
              and directly compared with on-line comprehension results from eye movement
              experiments that allow for the monitoring of subjects' eye movements to a
              visual array in response to spoken linguistic stimuli.

It is suggested here
              that the discourse effects previously observed with modified NPs are not
              limited to modified expressions, but extend to other cases involving deviation
              from a default expression (e.g. the distinction between basic-level and
              subordinate level expressions as identified in the categorization literature). 
              Experiments testing this hypothesis will be conducted both by means of
              production and eye monitoring experiments, as well as by building on work in
              more traditional methodologies such as reading time studies of temporarily
              ambiguous sentences.
