Title       : Reputation, Incentives, and Transaction Costs in Firms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a0079876

Award Number: 0079876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88428              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Tadelis stadelis@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal includes two separate projects that together contribute to
              understanding mechanisms that affect incentives in firms.  The first project
              investigates how the market for reputations can affect incentives of firm
              owner/operators. This problem is different from the standard reputation
              literature that investigates individual reputations.  The researcher will use
              his model of firm reputations as tradeable assets as the starting point.  In
              that model the issue of incentives was not addressed and no welfare or policy
              implications could be analyzed.  By extending the previous model to include
              moral hazard, some interesting results and conjectures arise.  First, there is
              a relationship with the Career Concerns literature and the signaling literature
              that provides a useful benchmark.  However, unlike in a simple career concerns
              model, the market for reputations will be able to provide incentives for agents
              in terminal stages of their career.  In fact, the "strength" of career concern
              incentives that an agent faces when he is young is the same as the strength of
              incentives created by the market for reputations when he is old. Some
              conjectures, policy implications, extensions and future avenues for work are
              then outlined.

The second project is concerned with the role of incentives
              and transaction costs with respect to the celebrated make-or-buy decision: 
              should a component be produced in the firm or procured across the market?  This
              question has received much attention since Coase's seminal paper and was
              followed up by Williamson's development of Transaction Cost Economics, and by
              the Property Rights approach developed by such researchers as Grossman, Hart,
              and Moore.  The researcher proposes to contribute to this literature with a
              variant of a procurement model that he (together with Patrick Bajari) has
              recently developed.  In that model, which is motivated and informed by stylized
              facts from the construction industry, a buyer needs to hire a seller that will
              deliver a custom made good (e.g., house, factory, space shuttle, etc.).  The
              buyer must first incur a cost of providing a comprehensive design, and is faced
              with a trade-off between providing incentives and reducing ex post transaction
              costs due to costly renegotiation.  This approach shows that weak incentives
              are preferred over strong incentives when a project is more complex. This
              proposal seems to indicate that applying the model to the make-or-buy
              procurement decision may help explain why internal production dominates market
              procurement when the product is more complex.  This is consistent with some
              well known empirical work, and would provide foundations for Transaction Cost
              Economics. Directions in which this can be done are outlined.

