Title       : REG: Acquisition of Microbalance for Sorption Studies on High Surface Area
               Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  2000   
File        : a0079451

Award Number: 0079451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Tsapatsis tsapatsi@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Monson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Conner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0079451
Michael Tsapatsis

The Department of Chemical
              Engineering at the University of Massachusetts Amherst will purchase a
              gravimetric system for sorption studies in porous solids. The system that will
              be acquired and assembled is built around an in situ gravimetric adsorption
              system designed to operate from vacuum (10-6 torr) to 10 bar and from -195 C to
              500 C. This system measures the weight of a powdered sample in contact with a
              flowing gas or mixture of gases. The adsorption, desorption or
reaction on the
              solid is followed by the change of mass in time. On-line mass spectrometry or
              an on-line infrared detection system monitors the compositions of the gases
              passing over the sample allowing competitive adsorption studies.

 A common
              theme in the current projects of the investigators to be supported under this
              effort is the adsorption and transport properties of gases and vapors in
              microporous and mesoporous media. A wide range of activities is centered in
              this theme ranging from fundamental studies of adsorption equilibrium in porous
              media to practical applications of these materials in the forms of powders,
              monoliths and membranes for gas and organic vapor separations. Examples of
              activities include:
Development of zeolites and other molecular sieve
              adsorbents and
membranes
Understanding hysteresis in adsorption
              isotherms
Adsorbent structure modification during adsorption
Phase
              transitions in porous media
Development of new techniques for microstructural
              characterization of
fabricated porous media

The research to be carried out
              using the system is all currently funded from Federal sources and grants from
              private research foundations and US industry (NSF, ATP, NASA, DOE, The David
              and Lucile Packard Foundation, The Camille and Henry Dreyfus Foundation,
              Engelhard Co.). Five faculty members and their research groups currently
              consisting of over twenty-five graduate students and post-doctoral workers and
              more than ten undergraduate students will use the equipment requested in this
              proposal.

