Title       : Modulating Cerebral Asymmetries for Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0079456

Award Number: 0079456
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $377132             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine Chiarello christine.chiarello@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In the normal human brain, most cognitive behaviors depend on the conjoint
              functioning of the left and right cerebral hemispheres.  The aim of this
              research is to discover how characteristics of the stimulus environment
              influence the dynamic distribution of function between these two neural
              systems. Specifically, the planned studies will investigate the role of
              stimulus variation in promoting the conjoint use of the differing computational
              biases of the left and right hemispheres during language processing. It is
              argued that variation in the types of words experienced in a given context
              potentiates a right hemisphere processing bias towards imageable,
              semantically-rich, noun-like words, and a complementary left hemisphere
              processing bias towards abstract, semantically-sparse, verb-like forms. The
              planned experiments will employ a multi-task approach to investigate whether
              hemisphere-specific processing biases are modifiable based on relative vs
              absolute differences between words, and whether they can be potentiated by
              increasing the distinctiveness or heterogeneity of the stimulus context. 
              Additional experiments will determine whether it is task complexity or stimulus
              heterogeneity that modulates the distribution of function across hemispheres,
              and identify the time course of such changes. The goal of this research is to
              better understand how the architecture of the human brain supports language
              behavior and, most importantly, how the use of different neural systems can be
              environmentally modulated.  The latter has both theoretical and applied
              significance.  While we cannot alter the manner in which different brain
              regions process information, we can potentially modify characteristics of the
              linguistic environment, particularly in educational settings. 

