Title       : Molecular Mechanisms of Failure in Polymer Nanocomposites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0079410

Award Number: 0079410
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dilip Gersappe dilip.gersappe@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0079410
Gersappe
This is an award for theoretical and computational research
              on polymer nanocomposites.  Polymer nanocomposites are a new class of materials
              that are formed when nanometer sized inorganic particles (fillers) are mixed
              into a polymer matrix.  The large surface area presented by these fillers,
              coupled with the ability to control the interactions between the fillers and
              the matrix offers the possibility of the development of a new material that can
              find potential applications in a wide variety of areas give their extraordinary
              properties: their light-weight but extremely high mechanical strength, their
              selective filtering capacity and their high thermal stability.  Indeed, polymer
              nanocomposites are being touted as the next generation of materials in
              applications as diverse as automobile parts and bone fixation materials.  Yet,
              a fundamental knowledge of the processes by which these small nanoscale
              particles enhance the strength of the material is still unknown.  While
              advances in synthetic methods have led to a precise control of structures at
              the nanometer scale, the development of a theoretical framework that can
              predict macroscopic properties of polymers in such nanostructured environments
              from their microstructural details has not kept pace with the synthetic
              advances.  This is because macroscopic assumptions break down when the critical
              length scale of the environment is on the order of a few molecular sizes.  It
              is this gap that will be addressed in this research.  Thus, the aim is to
              understand the  molecular mechanisms that are responsible for the extraordinary
              mechanical properties of the nanocomposite.

The approach to be taken here
              uses a combination of mean field methods and molecular dynamics simulations to
              extract the critical parameters necessary to bridge the gap between the
              nanoscale (where the critical assemblies exist) and the mesoscales (where the
              prediction of physical properties takes place).  Numerical self-consistent
              field calculations combined with a netwrok formation theory will be used to
              focus parallel molecular dynamics simulations into those regions of phase space
              where one can determine the critical factors that control the response of  the
              nanocomposite to external load.  
%%%
This is an award for theoretical and
              computational research on polymer nanocomposites.  Polymer nanocomposites are a
              new class of materials that are formed when nanometer sized inorganic particles
              (fillers) are mixed into a polymer matrix.  The large surface area presented by
              these fillers, coupled with the ability to control the interactions between the
              fillers and the matrix offers the possibility of the development of a new
              material that can find potential applications in a wide variety of areas give
              their extraordinary properties: their light-weight but extremely high
              mechanical strength, their selective filtering capacity and their high thermal
              stability.  Indeed, polymer nanocomposites are being touted as the next
              generation of materials in applications as diverse as automobile parts and bone
              fixation materials.  Yet, a fundamental knowledge of the processes by which
              these small nanoscale particles enhance the strength of the material is still
              unknown.  While advances in synthetic methods have led to a precise control of
              structures at the nanometer scale, the development of a theoretical framework
              that can predict macroscopic properties of polymers in such nanostructured
              environments from their microstructural details has not kept pace with the
              synthetic advances.  This is because macroscopic assumptions break down when
              the critical length scale of the environment is on the order of a few molecular
              sizes.  It is this gap that will be addressed in this research.  Thus, the aim
              is to understand the  molecular mechanisms that are responsible for the
              extraordinary mechanical properties of the nanocomposite.
***




