Title       : Acquisition of a Research-Grade FT-IR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0079415

Award Number: 0079415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104498             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon J. Kellar jkellar@silver.sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robb M. Winter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel L. Heglund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sherry O. Farwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lidvin Kjerengtroen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1058,1189,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to develop a thermal imaging system, including
              both hardware and software, to detect mechanical damage in gas pipelines.  The
              sensors will be in the form of a configurable array of infrared CCD cameras,
              which will permit the complete imaging of the pipeline as the inspection
              instrument travels its length.  The goal is to arrive at a minimal modification
              of the current inspection tool design, making the system attractive to
              pipeline-inspection vendors.  The addition of a thermal-imaging sensor to the
              existing magnetic sensor offers the opportunity for fusing the two data sets in
              order to improve the accuracy and sensitivity of the inspection tool.  Results
              obtained from this initial study will be disseminated to the gas
              pipeline-inspection industry and research community.

The proposed project
              addresses a critical problem in the inspection of gas pipelines - faults caused
              by mechanical damage.  The instrument system being developed has the potential
              for application as a general nondestructive evaluation tool that can be used
              with any material in which a defect or damage introduces a variation in thermal
              diffusivity from the bulk material.  This method may be applicable to detect,
              for example, delamination in sandwiched composite materials.
 
