Title       : Atmospheric Frontal Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1998     
File        : a9627792

Award Number: 9627792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250249             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Blumen blumen@paradox.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Most winter time severe weather in temperate latitudes is associated with cold
              fronts. These transition zones between warm air to the south and cold air to
              the north represent the focus of weather forecasts. The models used by most
              weather services often produce accurate forecasts of these weather systems, but
              errors, when they occur, may in part be associated with motions that occur on
              scales that are less than the resolution, in space and time, of the numerical
              models. One way to alleviate errors in numerical forecasting models is to carry
              out research programs to observe small-scale, high-frequency motions and to use
              this information to introduce sub-grid scale effects by parameterizing their
              effects in a physically realistic manner.    The proposed investigation makes
              use of observations obtained from two observational programs that have been
              supported, in part, by the National Science Foundation: the Stormscale
              Operational Research Meteorology-Fronts Experiment Systems Test (STORM-FEST,
              1992) and MICROFRONTS, 1995. Observations on the scale of fronts from tens of
              kilometers down to millimeter scale were accumulated by means of both sonic and
              hot-wire anemometers. A principal objective is to document the dissipation of
              turbulent kinetic energy near frontal surfaces in the Earth's boundary layer.
              The data from MICROFRONTS serves this purpose, and these data will be used to
              verify the accuracy of various theories associated with dissipative processes. 
              Knowledge of turbulent dissipative processes, in both space and time, is
              necessary to provide more realistic parameterizations of boundary layer
              dissipation for use in forecast and research models.    A second objective is
              associated with the improvement of a classical theoretical model that provides
              a physical explanation of the frontal contraction process, so-called
              frontogenesis. This model neglects certain features that have been observed in
              a frontogenesis event that occurred during STORM-FEST: inertial oscillations
              with periods of about 17  hours. The effect of these oscillations on
              frontogenesis and the accompanying motions will be included in a theoretical
              development. The solutions do not take account of dissipative processes that
              become important when the front is within the boundary layer. The blending of
              dissipative processes, as determined by the former investigation, into
              theoretical models that either handle such effects crudely or not at all, is a
              long-range goal of this research.***
