Title       : SBIR Phase II: Parallel FLUENT/RUG: A Three-Dimensional Finite-Volume Turbulent
               Flow Simulation Tool
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1998      
File        : a9627661

Award Number: 9627661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299963             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilya Staroselsky   (Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Flannery  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cambridge Hydrodyn Inc
	      P O Box 1403
	      Princeton, NJ  085421403    609/683-1515

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9627661  Flannery        This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project is to develop a scalable, parallel FLUENT-compatible code for realistic
              time-dependent laminar and turbulent problems.  The rapid development of
              computer hardware, especially superworkstations and parallel supercomputers,
              coupled with advances in numerical and physical modeling of fluid dynamics have
              opened new opportunities for working engineers and scientists to use flow
              simulations for analysis and design in areas previously only amenable to
              costly, time-consuming experimental laboratory exploration.  Phase I 
              demonstrated the significant potential of a new code for general-purpose fluid
              dynamics computations on parallel computers, with order-of-magnitude speedups
              over presently available commercial codes achieved even on moderate problems. 
              The specific research issues to be addressed in Phase II include: (1)
              implementation, parallelization, and testing of algebraic multigrid
              acceleration for the pressure solve, as well as further study of other
              non-symmetric solver technologies; (2) introduction of enhanced coordinate
              systems capability; (3) enhancement of ZFLOW to handle turbulent heat transfer;
              (4) implementation, parallelization, and testing of parallel block-unstructured
              techniques which potentially lead to order-of-magnitude increases in maximum
              treatable problem sizes.          Commercial CFD users increasingly require
              problem solutions involving significant three-dimensional COIIlplexity and/or
              time-dependence. These solutions demand the use of advanced parallel
              supercomputers. This project provides a unique opportunity to integrate
              advanced CFD and parallel computer technologies into a highly practical
              software product that will quickly address this need.  This new technology
              should have a significant impact on the commercial CFD market.
