Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Object Oriented Software Design for Optimization and
               Inverse Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1997    
File        : a9627355

Award Number: 9627355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Symes symes@caam.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Symes  9627355    The investigator and his colleague aim to bridge the often
              large  gap between ``off-the-shelf'' software packages for numerical 
              optimization, on the one hand, and complex applications in  science and
              engineering, on the other, through further  development of the Hilbert Class
              Library, an object-oriented  programming environment written in C++.  This
              approach to  programming expresses optimization algorithms in terms of their 
              natural abstract components (vector addition, inner product, and  so forth),
              without imposing unnecessary constraints on data  structure and representation.
               Application software, on the other  hand, can be written using the most
              suitable data structures,  algorithms, and languages (various dialects of
              Fortran, for  instance).  The programming environment provides a flexible and 
              largely automatic interface between the generic optimization code  and the
              application-specific code.  In addition to the  elaboration of the basic class
              library, objectives of this  proposal include the implementation of several
              modern algorithms  for large-scale optimization, the design of a software
              toolkit  that allows application programmers and numerical optimizers easy 
              access to the HCL programming environment, and testing on a  variety of
              realistic problems.  For example, research in seismic  data processing methods
              provided the original motivation for this  project, and remains a principal
              target.    Reuse of software is a long-standing goal of software engineering 
              research, as software development and maintenance represents the  bulk of the
              cost of computation.  Object oriented programming  designates an approach to
              software design that elevates  reusability to the status of guiding principle. 
              Traditional  ("procedural") programming style embeds the internal details of 
              data and algorithms in the interfaces between program parts.   Object oriented
              programming hides or encapsulates these details,  which permits program parts
              to be interchanged with considerably  great er ease.  For this and other
              reasons, object orientation has  become the dominant methodology in commercial
              programming,  especially for graphics applications.  It has not up to now had 
              much impact on scientific computation, which has an equally great  need for
              reusable software.  Many scientists do not use freely  available high quality
              numerical programs, simply because the  procedural style in which these
              programs are written makes them  incompatible with natural data representations
              in such fields as  computer aided design and manufacturing, materials science,
              and  biotechnology.  An object oriented framework for basic scientific 
              computations, as proposed here, could lead to greatly enhanced  interchange of
              software between numerical analysts and other  scientists, and so improve the
              efficiency of computational  research.
