Title       : VPW: Visiting Professorships for Women: Theta Series and Automorphic Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9627069

Award Number: 9627069
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102927             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne H. Walling   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In recent work, Dr. Lynne Walling developed an algebraic proof of  Siegel's
              representation formula, yielding formulas more explicit  than those of Siegel
              to describe average representation numbers of  positive definite quadratic
              forms of even rank and odd level.  She  is currently working with J.L. Hafner,
              using the theory of  automorphic forms to extend these results to indefinite
              quadratic  forms, obtaining explicit formulas for the measures of the 
              representations of the indefinite forms over number fields and over  function
              fields.  In work with O. Imamoglu, Dr. Walling has defined  a symplectic theta
              function over a function field and computed the  transformation formula nd will
              develop some theory of Siegel  modular forms and Jacobi forms in the function
              field setting.   Information will be gained regarding representations of
              quadratic  forms by higher dimensional quadratic forms.  She also intends to 
              extend the techniques developed in work with J. Hoffstein and K.D.  Merrill,
              explicitly computing the Fourier coefficients of cusp  forms of weights 0 and
              1/2 for congruence subgroups that admit only  one-dimensional spaces of cusp
              forms.    Interactive activities include developing curricula for 
              college/university mathematics courses based on contemplation,  precise
              reasoning and clear communication; developing a summer  research institute for
              women mathematicians; and running a one-week  conference for women in harmonic
              analysis and number theory.
