Title       : Fluvial Geochemistry of the Arctic Rivers of Eastern Siberia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9627613

Award Number: 9627613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Edmond   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1584,5219,5939,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9627613  Edmund    The aims of this continuing project are; (1) to characterize
              the chemical compositions of the pristine large rivers of Eastern Siberia and
              their fluxes to the Arctic Ocean; (2) to investigate the factors controlling
              weathering rates in low temperature environments as compared to those operating
              in similar geologic terrains in the Tropics; (3) to constrain the effects that
              the large expansion of peri-glacial environments characteristic of the glacial
              maxima had on weathering fluxes; (4) to provide base-line data for the
              environment likely to be most impacted by future greenhouse warming.  This work
               will provide insights on the biogeochemical effects that will result from the
              climatic and hydrologic changes to be expected from anthropogenic global
              warming.  In addition the results will allow estimates to be made of the
              effects of climatic deterioration, i.e. glacial maximum conditions, on global
              weathering fluxes, presently a topic of much controversy owing, mainly, to lack
              of data.  Strong constraints will also be place on the assumptions used in
              global climate models of the geologic past that invoke a pCO2-weathering
              feedback to stabilize the greenhouse effect.    Extensive field work has been
              carried out in the basins of the Lena, Yana and Kolyma.  Data from steams
              draining the igneous and metamorphic basement rocks of the Aldan Shield and
              Trans-Baikal Highland in the Lena headwaters give areal chemical fluxes
              comparable to those from the Guayana Shield in the drainage of the Orinoco,
              this despite the fact that latter has an annual average temperature~50oC warmer
              and receives at least four times the amount of precipitation.   While the
              chemical yields are comparable the severity of weathering, as indicated by Na/K
              ratios and the   87 Sr/86Sr values, is much less in the Siberian basins.  In
              the Tropics weathering of basement is essentially complete, to kaolinite and
              gibbsite, but extremely slow, "transport limited". In cold climates frost
              action continually generates fresh re action surfaces at all scales leading to
              essentially an "exposure limited" situation.  In addition rivers draining the
              complete  range of sedimentary rock types give fluxes similar to those observed
              in lower latitudes  e.g. the large rivers of China.    It is proposed to extend
              this work to the other important rivers of the region, the Anabar, Olenek, 
              Indigirka and Anadyr, and to make a complete characterization of the major,
              minor and trace element geochemistry and of the isotopic systematics of the
              dissolved and particulate organic carbon and nitrogen systems of the fluvial
              regimes in this unglaciated but cold-dominated environment.
