Title       : Field Test of Models of Sedimentation in Continental Half Grabens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1996      
File        : a9627468

Award Number: 9627468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49057              (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg H. Mack gmack@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mack  9627468   An influential tectono-stratigraphic model suggests that
              asymmetrical distribution of alluvial-fan and lacustrine or axial-fluvial
              facies in half grabens is primarily controlled by tectonic tilting and the size
              of catchment areas imposed by that tilting.  Moreover, the model states that
              during periods of activity on the basin-bounding normal fault, the facies belts
              shift towards the footwall block, as a result of incision of hanging
              wall-derived drainages, backfilling of footwall-derived drainages, and
              footwall-directed incursion of the basin-axis depositional system.  This latter
              idea is often accepted as fact, but is largely untested against the rock
              record, and many questions remain concerning the scale, mechanism and rate of
              facies shift, as well as whether the tectonic signature is distinguishable from
              that of other extrinsic variables.  The extant Palomas half graben in the
              southern Rio Grande rift, New Mexico, is an excellent place to field test the
              hypothesis of tectonically induced facies shift, because (1) up to 100m of
              Pliocene-early Pleistocene alluvial-fan and axial-fluvial strata have been
              exposed by post-early Pleistocene entrenchment of the Rio Grande and its
              tributaries, (2) a chronostratigraphic framework exists for the exposed strata
              in the form of high-resolution reversal magnetostratigraphy, and (3) the stable
              oxygen and carbon isotopic composition of pedogenci carbonate provides a
              paleoclimatic record of the region in Pliocene and Pleistocene time, and
              eustacy was not a factor during deposition of the strata in question. 
              Delineation of three-dimensional architecture and across-basin correlation of
              facies in the Palomas basin will not only provide a test of the biability of
              the hypothesis of tectonically induced facies shift, but will address many of
              the questions concerning the processes and rates at which the depositional
              systems shifted across the basin.  Data collection will include (1) 25 measured
              sections along the canyon walls of 5 incised hanging wal l drainages and 6
              incised footwall drainages, (2) facies mapping of regions of well exposed
              badlands at the scale of 1:12,000 and on photo mosaics, and (3) reversal
              magnetostratigraphy of 21 stratigraphic sections, supplementing the11
              magnetostratigraphic sections already analyzed by the P.I.  Paleomagnetic
              sampling will be on the vertical scale of 0.5-2 m and will involve standard
              drilling of sedimentary rock and a soft-sediment sampling technique.  The P.I.
              will be accompanied during paleomagnetic sampling by Dr. Stephen Salyards
              (UCLA), who will perform the subsequent laboratory analyses and whose field and
              lab expenses are included in this proposal.  In addition, the P.I. will be
              accompanied during some of the field work by Dr. Michael Leeder (University of
              Leeds, U.K.), who will be independently funded by NERC.
