Title       : Mathematical Sciences: RUI: Mathematical Modeling of Hematopoiesis and Cell
               Cycles in Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1998       
File        : a9627047

Award Number: 9627047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. Mahaffy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9627047  Mahaffy       The principal investigator continues his research on 
              hematopoietic and cellular control systems.  One study examines an 
              age-structured model for erythropoiesis, which is compared to a  simpler model
              with two delays.  Bifurcation analyses predict  oscillations that correlate
              reasonably well with studies on  auto-immune hemolytic rabbits.  Mathematical
              studies investigate  the key modeling elements that lead to oscillations
              observed in  some serious hematopoietic diseases.  Study of the erythropoietic 
              model extends to a related system for thrombopoiesis for which  more clinical
              problems have been observed.  This research improves  a current age-structured
              model so as to match better experimental  data following a phlebotomy,
              including the effects of plasma  regeneration, the accelerated maturing and
              active destruction in  the aging of erythrocytes.  Mathematical analyses
              examine the  significance of the state-dependent delays in the reduced 
              age-structured model and parameter sensitivity.  Research  continues in
              collaboration with Dr.  J.  W.  Zyskind on the modeling  of initiation of DNA
              replication in Escherichia coli.  Mathematical models are developed to support
              current theories on  the most important biochemical events beginning the DNA 
              replication cycle.  Interest centers on the role of the stable  protein DnaA,
              which experimentally has been shown to play a key  role.  The models consider
              the significance of an eclipse period  for DnaA mRNA synthesis following
              initiation, the existence of an  unknown protein recently discovered that
              inactivates DnaA, and  the competition for binding important activation sites
              with a  growth dependent protein, Fis.  Mathematical studies continue on 
              cellular control systems in exponentially growing cells and  extend to examine
              what happens when cells experience starvation.       Both proposed areas of
              study use mathematical models to  provide a better understanding of the
              fundamental controls in  important biological systems.  The f ear of
              contamination of the  blood supply by the HIV virus, which causes AIDS, results
              in many  surgical patients providing their own blood for the operation.  The
              mathematical models in this proposal allow the study of  optimal schemes for
              regeneration of red blood cells, which could  indicate ways for increasing this
              supply.  This leads to a lower  demand on the general blood supply and
              increased security of the  blood supply for the self-donors.  In addition,
              there are several  serious hematopoietic diseases (diseases linked to the
              formation  of different types of blood cells) that are poorly understood.  The
              proposed models provide a non-invasive means to examine which  aspects of this
              complicated biological control system are most  likely to result in the
              observed problems.  This gives clinicians  more information on possible
              therapeutic treatments and narrows  the search for the primary cause of the
              disease.  The mathematical  models for the initiation of DNA replication in
              bacteria again  provides a non-experimental approach to better understand an 
              important biological process.  In this case, the study examines  the control of
              the cell cycle in bacteria, which is fundamental  to cell growth and
              reproduction.  Biotechnology relies heavily on  the bacterium, E. coli, for
              many of its experiments and products,  so a better understanding of the cell
              cycle aids this industry as  well as providing some answers to basic questions
              in cell  biology.
