Title       : DOING IT
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1996  
File        : a9627213

Award Number: 9627213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $407924             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bill Jersey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Pierre Valette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Quest Productions
	      2600 Tenth Street
	      Berkeley, CA  94710    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9627213  Jersey    Quest Productions is producing and testing the pilot phase
              for a series of weekly television programs entitled, Doing It.   The series
              which is targeted at six to ten year olds is co-production with KCTS, the
              producer of Bill Nye the Science Guy in Seattle, will focus on science and
              technology-oriented themes by introducing viewers to men and women who develop
              and apply science and technology in their everyday lives.  In each program, two
              young "explorers" will journey to a place in the real world that fascinates
              them and, with an adult guide, explore the inner workings of the particular
              site and how science is involved in what the person does.  An additional
              character, a young woman named Howzit Work, will serve as a role model for the
              process of figuring out how and why things work.  Each episode will end with a
              Doing It at Home segment which feature an activity or investigation selected
              from one of the activities designed by the GEMS project at the Lawrence Hall of
              Science.  Ancillary material designed to encourage child/parent involvement is
              science include a Doing It booklet, and Internet Home Page, and a CD-ROM.     
              The PI and Senior Producer will be Bill Jersey.  His children's TV credits
              include 3-2-1 Contact, Sesame Street, and Bi-Lingual Children's Television. 
              Pierre Valette, who helped develop and produce the pilot for Where in the World
              is Carmen Sandiego? is the creator of the project and will serve as Project
              Director.  The Executive-in-charge of Production at KCTS is Elizabeth Brock,
              one of the developers of Bill Nye the Science Guy.  The Senior Science
              Consultant is Ted Ansbacher, former Director of Exhibits at the New York Hall
              of Science.    Evaluation will be conducted by Barbara Flagg.   They will work
              closely with an advisory team of formal and informal science educators.
