Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Complex Analysis: Quantized Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1996      
File        : a9627787

Award Number: 9627787
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15099              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomasz Dubejko   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS-9627787  PI: Dubejko     This proposal by Dubejko
              contains a research plan whose realization would considerably expand the
              development of the "quantum" theory of complex analysis. This discrete theory
              is built using circle packings, which are, roughly speaking, collections of
              circles on Riemannian 2-manifolds with prescribed patterns of tangencies
              encoded in simplicial 2-complexes. The plan has three main objectives with
              strongly represented computational aspects. The first objective is to develop a
              notion of discrete meromorphic functions in such a way that discrete functions
              would possess main characteristic properties of their classical counterparts.
              Approximation issues and the development of a constructive algorithm for the
              approximation are also a part of this first objective. The second objective
              calls for the construction of a discrete analog of the harmonic measure via
              random walks induced by circle packings on their tangency graphs. This
              construction should utilize the geometry of the objects involved. Furthermore,
              algorithms for computing the discrete measure and for approximation of the
              classical harmonic measure by discrete counterparts are expected to be
              developed. The third objective is to obtain a complete discrete version of the
              Uniformization Theorem of Riemann S12urfaces. In particular, the complete
              classification of univalent and proper branched circle packings must be given
              according to certain properties from potential theory on networks.     In more
              general terms, the Dubejko's overall goal for this project is to create a
              discrete analog of the fundamental classical area of mathematics called complex
              analysis. The primary objects of the proposed studies are discrete, and as such
              they have the advantage of being more suitable for applications than their
              classical counterparts. Furthermore, they allow researchers to employ computer
              technology in various forms, for example, in computer experiments and
              visualization of geometric objects. In fact, the co mputational issues form an
              integral part of the project. It is hoped that a consistent new theory can be
              developed which will give an alternative look at problems in mathematics and
              other fields, provide new tools to deal with them, and play an important
              educational role.
