Title       : Mathematical Sciences: An Interdisciplinary Program in Mathematics and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1997      
File        : a9627351

Award Number: 9627351
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pierre Deligne deligne@math.ias.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Witten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Advanced Study
	      Einstein Dr.
	      Princeton, NJ  08540    609/734-8000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9627351  Deligne    This grant supports an interdisciplinary program in the
              interface between mathematics and physics. The program is centered around the
              current and anticipated developments in quantum field theory, especially string
              theory, and the mathematics needed to express and to further those theories.
              The central problem is that while there are strong indications that the
              different string theories are one, physicists do not yet understand in what
              terms this one theory should be formulated; this awaits a combination of new
              physical ideas and new mathematical structures. Among the topics to be pursued
              in theoretical physics are electric-magnetic duality, supergravity,
              non-classical symmetries of string theory, soliton solutions in field theory,
              and quantum gauge dynamics in four dimensions. On the mathematics side, mirror
              symmetry of Calabi-Yau three-folds and differentiable four-manifolds are among
              the topics to be investigated.    The program seeks to better enable
              mathematicians and physicists to think about problems of common interest from
              the perspective of the other field. Thus the program contains an
              interdisciplinary educational objective. The investigators will train
              postdoctoral fellows in mathematics and physics who can look at problems with
              the intuition and perspectives of the other. Special encouragement will be
              given to women applicants. This project is funded jointly by the Division of
              Mathematical Sciences, the Division of Physics, and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) within the Directorate for Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences. (The OMA facilitates the support of multidisciplinary
              proposals that fall within the normal responsibilities of a single division by
              providing an appropriate home for their consideration.)
