Title       : Chemical Separations Using Combined Structure Fluid Gradients and Countercurrent
               Field Flow Fractions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9627453

Award Number: 9627453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: ELDRED H CHIMOWITZ                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Alan Hatton tahatton@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT      Proposal No:   9627453  Proposal Type:  Investigator Initiated 
              Principal Investigator: T. Alan Hatton  Affiliation:   Massachusetts Institute
              of Technology      This grant is awarded through the Interfacial, transport and
              separations program of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division. The
              principal investigator is Dr. T. Alan Hatton of the Massachusetts Institute of
              Technology. The research addresses the development of a new technique
              applicable to many difficult  chemical separation problems, particularly in
              low-volume high value-added applications. Externally-applied field gradients
              will be utilized to generate systems having lateral gradients in solution
              structure and hence in their interactions with specific solutes or particles.
              The differences in distribution of different solutes over such structured
              gradient solutions can be exploited in separation processes by using filed-flow
              fractionation concepts with imposed countercurrent flow. Certain block
              copolymer solutions, for instance, can undergo microphase transitions over a
              relatively narrow temperature range such that if a temperature difference is
              applied across the solution, micelles are formed in the warmer regions of the
              flow channel but are not formed in the colder parts of the solution. This could
              affect the distribution of hydrophobic solutes through solubilization within he
              micelle cores, or could lead to size exclusion of larger molecular species such
              as proteins and viruses. Another example would be the use of polymer-stabilized
              magnetic nanoparticles as separations media in a magnetic field gradient.
              Highly selective complexing agents, such as calixarenes or chiral surfactants,
              can be attached to these polymers to enhance the separation capabilities.    
              These methods will have the significant advantages that the process may be
              operated continuously, it will be gentle and low in toxicity and may achieve
              high resolution even when the driving force for separation of two solutes is
              small. Potential applications  include fine chemicals separations, the optical
              resolution of enantiomeric mixtures, protein separations, and virus
              purification.            Vijay T. John, PD/CTS  03/27/97
