Title       : Supersonic Source - FTMS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1998     
File        : a9627221

Award Number: 9627221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred E. Lytle   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ben S. Freiser  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This renewal grant to Professor Ben S. Freiser at Purdue University is in   the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and supports studies of   gas-phase
              metal containing cluster ion  reactions by mass spectrometric   techniques. 
              Supersonic and seed plasma sources will be used to generate   the clusters and
              the measurement step will involve Fourier transform ion   cyclotron resonance
              mass spectrometry.  Particular emphasis will be   placed on metal-carbon ion
              clusters, including metallo-carbohedrenes.    The objectives of the work
              include the accumulation of fundamental   information regarding the bonding and
              reactivity of these clusters, and   development of a new approach to synthesis
              of macroscopic amounts of the   materials.  Collaborative theoretical studies
              will augment the former and   additional collaborative work is involved in the
              synthesis   investigations. Both collaborations involve other research groups
              on the   Purdue campus.  Cluster compounds have only recently been discovered
              and much is not   known about their structure, bonding, and reactions.  This
              project is   focussed on obtaining just such information.  Using apparatus
              available   to the principal investigator which represents novel and/or unique 
               approaches, the materials can be generated and their reactions   subsequently
              studied by mass spectrometric techniques.  In addition, the   work may produce
              these materials in macroscopic amounts which would   greatly accelerate
              developments in the area.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
