Title       : Reduced Complexity Tree Coding of Speech in the Presence of Background
               Impairments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1996    
File        : a9627610

Award Number: 9627610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas E. Fuja                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245735             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry D. Gibson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Extraordinary advances in speech coding have been achieved in the past few 
              years, with the ITU and digital cellular industries producing voice coding 
              standards for telephony and videoconferencing with performance perhaps 
              unimaginable even ten years ago.  At rates below 12 kbits/s, however, these 
              coders are sometimes criticized for their implementation complexity and for 
              their difficulty in coding speech in the presence of extraneous background 
              impairments.  The complexity issue is omnipresent, but becomes increasingly 
              important in the mobile communications environment, both in digital  cellular
              and emerging personal communications systems, where battery power  is a
              dominating issue. Furthermore, there are many applications being  developed and
              proposed for packet-switched videoconferencing at various  rates, where it is
              desirable to have voice coders implemented either wholly  in software on
              standard platforms (Macs, PCs, Sparcs) or whose  implementations do not usurp
              large portions of the capabilities of a DSP  chip.  Being able to code speech
              in the presence of background impairments  has always been of interest, but has
              recently moved to the fore because of  the mobile environments encountered in
              digital cellular mobile radio and  evolving personal communications systems. 
              Desktop applications also  present a challenge for coding with background
              impairments, since  hands-free interaction is critical and thus even some
              relatively quiet  office environments do not have the handset to aid in
              rejecting the  background noise.  The challenge is therefore to achieve
              communications  quality speech at 8 kbits/s with medium-to-low complexity for a
              variety of  implementation approaches without changing background impairments
              into  annoying artifacts. This research approaches this problem by starting
              with  a low delay waveform following coder, called a tree coder, removing the
              low  delay requirement and employing frequency domain based variable rate 
              techniques, forward adaptation ideas, code tr ee adaptivity innovations, and 
              improved perceptual weighting to reduce implementation complexity while 
              retaining reconstructed speech quality.
