Title       : High Resolution Paleoecology in a Complex Tropical Ecosystem (Lake Tanganyika,
               Africa) and the Development of Paleoecological Models for Lake Conservation
               Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9627766

Award Number: 9627766
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179833             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew S. Cohen acohen@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Dettman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,5928,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9627766  Cohen   This project will examine the patterns and timing of benthic
              paleocommunity change in Lake Tanganyika, a large and ancient aquatic
              ecosystem.  Prior investigations in the lake have yielded conflicting views of
              the nature of ecological interactions in the lake, whether they are tightly 
              linked and coevolved, or whether they are much looser assortments of taxa,
              formed either through the individualistic habitat requirements of components
              species or even more randomly by recruitment from patchy metapopulations. This
              disagreement is a microcosm of the broader and long-standing argument among
              ecologists of what a community is and how it is assembled.  The dispute is not
              merely academic, since the design of underwater reserves in a lake implicity
              requires assumptions about the permanence or ephemerality of communities and
              their component species' populations.  Given its intrinsic interest as a major
              reservoir of biodiversity (>1400 spp., ~600 endemic), Lake Tanganyika provides
              an excellent site to address this problem using paleoecolgical techniques. 
              Preliminary studies have demonstrated that dateable cores with abundant and
              diverse faunas can be obtained from the nearshore sediments of this lake, with
              stratigraphic resolution on the decadal (and perhaps even annual) level.  Cores
              taken at strategic localities in the lake will be taken to create an interface
              between the time-scales investigated by Long Term Ecological Research Studies
              (decadal) and the time spans to which marine paleoecologist are normally
              constrained by time-averaging taphonomic processes (millenia).  These cores can
              be used to answer questions of interest to both conservation biologist and
              theoretical paleoecologists.   The primary goal of this project will be to
              document patterns of local extinction and recolonization of habitat patches by
              individual benthic species (crustaceans, molluscs and sponges) and to determine
              the degree to which the various species histories at each site are
              interrelated.  This will be ach ieved by coring portions of the lake where high
              resolution paleoecological records can be obtained, obtaining a closely-spaced
              series of radiometric dates (210 PB and AMS 14C) to provide an accurate
              chronology of the cores, and then sampling the fossil fauna at ~decadal scale
              intervals.  A series of cores at both distrurbed (river delta) and undisturbed
              (platform environments away from major rivers) localities  will be taken along
              the Tanzanian coast of the lake along depth transects (25,50 and 75m) and
              analyzed quantitatively for fossils benthos content and various
              paleoenvironmental indicators (sedimentology, stable isotope history and diatom
              paleoecology) to address the following questions:   -Do species groups colonize
              and dissappear from localities in synchrony or individualistically?  -Are
              appearances and disappearances of species correlated with changes in overall
              diversity and/or  environmental shifts?  -Do particular clusters of taxa
              replace each other consistently in biotic overturn, in the absence of 
              paleoenvironmental change?  -Does the paleobiologic record in Lake Tanganyika
              better support a model of extreme niche specialization   and species
              integration (little relative biotic overturn, under relatively constant
              environmental   conditions or one of continuous non-equilibrium reassortment of
              species assemblages?  -At what rate do local extinction and recolonization
              events naturally occur and how "permanent" or  temporary are populations of
              local endemics?  -What are the implications of the observed presence or absence
              of community cohesion for the  establishment of  underwater reserves in
              adjacent parts of the lake?   Community paleoecologist and conservation
              biologists share a host of questions about community structure and stabilty,
              although explicit linkages between the two fields have rarely been articulated.
               The research proposed here has the potential to demonstrate ways in which
              these linkages can be made.
