Title       : Linking Intermetallics and Zintl Phases: Experimental and Theoretical Studies of
               Ternary "Trielides"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1998   
File        : a9627161

Award Number: 9627161
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon J. Miller gmiller@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    DMR-9627161           Miller    The role of valence electron
              concentration (vec = electron/atom ratio) to influence structure  is well
              documented for Zintl phases (valence compounds of electropositive metals with 
              post-transition elements: covalent networks and cages involving two-center
              two-electron  bonds) and Hume-Rothery phases (intermetallic compounds of late
              and post-transition  elements: dense packings involving "metallic" bonds).
              Zintl phases occur for vec > 4 (based  upon the network of post-transition
              elements) and Hume-Rothery phases are observed for vec  ~ 2. To date, there is
              no systematic investigation of the broad region in vec between these two 
              extremes. Since the two established compound classes show dramatic differences
              in structural  principles and electronic properties, studies involving
              compounds with vec in the intermediate  regime will provide a means of
              examining the transformation from one class to the other.  This research
              involves the synthesis and detailed characterization of ternary compounds in- 
              volving (i) an electropositive alkaline earth or rare earth metal; (ii) either
              a late transition  metal, i.e. groups 8-12 elements or one of either Li or Mg;
              and (iii) a group 13 element (Al,  Ga, In), called "trielides," in order to
              probe materials with vec between two and four by  tuning the electron count.
              Synthetic strategies will include high temperature methods  (arc-melting) and
              using metallic fluxes. Products will be examined for their crystal structure, 
              composition, and physical properties. In particular, X-ray and neutron
              diffraction, electron  microscopy, thermal analysis, X-ray photoelectron
              spectroscopy, electrical resistivity, and  magnetic susceptibility measurements
              will be utilized. Later stages of this investigation will  involve the
              incorporation of boron, carbon, and nitrogen into these intermetallics. In
              addition  to these experimental approaches, theoretical methods will be applied
              to investigate the  valence electron distribution in thes e systems as the vec
              changes. Specifically, relationships  between these solids and molecular
              analogues, e.g., ranging from metallocarborane  deltahedra to Zintl-type
              anionic cages, will be explored. Semiempirical electronic structure 
              calculations will be used to examine the ternary systems under study, with the
              aspirations of  adapting the LMTO calculations to these complex systems.   %%% 
              This investigation represents the first concerted effort of experiment and
              theory to perform a  systematic examination of compounds linking complex
              intermetallics with complex valence  compounds. The ternary compounds in this
              investigation may show high electrical conductivities  coupled with regions of
              strong covalent bonding. Therefore, these materials may offer potential 
              applications as high temperature metals, or may provide a means of studying
              either strengthening  or embrittlement mechanisms in intermetallics.
