Title       : Collaborative Research: A Test of Eustatic and Local Tectonic Controls on
               Lithofacies Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1997      
File        : a9627872

Award Number: 9627872
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81999              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Delano jdelano@cnsvax.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Delano  9627872     Sequence stratigraphic interpretations of facies development
              have come into wide application. Yet this model has seldom been tested against
              an independent set of high precision chronostratigraphic correlations. The
              proposed research seeks to directly examine two of the central assumptions of
              sequence stratigraphy: that unconformity bounded onlap/offlap cycles are
              synchronous across broad regions, and that maximum flooding surfaces within
              cycles can serve as regional isochrons.   We  propose to test these predictions
              by comparing the timing of late Middle Ordovician depositional sequence along
              two regionally extensive transects across eastern North America (Fig 1). The
              first will extend to the southwest within the Taconic foreland basin, from the
              New York Promontory through the Pennsylvania Reentrant to the Virginia
              Promontory. Along this transect, we will examine sections in east central
              Pennsylvania, western Virginia, eastern Tennessee, and  northern Alabama. The
              second transect will extend from the Taconic foreland basin through the
              Jessamine Dome, in North central Kentucky, and into the cratonic interior,
              where we will examine sections in Iowa, Illinois, and Missouri. These areas are
              widely separated geographically and are known to have experienced different
              tectonic histories during this interval.   Along these two transects, we will
              examine the time-space distribution of the upper-most Middle  Ordovician third
              order stratigraphic sequence relative to an independently constructed
              high-precision chronostratigraphy. We will focus in particular on the
              equivalents of 1) the lower Trenton Group-Utica Shale transgressive and
              highstand systems tract that developed in the Taconic basin of New York during
              the Corynoides americanus Chron and 2) the succeeding lowstand fan (Dolgeville
              Formation), which developed during the Orthographus ruedemanni Chron. Predicted
              sequence equivalents of this cycle will be taken from published literature. Our
              previous research on the Middle Ordovicia n Trenton Group and Utica Shale in
              central New York State has produced a high resolution chronostratigraphy that
              integrates data from geochemical fingerprinting of K-bentonites with data from
              graptolite and conodont biostratigraphy. we propose to extend this
              chronostratigraphic framework by a combination of 1) graptolite and conodont
              biostratigraphic studies, and 2) high precision electron microprobe analysis of
              apatite phenocrysts and glass inclusions within quartz phenocrysts obtained
              from K-bentonites at the study sites. Chronostratigraphic resolution based on
              graphic correlation within this system should be high (greatly exceeding that
              of biostratigraphy alone or of radiometric dating) and sufficient to provide a
              definitive test of the synchroneity of the rapidly onlapping transgressive
              system track, the overlying maximum flooding surface/marine hiatus, and the
              upper sequence boundary/lowstand fan.   By extending this set of time lines
              into the relatively stable cratonic interior and south into regions that
              experienced collisional loading during the earlier, Blountain Phase, of the
              Taconic Orogeny, it will be possible 1) to gain a precise and independent
              measure of synchroneity among the transgressive-regressive cycles documented in
              this interval in eastern North America and, therefore, 2) to use this system of
              correlations to examine the relative contributions of changing eustatic
              sea-level and regional tectonic events to the formations of late Middle
              Ordovician stratigraphic sequences. The work will provide important and
              otherwise inaccessible information about he physical and temporal connections
              between geological events on the craton and those along a major orogenic belt.
