Title       : Theoretical Studies of Structure and Reactions of Transition Metal Atoms, Ions,
               Complexes and Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a9627775

Award Number: 9627775
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keiji Morokuma morokuma@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program is supporting Prof.   Keiji
              Morokuma at Emory University in his theoretical research on   transition metals
              and their complexes. High level ab initio theoretical   calculations are
              applied to a wide range of problems on structure and   reactions of transition
              metal atoms, ions, complexes and clusters. The   potential energy surfaces of a
              variety of chemical reactions will be   calculated, ranging from gas phase
              reactions of bare transition metal   ions and atoms and simple complexes,
              activation of various bonds by   complicated transition metal complexes, the
              potential energy profiles of   full catalytic cycles by organometallic
              catalysts, and reactions of   transition metal clusters and cluster complexes.
              In addition to the   standard ab initio molecular orbital (MO) methods, the
              Integrated   Molecular Orbital + Molecular Mechanics (IMOMM) method and the
              integrated   MO + MO (IMOMO) method, developed recently by the principle
              investigator,   will be used for studies of reactions involving complicated
              ligands.   Theoretical studies of full catalytic cycles by transition metal  
              complexes, which still remain a challenge to theoreticians, will be   performed
              for (1) boration of alkenes and alkynes by Pt(0) and Pd(0)   complexes, (2)
              regio- and enantio-selective  hydroformylation of olefins by Rh(I) catalyst
              with a chiral ligand   BINAPHOS, and (3) Murai's C-H activation of aromatic
              ketones by Ru   complexes. In addition copolymerization of olefin and CO
              catalyzed by   Pd(II) complex and dehydrogenative polymerization of silanes by 
               zirconocene catalysts will be studied. In the boration of alkenes and  
              alkynes, Pd(0) and Pt(0) have very different reactivities to different   B-X
              bonds, and the origin of the difference will be studied. In   enantioselective
              hydroformylation, the different selectivity with   different phosphine ligands
              will be studied with the IMOMM method to   provide a clue for design of better
              ligands.  The knowledge to be obtained through this research, such as
              structure,  spectroscopic properties and energies of reaction intermediates and
                transition  states, is complementary to that gained from experiments, and is
              expected   not only to promote the fundamental understanding of complicated
              chemical   reactions of transition metal complexes but also to help logical
              design   of new catalysts for better control of complicated chemical reactions.
                Close contact with experimental groups will be maintained throughout the  
              proposed research.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
