Title       : Feasibility Study of Decomposition of Semiconductor Device Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1996      
File        : a9627223

Award Number: 9627223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth J. Brauer brauer@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9627223  Brauer  Process engineers gather data to make decisions regarding
              semiconductor fabrication processes in two ways.  One, test structures are
              designed, fabricated, and evaluated on wafers costing upwards of  $1000 and
              requiring several weeks of manufacture.  The second method involves computer
              simulations of limited accuracy, long runtimes, and poor convergence.  Neither
              method is completely satisfactory in terms of cost, time, and accuracy.   
              Given the continuing decrease in computing cost, modeling and simulation of
              semiconductor processes and devices, collectively known as Technology
              Computer-Aided Design (TCAD), is an increasingly useful tool for process
              engineers.  Much research has been done in this area but the results have not
              been adequate for industrial use while industry needs continue to grow. 
              Historically, commercial TCAD tools have lagged leading-edge process
              development by one generation. Thus, increased effort in TCAD research and
              commercialization is a critical need, as identified by the Semiconductor
              Industry Association.    This proposal addresses the need for improved device
              simulation by investigating the feasibility of using additive decomposition in
              the solution of the semiconductor device equations.  We are specifically
              interested in implementing the semiconductor hydrodynamic model in a practical,
              computationally efficient, parallelized device simulation tool use in a
              industrial setting.  The hydrodynamic model is chosen for three reasons. 
              First, hot electrons degrade long-term reliability through shifts in transistor
              threshold voltage and the hydrodynamic model has been shown to accurately model
              the hot electron effect in submicron MOSFETs.  Second, the semiconductor
              hydrodynamic model is much cheaper computationally than the Monte Carlo method.
               Third, previous work developing the hydrodynamic model predicts accurate
              simulation of  MOS devices to gate lengths of  0.1um.    Numerical robustness
              and computational cost are roadblocks to practical use of the hyd rodynamic
              model.  The proposed work is a novel approach to semiconductor device
              simulation by application of additive decomposition, a technique for
              decomposing governing equations into large-scale and small-scale parts without
              averaging that has been successfully applied to Burgers' equation and the
              Navier-Stokes equations governing fluid flow.  To our knowledge, no researcher
              has applied additive decomposition to the semiconductor device model.  The
              additive decomposition technique is particularly well suited to problems with a
              large range to time and/or space scales, as found in the carrier concentration
              and carrier temperature in submicron MOS devices, leading to convergence
              difficulties and requiring robust numerical techniques in the solution method. 
              Furthermore, additive decomposition adds another level of parallelization,
              improving the computational cost.    The project investigates the feasibility
              of the additive decomposition technique applied to the one-dimensional
              semiconductor equations.  The drift-diffusion model is a simple version of the
              hydrodynamic model and is, thus, an ideal vehicle for the feasibility study. 
              The test case is the submicron ballistic diode with an n+-n-n+  structure,
              which captures the essential features of the MOS channel.  The proposed work
              develops and tests the discretization and parallelization schemes for the
              one-dimensional drift-diffusion model using additive decomposition.    The
              project collaborators are Mr. Scott Irving, Process CAD Engineering Manager,
              National Semiconductor, and  Prof. James McDonough, Department of  Mechanical
              Engineering, University of Kentucky.  ***
