Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Uniform Numerical Methods for Singularly Perturbed
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1996    
File        : a9627244

Award Number: 9627244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Farrell farrell@cs.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Farrell  9622744    The investigator, together with colleagues in Ireland and
              Russia,  develops epsilon-uniformly convergent finite difference schemes  for
              singularly perturbed equations.  Unlike classical schemes,  such schemes have
              the advantage that the errors do not depend on  an inverse power of the small
              parameter epsilon, and hence do not  become unbounded as epsilon approaches
              zero.  The aim of this  project is to develop methods for a number of nonlinear
              ordinary  differential equations, and linear and nonlinear partial 
              differential equations of elliptic and parabolic type, using  meshes that are
              condensed (refined) in the boundary layers.   These meshes usually involve at
              least one free parameter.  They  investigate the influence of these parameters
              on the accuracy of  the approximation and the speed of convergence of linear
              and  nonlinear solvers.  The investigator implements these methods on  parallel
              (shared memory) and distributed computers.  This  involves theoretical work on
              convergence of Schwarz type methods  of domain decomposition and their parallel
              variants, as well as  comparisons of the efficiency of various parallel and
              sequential  methods.  They also study efficient solvers for the linear  systems
              arising from these problems, which can be highly  nonsymmetric for small
              epsilon.    Singularly perturbed differential equations are pervasive in 
              applications of mathematics to problems in the sciences and  engineering. 
              Among these are the Navier-Stokes equations of  fluid flow at high Reynolds
              number, the drift-diffusion equations  of semiconductor device physics, the
              Michaelis-Menten theory for  enzyme reactions, and mathematical models of
              liquid crystal  materials and of chemical reactions.  The development of 
              efficient generalizable methods for such equations, which yield  guaranteed
              bounds on the error independent of the value of the  small perturbation
              parameter, is thus of considerable  significance in a number of important
              areas.
