Title       : Mathematical Sciences Computing Research Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1996     
File        : a9627797

Award Number: 9627797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138912             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leo Breiman leo@stat.Berkeley.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Rice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terence P. Speed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Brillinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Statistics at the University of California at Berkeley will
              purchase 18  SUN Ultrasparc workstations which will be dedicated to the support
              of research in the mathematical sciences.  The equipment will be used for many
              research projects, including:  Genetics (Terry Speed) testing for genetic locus
              heterogeneity, investigating the power effects of interference,  estimating
              recombination fractions, modeling crossover interference, identification of
              quantitative trait loci, location of disease genes, and estimation of
              phylogenetic relationships between species. Wavelets (David Donoho) research
              includes basis pursuit, time frequency signal analysis, and digital
              communications processing,  Biological and Environmental Problems (John Rice)
              analysis of ion channel recordings, analysis of oceanographic measurements, and
              modeling hormonal profiles ( David Brillinger) analyzing nerve cell spike
              trains,  trajectories of mammalian dives,  motion of meteorological fields, and
              seismic risk analysis. Astrophysics(Philip Stark)  modeling the structure of
              the sun,  algorithms for the analysis of satellite data. Methodology (Leo
              Breiman) study of the structure of neural nets, prediction of multiple time
              series,  stabilizing nonparametric high dimensional predictors in regression
              and classification, using categorical variables in nearest neighbor
              classification, and parallelizing CART over a workstation network. Stochastic
              Processes (David Aldous) Monte Carlo experiments in spatial stochastic
              processes.  (Ching-Shui Cheng) nonregular experimental designs
