Title       : Fundamental Photographic Observations of Triggered Lightning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2000 
File        : a9627276

Award Number: 9627276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240476             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent P. Idone vpi@atmos.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Idone/Abstract            The objective of this research is the acquisition and
              analysis of  highly time-resolved photographic records of triggered lightning
              flashes  to be obtained during the summer of 1997 at Camp Blanding, Florida. 
              The  data acquired will allow study of 1) the channel creation process, 2) the 
              development of the return stroke and dart-leader diameter with time,  and 3)
              the evolution of channel microscale tortuosity.  These experiments  will yield
              unique data sets that are fundamentally new and that could be  critical in the
              testing of newly emerging models of different phases of  the lightning
              discharge.          The recordings proposed would be made from two separate
              sites.   A  distant  site (~ 1 km away) would be used to provide an overall
              record  of the luminous lightning components propagating along most of the 
              channel below cloud base.  A "near  photographic site (80 m away) is also 
              proposed to record new details of the evolution of lightning channels  during
              the course of the discharge.  The totality of photographic records   obtained
              would correlate with and complement other data sets to be  acquired
              simultaneously by other researchers participating in this  campaign.         
              The distant-site recordings would document the creation of the  lightning
              channel by the initial leader process using a near-UV  photographic system; 
              this provides a superior rendering of the initial  phase of the discharge.  The
              near-site experiments would provide highly  time-resolved imagery of the
              cross-sections of lightning channels for the  same strokes, these records being
              attained from a vertical section only 8  mm in extent.  These close-up
              recordings would yield a direct  measurement of the luminous channel diameter
              as small as 6mm with a  time resolution of 0.9 ms.  Once 10-20 return stroke
              images are obtained,  attempts would be made to image the cross-sections of
              downward  propagating dart-leaders or dart-stepped leaders from a channel
              section  aloft as the dart-leader luminous  diameter has not been examined
              directly  before.  Framing photographs (4000 fr/sec) of the same field of view 
              would document the movement and geometric variation of the channels   on the
              microscale (~2 cm).          It is anticipated that the field observations
              could be acquired in a  single field campaign during the first summer of
              support.  The remainder  of the project would be devoted to analysis of the
              photographic data in  its own right along with use of these results in
              collaborative analyses with  other researchers.
