Title       : Making and Breaking Carbon-Carbon Bonds at Transition Metal Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1998     
File        : a9627882

Award Number: 9627882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell P. Hughes rph@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Russell P. Hughes, Department of Chemistry, Dartmouth College, is  
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of   the
              Chemistry Division to determine how transition metals make and break  
              carbon-carbon bonds. To investigate the scope of metal-mediated   carbon-carbon
              cleavage and formation, detailed mechanistic studies will   be carried out for
              the reversible insertion of metal centers into the   carbon-carbon bonds of
              cyclopropenyl rings. As the product of   metal-mediated carbon-carbon forming
              reactions is often dependent on the   conformational properties of the metal
              complex, `sticky` fluorinated   substituents will be attached to
              cyclopentadienyl rings to control   conformational properties of metal
              complexes containing two   cyclopentadienyl ligands. This will force the
              self-assembly of   dissymmetric and asymmetric complexes from two achiral
              cyclopentadienyl   ligands. New valence isomers of the metal-cyclopentadienyl
              fragment and   new transition metal complexes containing metal-carbon and  
              metal-heteroatom multiple bonds will be produced through  harnessing the  
              steric strain imparted by adjacent tertiary butyl groups on cyclopropenyl   and
              cyclopentadienyl rings to force skeletal rearrangements.  Transition metal
              complexes promote very selective catalytic and   stoichiometric transformations
              of organic compounds. Since many of these   reactions involve the activation of
              normally inert bonds, it is of   considerable interest to understand how metal
              centers make and break   bonds between carbon atoms. This study aims toward a
              fundamental   understanding of such processes. The detailed knowledge that will
              be   obtained will permit an increased usage and expansion of metal catalysts  
              and will permit the catalysts to be fine tuned in order to precisely   control
              chemical reactions.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
