Title       : Quantitative Reconstruction of Sediment Provenance: A Geochemical Study of the
               Amazon Fan/Delta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1997      
File        : a9627908

Award Number: 9627908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott M. McLennan Scott.McLennan@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9627908  McLennan   Siliciclastic sediments preserved within the Amazon
              subaqueous delta and deep-sea fan were derived from the Amazon drainage basin
              under contrasting climatic conditions.  The delta represents relatively recent
              deposition largely under tropical conditions whereas the fan represents
              deposition during various Pleistocene glacial stages when the shelf was
              by-passed during low sea level stands.  Stratigraphically constrained samples
              have only recently been made available for the Amazon Fan from ODP Leg 155. 
              This proposal is concerned with quantitatively evaluating the relative
              importance of Andean versus cratonic provenance for these sediments during
              these contrasting climatic conditions.  Preliminary petrographic, geochemical
              and isotopic data suggest a dominance of Andean sources but also suggest that
              in detail the provenance history is complex.  The study will evaluate the
              sources of both muds and sands using neodymium and lead isotopes and a variety
              of geochemical and petrographic techniques.  For the sands, the lithology most
              often used in provenance studies of ancient sequences, we will further evaluate
              the provenance of the major individual components, quartz, feldspar and heavy
              minerals (using zircon as the proxy) using a combination of Pb and Nd
              measurements.  The purpose of this aspect of the study is twofold:  (1) to
              determine if the provenance inferred from whole rock Pb and Nd isotope
              measurements can be applied to the major minerals that contain relatively
              little Nd (quartz and feldspar) or Pb (quartz); (2) to determine if the
              provenance inferred from detrital zircon studies is similar to that inferred
              for major minerals (quartz and feldspar), bulk sands and associated muds.  From
              these data, we will be able to reconstruct the provenance of both sands and
              muds with some precision and evaluate if the craton plays a greater role for
              sands that muds, as suggested by others, and whether the craton plays a greater
              or lesser role during contrasting climatic conditions.  Th is study will
              provide fundamental information regarding limitations on how various approaches
              to provenance (e.g., petrography, geochemistry, radiogenic isotopes) can be
              interpreted.  The Amazon drainage system is the largest in the world and
              understanding the origin and history of sediment derived from this system is of
              the great interest in its own right.  Any contrasts between sediment preserved
              on the fan and delta would have significance for paleoclimatological studies of
              this drainage system.
