Title       : Reconstruction of the Green Bay, Lake Michigan and DesMoines Lobes, 21-11,000
               B.P.: Ice Surfaces Profiles, Landform- Sediment Associations & Deglaciation
               Chronology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9627798

Award Number: 9627798
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144730             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Mickelson mickelson@geology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Mickelson  9627798   Only a few studies have examined the dynamics of large
              glacier lobes, even though they controlled the mass balance of the Laurentide
              ice sheet.  By analyzing ice-surface profiles, landform-sediment associations,
              and advance-retreat chronologies, this research process relationships of three
              southern Laurentide glacier lobes, at various time during deglaciation
              21-11,000 BP.  This integration of three separate lines of evidence:  glacier
              reconstructions, landform sediment associations, and chronology should increase
              understanding of the dynamic history of these lobes and whether or not they
              contributed significantly to the collapse of the Laurentide ice sheet.  
              Geomorphic evidence suggests that these lobes at times experienced surge type
              or streaming flow regimes.  There is also evidence suggesting ice marginal
              stagnation and rapid retreat.  Flow regime at a specific site or time depended
              on bed conditions present and climatic factors influencing mass balance.  This
              project will document these changes in flow regime and derive from field
              evidence estimates of bed conditions.  The final result will be an improved
              conceptual model of how large glacier lobes responded to changing conditions
              during the last deglaciation.  This will lead to more confident interpretations
              of the relationships between climate, ice sheets, and the sedimentary record.  
              Reconstructions of two lobes of the southern Laurentide ice sheet during
              several early phases of deglaciation have been produced so far.  Reconstructed
              glacier profiles indicate that basal shear stresses varied from >25 kPa to <5
              kPa during deglaciation and that surge-type flow and steady sheet-type flow
              were common.  A major unanswered question about southern Laurentide lobes is
              whether retreat occurred progressively at rates of -40 to 100 m/y or
              catastrophically with rates of -500 to 1000 m/y.  The answer to this question
              is fundamental to understanding the behavior of the southern Laurentide ice
              margin as well as in interpreting the  deglaciation chronologies of these
              lobes.  Was there a rapid collapse corresponding to a rapid warming and climate
              change seen in Greenland ice cores?  Glacial deposits suggest there could be a
              relationship, but surface exposure dates (10be, 25Al, and 36Cl) must be
              obtained from the poorly dated terrestrial record to provide an independent
              test of existing chronologies.   Landform-sediment associations will be
              investigated to determine their relationship to reconstructions of paleoglacier
              conditions.  Sediment fabric, sedimentary structures, and basal contacts will
              be described to determine whether there are major differences in the type of
              glacier bed transport between pre- and post- 13,000 BP advances.  The
              association of low profile surge-type lobes with fine-grained lake sediments
              and lake basins will be investigated and documented.  Where a clear difference
              in ice surface slope can be documented, careful examination of the associated
              sediment should distinguish a wet deforming bed from concentration of water at
              the ice-bed interface.  Thus, three different data sets are used to document
              glacier conditions during retreat along the southern margin of the Laurentide
              ice sheet:  ice surface profiles, landform-sediment associations, and
              chronology.
