Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mutual Synchronization of Biological Oscillators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1999 
File        : a9627189

Award Number: 9627189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven H. Strogatz shs7@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1022,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Strogatz  9627189       Many populations of biological oscillators can exhibit 
              remarkable collective behavior.  Despite differences in their  individual
              natural frequencies, the oscillators spontaneously  synchronize to a common
              frequency.  Examples include chorusing  crickets, fireflies that flash in
              unison, and synchronous firing  of cardiac pacemaker cells.  The investigator
              and his colleagues  study the principles underlying these self-synchronizing
              systems,  using analytical, computational, and experimental methods.  The 
              mathematical investigations concern the dynamics and stability of  mutual
              synchronization, analyzed with techniques from  perturbation theory, nonlinear
              dynamics, and statistical  mechanics.  The experimental aspects of the project
              deal with the  chorusing behavior of the snowy tree cricket, regarded as a
              model  experimental system for studying mutual synchronization.  The 
              experiments quantify psychophysical aspects of individual male  responses as
              they relate to chorusing, and then extend to the  behavior of larger groups,
              based on empirical measures of  auditory perception, physiology, and signal
              propagation.  The  goal is to understand mutual synchronization in this
              biological  system, and to test the results quantitatively against the 
              predictions of mathematical models.       This study provides the first
              detailed experimental  investigation of mutual synchronization in a biological
              system.  Although the synchronized chirping of crickets is the phenomenon 
              being studied, the goals of the project are much broader.  How  does synchrony
              emerge in a group of dissimilar oscillators?  This  issue arises throughout all
              of science and technology, in such  problems as the synchronization of arrays
              of lasers to achieve  greater collective power, or the synchronization of
              pacemaker  cells in the heart to produce a coherent beat.  Theories of such 
              self-synchronizing systems have been considered mathematically  for almost
              thirty years, but they have never been checked  experime ntally against any
              real biological system.  This study is  the first step in that direction. 
              Benefits are expected not only  for our understanding of biological
              synchronization, but also for  spin-offs to technological applications
              involving arrays of  oscillators, such as superconducting Josephson junctions
              and  lasers.
