Title       : Instance-Based Theorem Proving with Semantics and Equality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9627316

Award Number: 9627316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89204              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Plaisted plaisted@cs.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              First-order logic is a common formalism for representing  mathematical and other
              formal knowledge.  Many traditional  techniques for proving first-order
              theorems on a computer suffer  from severe inefficiencies on certain kinds of
              problems such as  near-propositional highly non-Horn problems.  Under previous 
              grants, theorem proving strategies have been developed that avoid  many of
              these propositional inefficiencies. These include hyper-  linking and
              hyper-linking with semantics.  The latter method is  able to make use of
              realistic models, or semantics, of the  problem.  However, the kinds of models
              it can use are limited  to those involving linear inequalities and those with
              finite  domains.  This approach will now be extended to include a much  more
              general class of models, those whose functions and  predicates are computable. 
                First-order logic with equality is a more powerful formalism that  is also
              often applicable.  For this formalism, methods based on  term-rewriting systems
              are commonly applied.  The above-mentioned  semantic techniques will be
              extended to first-order logic with  equality.  Other topics related to equality
              will also be studied,  such as rigid E-unification and specialized algorithms
              for  handling permutations that arise from equational systems.    A general
              framework---recently developed for studying the search  efficiency of theorem
              proving strategies, and applied in a  largely propositional context---will be
              extended to first-order  logic.  Complexity issues related to term-rewriting
              proofs will  also be studied.  ***
