Title       : VPW: Risk Sharing, Market Imperfections and Endogenous Policy Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1998     
File        : a9627016

Award Number: 9627016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154650             (Estimated)
Investigator: JoAnne Feeney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1592      PROF OPPOR FOR WOMEN IN RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research explores the importance of asset markets for rent-  seeking
              behavior and endogenously determined policy in democracies.   Part I shows that
              access to markets influences individuals' trade-  policy preferences and
              government policy choices.  Part 2  determines the consequences of this
              interdependence for human and  physical capital accumulation, growth and
              fluctuations.  Part 3  examines international lending to economies in
              transition from  socialist to market systems where rent appropriation by
              foreign  entrepreneurs arises.  This project will reveal the structure of 
              asset markets necessary to moderate protectionist interests,  minimize
              rent-seeking behavior, and further progression towards  market systems in
              transition economies.  The analysis employs a  formal theoretical framework and
              implications will be related to  empirical observations.    The interactive
              component incorporates teaching, research, and  social elements.  A course in
              international economics is being  offered to graduate students in the first
              semester, while a  freshman course will be offered on global economic issues in
              the  second semester.  Participation in the organization of the  International
              Workshop is ongoing throughout the visit as is  attendance at faculty meetings
              and departmental social functions.   In addition, initiation of more casual
              economics discussion groups  at weekly lunches is being promoted.
