Title       : VPW: Yup'ik Conception of Wellness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9627078

Award Number: 9627078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147824             (Estimated)
Investigator: Penelope M. Cordes lfpmc@aurora.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project describes contemporary Yup'ik conceptions of wellness,  i.e.,
              beliefs and practices associated with health promotion and  illness prevention.
               Research is being conducted over a twelve  month period in Bethel, Alaska
              which is the hub of the Yukon-  Kuskokwim Delta, the most populous region of
              Yup'ik speakers in the  state.  The hospital there serves as the medical center
              for 56  villages.  The project entails collaboration with the Alaska Native 
              regional health entity operating the hospital to prioritize  specific issues of
              concern within the topic of Yup'ik conceptions  of wellness.  The specific
              issues identified are the focus of  ethnographic research at the hospital.   
              By most epidemiologic, economic, demographic, and social health  measures, this
              region is the most disadvantaged in the state.   Acute infectious disease
              contributes substantial morbidity.   Additionally, many health problems are due
              to chronic disease,  injury, and other health problems that have a behavioral
              factor as  a contributing cause, the prevention which entails a behavior 
              change component.  The illness profile describing the disease and  psychosocial
              dysfunction of the people of the region is well  defined.  A wellness profile
              will be developed through compilation  of quantitative data on diachronic
              indices of risk factors and  health behavior change, and qualitative,
              ethnograpic data  describing cognitive categories related to preventive health 
              domains, explanatory models of illness episodes and their  relationship to
              wellness, and health behavior "success stories".    By focusing on contemporary
              beliefs, the research will advance the  knowledge of:  Yup'ik conceptual
              categories of etiology and  prevention; beliefs of a much wider age group than
              has previously  been described; and beliefs related to health issues previously
               unexamined.  Paradoxically, this work that focuses on the  contemporary and on
              fostering behavior change, could advance the  Yup'ik cultural revitalization
              agenda by reinforcing  the  traditional Yup'ik value of illness prevention and
              belief in the  role of human agency in the health of the individual and the 
              community.    Interactive activities include teaching an undergraduate course, 
              instruction and supervision of students as research assistants,  teaching a
              graduate course for health care providers, giving guest  lectures including
              instruction for Community Health Aides at the  Alaska Statewide Community
              Health Aide Conference in Anchorage in  April 1997.
