Title       : Continental Paleoclimate Reconstruction Through Analysis of Oxygen Isotopes in
               Iron Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1997      
File        : a9627953

Award Number: 9627953
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150781             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. Koch pkoch@earthsci.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Koch  9627953   To understand the influence that climate change has on the
              evolution and ecological organization of the biota, detailed records of proxy
              data for past temperature, precipitation, wind speed, and a variety of other
              features are essential.  While the marine climate record can be reconstructed
              from a wide range of proxies, analysis of paleoclimatic change in the highly
              variable continental realm has proven more difficult.  The chief proxies that
              are applicable to extremely ancient  periods are analyses based on leaf shape,
              faunal distributions, and the isotope chemistry of authigenic minerals and
              fossils.  The oxygen isotope composition of a mineral is determined by the
              temperature at which it forms and the isotope composition of the water from
              which it precipitates.  In this project, iron oxides in soils and surface
              waters will be used to reconstruct the oxygen isotope composition of meteoric
              water, which is strongly correlated to mean annual temperature in modern mid-
              to high-latitude regions.   This proposal has four sections.  First, we will
              determine the oxygen isotope compositions of iron oxides and meteoric waters
              from sites with relatively pure iron oxides under a variety of different
              climates in modern soils and surface water systems to determine if iron oxides
              are forming in oxygen isotope equilibrium with meteoric water.  Second, there
              are discrepancies between the hematite-water fractionation as a determined by
              synthesis experiments and by theoretical calculation.  If the calculation is
              correct, then the hematite-water fractionation is insensitive to temperature,
              and the oxygen isotope composition of hematite will reflect solely change in
              the composition of meteoric water.  A series of synthesis experiments are
              proposed to resolve this discrepancy and shed light on natural formation
              mechanisms.  Finally, oxygen isotopes in ancient soil hematites will be used to
              study two of the most significant transitions in the earth's climate in the
              last 100 million years, the dramati c warming at the Paleocene/Eocene boundary
              and the stepwise transition to cooler climates at the end of the Eocene.  The
              study of ancient climates will focus on western North America, where there are
              excellent records of faunal and floral change from the same stratigraphic
              sections that will supply hematities for the isotopic study.  These studies
              will help resolve the roles played by local versus global climate changes in
              the evolution of continental faunas and floras, and will provide an opportunity
              to examine in detail the contrast between the effects of warming versus cooling
              on the biota.
