Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Collaboration and Innovation in the Commerical
               Geographic Information System Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9627812

Award Number: 9627812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9888               (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan D. MacPherson geoadm@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Hartung, Valerie  SUNY at Buffalo   The study is designed to examine
              collaborative efforts utilized by firms in the Geographic Information Systems
              (GIS) sector in the U.S. through a series of site interviews.  The goal is to
              investigate the spatial and organizational nature of linkages with particular
              emphasis upon the impact of joint ventures in technological development and
              innovation diffusion.  The research will investigate the nature and origins of
              innovation within the GIS sector and whether technological innovation is
              approached internally or externally.  In addition the spatial connection, and
              especially the presence of a distance decay factor, will be investigated.  The
              presence or absence of computing and telecommunication advances upon the scope
              of collaborative ventures will be studied.  A mail survey will be conducted
              upon the population of GIS firms and is intended to assess the technical
              contribution of external forward and backward linkages, export propensity, and
              locational attributes of the responding firms.  The survey will be followed by
              on-site interviews of firm executives.  The goal of these interviews is to
              understand the firm's observed behavior in light of its competitive strategy,
              product technology, production methods, labor relations and the behavior of
              competitors.  The study will illuminate the potential impact of information
              technologies in the North American economy and on its ability to develop and
              transfer innovation into marketable products and services.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
