Title       : A Mathematical Derivation of Geologically Important Silicate Minerals and a
               Study of Electron Density Distributions and the Nature of Bonds in Silicates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1998   
File        : a9627458

Award Number: 9627458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald V. Gibbs boisen@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Monte B. Boisen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9627458  Gibbs  This project is designed to advance work in three fields: 
              mineralogy, crystallography and geochemistry.  Recent advances by the
              investigators have resulted in a determination of crystal structures, space
              group symmetries and cell dimensions.  Software, developed by the
              investigators, was used to derive more than 85 distinct stable and metastable
              framework silica structure types employing a potential energy function created
              from quantum mechanical calculations.  An examination of the structure and the
              potential energy functions used in the derivations will improve the
              understanding of  the forces that bind the structures together and clarify the
              role that these forces play in governing the atomic arrangements and the
              symmetries of the resulting phases.  The calculations will also provide a
              catalog of structure types that will facilitate the identification of any new
              structure types that are discovered either in the laboratory or in nature. 
              First principle crystal calculations will be used to generate structures for
              the new low energy structure types derived in this study.  It is anticipated
              that this information will increase the understanding of the connection between
              potential energy and structure thereby enhancing the understanding of the role
              that the binding forces and the electron density distributions play in
              determining structure.  An analysis will be completed of the electron density
              distributions calculated for the bonds of a variety of hydroxyacid molecules in
              an attempt to relate the fractional ionic character of the bonds in these
              molecules to the electron density and the local kinetic and potential energy
              densities at the bond critical points.  One of the benefits of this study is
              that it could lead to improved models and strategies for the synthesis of new
              porous tectosilicates, materials that have found use in the beneficiation and
              generation of petroleum products.  Another benefit is that the calculations
              could produce a collection of dense silica structure type s with 6-coordinate
              Si, phases which would be of importance in geophysical research.
