Title       : Structure and Maintenance of Potential Vorticity in the Midlatitude Atmosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9627040

Award Number: 9627040
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269596             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noboru Nakamura nnn@bethel.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9627040  Nakamura     This project involves numerical and theoretical
              investigations of the mean structure of the potential vorticity (PV) in the
              earth's midlatitude atmosphere.  Of particular interest are (1) how the
              nonconservative processes (friction, radiation, latent heating, etc.) interact
              with advective processes to maintain the highly inhomogeneous PV structures
              such as those found at the tropopause and at the edge of the stratospheric
              polar vortex and (2) how the values and gradients of the tropospheric PV are
              maintained.     A new diagnostic technique to define the mean PV profile, based
              on the Lagrangian mass coordinate and recently developed by the principal
              investigator, will be employed.  In a radical departure from the conventional
              zonal- and time-mean approaches, the method characterizes the isentropic
              transport as redistribution of mass between PV contours for which
              nonconservative processes such as diffusion are essential.  Chaotic advection
              is viewed as the stretching of the PV contours, affecting the available
              interface for microscale diffusion.  This Lagrangian diagnostic appears to
              identify strong PV gradients much better than conventional methods.     Within
              this framework the baroclinic adjustment and the height of the tropopause will
              be investigated in terms of the mass budget of the troposphere, considering
              both the stratosphere-troposphere mass exchange and the mass sink/sources (heat
              fluxes) at the ground, with stirring due to baroclinic eddies regulating these
              processes.  Using a two-dimensional model, the PI will first simulate a
              statistical steady state of the baroclinic atmosphere and examine the mechanism
              of tropopause formation and maintenance.  The analysis will be extended to
              three dimensions, based on the high resolution simulations with the GFDL's
              SKYHI global circulation model.  The same approach will be used to investigate
              the maintenance of the stratospheric polar vortex edge except that breaking
              Rossby waves will replace baroclinic waves as the stirr ing agent.  These
              studies are directed at finding unifying theories of various aspects of the
              midlatitude general circulation.  ***
