Title       : Virtual Reality Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1997        
File        : a9627334

Award Number: 9627334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43080              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve Novotny   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Galloway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose High Academy
	      275 North 24th Street
	      San Jose, CA  95116    /   -

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***  9627334  Novotny    Through the application of advanced technology, the
              Virtual Reality Education project will aid in the development of critical
              thinking, and self-assessment skills in the areas of mathematics, and science
              in students. In six weeks the students. In six weeks the students will discover
              and experience Virtual Reality first-hand, while also learning about its
              relation to many different forms of math and science. As the students progress,
              their ability to not only comprehend,but visualize, and apply a variety of
              mathematical concepts will vastly improve. Their understanding about physics,
              algebra, logic, geometry, and (for the more advanced) calculus, will be put to
              the test as they are asked to complete a packet of Virtual worlds which contain
              applications of those fields of maths and science. Students who complete the
              packet early enough will be allowed to develop their own Virtual worlds in
              which other applications of math and science will be demonstrated. All the
              results from each six week course will be placed on a special web-page on San
              Jose High Academys' home-page. This will allow for a quick dissemination of the
              results, aiding in the development of other educational VR projects. This,
              then, would make the VRE project one that has a global impact, as it would be
              accessible to the entire world via the World Wide Web. The potential of Virtual
              Reality is so immense that its incorporation into our society is an inevitable
              fact. The educational value of this technology lies within its ability to train
              students to visualize what would otherwise be vague concepts. As visualization
              is 90% of the comprehension process, Virtual Reality can easily be described as
              one of the most advanced forms of teaching. By being a pioneer project, VRE is
              demonstrating the strength of this new technology at a high-school level. This
              demonstration will become a reference point for every educationally based
              Virtual Reality project in the future. The impact on the current system of
              education,  a nd indeed on our own understanding of how to educate, will be
              immeasurable.  ***
