Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Holomorphic Dynamical Systems and Small Divisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1996      
File        : a9627038

Award Number: 9627038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ricardo Perez-Marco ricardo@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Perez-Marco    The main goal of the project is to give a complete
              analysis of the local dynamics of a one-dimensional holomorphic map near an
              indifferent irrational fixed point when it is nonlinearizable due to the
              existence of Small Divisors.  In particular, I want to understand as thoroughly
              as possible, the topological and metrical structure of the mapping invariant  
              sets (Siegel compacts), and stability properties.  Achieving these aims will
              entail sharp geometric estimates for analytic circle diffeomorphisms.  Using
              these tools I propose to study the boundary of what are called Siegel disks of
              the first type.  A long range objective of this research is to obtain a
              geometric theory of Small Divisors applicable to higher dimensional problems.  
               The theory of Dynamical Systems studies the evolution of solutions of a system
              of differential equations, that describe the evolution of a physical system. 
              Typically the solutions of these equations arising in Physical Sciences,
              meteorology, engineering, etc... cannot be obtained by a close formula (it is
              the same situation than for the roots of a polynomial: we know that there are
              always complex roots, but we cannot express  the roots from the coefficients by
              simple algebraic operations).   It is of fundamental importance in the
              applications to determine the future evolution of the physical system. Probably
              the most important problem is the question of stability: Is the system   going
              to have a stable evolution forever or it is going to break at some moment ? 
              Certainly, this is an every day problem for engineers building planes or other
              moving devices, but we can find much more complex situations where the solution
              of this problem is of capital importance.  For example, one of the hardest
              problems in the practice of fusion in the Tokamak machines, is the
              magnetohydrodynamical problem of finding stable configurations of a plasma at
              extremely high temperatures.  The control of fusion will provide clean energy
              from the water!  It is a quest ion of fundamental importance.  As
              mathematicians, we study the simplest situations to develop the tools to treat
              the more complex ones.  The theory of Small Divisors is a fundamental tool to
              study problems of stability in conservative situations.  Conservative situation
              meaning that some structure (a volume, a conformal structure,...) is preserved.
              This is very common in the applications, the equations of mechanics without
              friction are conservative for example.  In my research, I study the situation
              of a conformal map in the plane, that is a map that preserves angles. In this
              situation, there are classical Small Divisors theorems which guarantee
              stability   properties.  A large part of my research is devoted to study the
              situation where the tools of Small Divisors fail to prove stability.  New weak
              stability notions have been found in this setting.  The major part of my
              research project consists in the detailed study of these new stability
              features.
