Title       : VPW: Detection and Analysis of Reptitions in Biosequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9627109

Award Number: 9627109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160565             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanette Schmidt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9180,9215,HPCC,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on the development of computational tools for  analyzing
              and comparing sequences.  An important aspect of this  work is the
              collaboration with scientists in the biological  sciences.  Particular emphasis
              will be placed on the development of  computational tools for the detection of
              multiple repeated regions  and tandem repeats in both DNA and protein
              sequences.  These  regions are very important as they have been associated with
               regulatory, stabilizing, and evolutionary sites.  Many such  repeated regions
              are difficult to detect because the repetitions  are inexact, sometimes
              exhibiting a low percentage of identical  symbols.  An analysis will be
              conducted to gain more insight into  the difficult problem of determining the
              threshold for statistical  significance of such repeats.  The efficient
              identification of  multiple repeats requires a subtle similarity measure.  This
              will  require the identification and representation of optimal as well as  near
              optimal alignments between subsequences.  An empirical  comparative study will
              be conducted to assess the applicability and  significance of the new
              algorithms.    Interactive activities include teaching a seminar to encourage a
               dialogue between students from different disciplines; visiting  local high
              schools; organizing group meetings with undergraduate  interns; and interacting
              with the graduate students; participating  in journal clubs, colloquium and
              seminars; and engaging in joint  research with other members of the
              Biochemistry, Medical  Informatics and Genome Center at Stanford University.
