Title       : SBIR Phase II: Real Time Sputter Depth Measurement for In Situ Surface
               Microanalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1997       
File        : a9627857

Award Number: 9627857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293552             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl Colvard ccolvard@cea.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Charles Evans & Associates
	      301 Chesapeake Drive
	      Redwood City, CA  94063    415/369-4567

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9627857  Colvard   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              addresses the problem of knowing what subsurface level of a sample is being
              analyzed at any given moment during an analytical depth profile. Depth profile
              analysis of elemental composition at solid surfaces with secondary ion mass
              spectrometry (SIMS) and Auger electron spectrometry requires ion beam
              sputtering of material from the surface to form a crater of increasing depth.
              Only after the measurement is completed can the crater depth be measured by
              profilometry, the sputter rate averaged, and the calibration of composition
              versus depth completed. Unfortunately, sputter rates can vary widely in
              different materials, which shifts the apparent position of interfaces. Sputter
              rate has also been linked to ion yield, which affects the relative sensitivity
              factors used to quantify impurity data in SIMS.   As industrial demands
              increase for higher levels of spatial and compositional accuracy, and for
              faster analytical turn around, it is important to measure crater depth and
              sputter rate in situ and in real time. We demonstrated in Phase I an
              interferometric technique that can perform this measurement. In Phase II we
              propose to use this approach to create a new tool, adaptable to existing
              analytical instruments, that will provide dynamic depth measurements, during an
              analysis, with a resolution approaching one nanometer.   We will build a
              prototype instrument, adapted to an analytical SIMS spectrometer, that will
              monitor sputter depths at a single point during depth profile analyses. Its
              performance and functionality will be characterized, and shortcomings will be
              addressed. Experiments will be conducted to explore its behavior with different
              sample types, and multi-point extensions to the technique will be examined.  
              Immediate applications exist for incorporation of this tool into commercial
              secondary ion mass spectrometers and Auger microprobes, both in new instruments
              and as retrofits into the large installed base.
