Title       : Habitrek
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2000    
File        : a9627053

Award Number: 9627053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barry A. Van Deman                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $699638             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel M. Hamilton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith Winsten  (Principal Investigator former)
              Anne Savage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rhode Island Zoolog Soc
	      Elmwood Ave
	      Providence, RI  02905    401/941-3988

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9627053  Winsten    The Rhode Island Zoological Society will develop, prototype,
               install, and evaluate "Habitrek", a 3000 sq. ft. exhibit to be  placed in
              their new Education Center.  The center is a circular  building and as visitors
              go through it they will encounter habitat  displays of a Urban Providence,
              Woodlands, Wetlands, and Desert.   In addition there will be giant scale
              replicas of a wormhole, a bat  cave, a prairie dog colony, and a stream.  Their
              intent is to use  live animals, animal replicas and interactives to shift the 
              visitor's emphasis from simply finding and identifying species to  learning
              about habitats where animals live and where animals and  humans often have to
              interact.  In addition to the exhibits,  several complementary educational
              activity packages will be  developed.  These include a family activity pack of
              activities that  can be completed both at the zoo and in the home.  They will
              relate  many natural history stories not obvious from the exhibit alone.   To
              streamline the development process, materials developed by the  Bronx Zoo's
              Habitat Ecology Learning Program (an NSF-supported  teacher enhancement
              activity) will serve as the basis for these  family packs.  The HELP materials
              will also serve as the basis for  activities developed for use by teachers to
              complement the already  existing Kits in Teaching Elementary Science (KITES)
              program  (another NSF-supported program).  The zoo also has cooperative 
              programs with the Rhode Island Girl Scout Council and materials  will be
              modified for their use as well.  Of special interest is the  attention that is
              being given to going beyond minimum ADA standards  to make the exhibit broadly
              accessible.  Ambient sound will be an  important part of all exhibit settings,
              design considerations will  be made for those with limited vision, and
              sightlines will be  consistent with wheelchair standards, are a few examples. 
              The  anticipated exhibit opening is early 1998.
