Title       : Paleontology and Biostratigraphy of the Terminal Proterozoic and Earliest
               Cambrian Nama Group, Southern Naimbia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9627924

Award Number: 9627924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129824             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce N. Runnegar runnegar@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9627924  Runnegar    The Cambrian Explosion is the sixth  of eight revolutionary
              advances in the history of life and one with obvious geological effects. The
              aims of this project are to document the history of life in the poorly
              understood (Neoproterozoic) stage of the Cambrian Explosion when most
              innovations were well underway. This will be achieved by using  the largely
              unexplored but appropriately fossileferous Nama Group succession in southern
              Namibia as the primary source of data.    The Nama Group succession is a
              well-exposed, flat lying, foreland basin succession that contains a variety of
              fossils (Ediacaran soft bodied fossils, trace fossils, calcareous fossils) at
              several stratigraphic levels. Equally important, existing knowledge of the
              sequence stratigraphy, carbon isotope stratigraphy, and   U-Pb geochronology
              makes it possible to relate the biological evolution to environmental events
              that could be global in character. It may therefore be possible to tease apart
              the intrinsic and extrinsic factors that were driving or being driven by the
              Cambrian Explosion of complex multicellular life.     Building on
              reconnaissance work carried out in Namibia in 1993 and 1995, we shall begin to
              document the   biostratigraphy and paleoecology of the Nama Group in the
              southern Witputs Basin in 1996. This will involve extensive field exploration
              and observation as well as collecting fossils, measuring sections, tracing
              formation and sequence boundaries, and sampling for carbon isotope
              chemostratigraphy. The laboratory work will be completed in the following
              twelve months so that the results can be sent to press before extending the
              field work to the northern Zaris Basin in subsequent years. The expected
              long-term outcomes are:     (1) Documentation of the Stratigraphic ranges of
              the fossils and trace fossils with respect to formations, facies boundaries,
              sequence surfaces, carbon isotope excursions, and ash beds with precise  U=Pb
              ages. These data will form the framework for a global standard success ion for
              Neoproterozoic biostratigraphy.   (2) A deeper understanding of the evolution
              of the southern Namibian sedimentary basins through better time control and
              better environmental interpretations based on information obtained from the
              integrated data.   (3) Documentation  of the morphology, taphonomy, and
              paleoecology of a wide range of fossils and trace fossils, including some
              significant new soft-bodied organisms found in 1993 and 1995. The data should
              provide new evidence for the nature of core members of the Ediacara "fauna"
              such as Pteridinium and Ernietta  and their life habits.   (4) New sights into
              the timing and relationships of biological and environmental events at the
              close of the Neoproterozoic.    (5) Development and explanation of a major
              natural heritage resource for the citizens of the Republic of Namibia.
