Title       : Wonders of the Modern World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1999 
File        : a9627044

Award Number: 9627044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3106100            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula S. Apsell paula apsell@wgbh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry Klein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              21        Mathematics                             
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              50        Engineering                             
              80        Social Sciences                         
              88        Geography                               
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9627044  Apsell    WGBH will develop, produce, and distribute Wonders of the
              Modern World, a project that examines the science and technology behind the
              building of five international landmarks -- the Golden Gate Bridge, the Aswan
              Dam, the Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur, the Toronto Skydome, and the English
              Channel Tunnel connecting Great Britain and France.  Wonders of the Modern
              World is an integrated, synergistic project that combines a
              nationally-broadcast, prime time television series with print, interactive
              components, and on-line products for home and school.  The goals of the project
              are to educate the public about concepts in physical science, technology, and
              engineering and to engage youth and adults in a diverse range of science and
              technology activities using various media ranging from on-line
              telecommunications to print.  The specific components of the project include:  
               o A prime time PBS television series consisting of five one-hour programs that
              will be hosted by David Macaulay, author of numerous popular books on
              technology such as How Things Work, Cathedral, Castle, and Pyramid,  o A World
              Wide Web site where users can conduct interactive science and technology
              activities,  o Print guides to help with on-line activities,  o Family-oriented
              video vignettes with experiments in structural design,  o Activity kits that
              include the materials needed for conducting family-based science experiments,  
              o Curriculum-based school videos,  o Student/teacher guides that will help
              interpret the series for classroom use, and  o A CD-ROM.    WGBH has formed
              alliances with four national organizations that will undertake a major effort
              to engage members of underserved and low-income communities in the series and
              the ancillary activities.  These organizations are The Boys and Girls Clubs of
              America, The Community Technology Centers Network, The Public Library
              Association, and The American Architectural Foundation.    The PI and Project
              Director will be Paula Apsell, Executive Producer for NOV A and Head of the
              WGBH Science Unit.  Larry Klein, Head of Production Group, Inc., will be the
              Series Executive Producer and Co-PI.  Beth Kirsch of WGBH will serve as
              Director of Educational Print and Outreach, and Mark Olshaker will be series
              editor and scriptwriter.  Ted Sicker, Executive Producer for Interactive
              Projects/New Media at WGBH Educational Foundation will direct the development
              and deployment of the on-line components of the project.  Barbara Flagg will
              conduct formative evaluation and Irene Goodman will conduct summative
              evaluation.
