Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stabilized Geometric Integrators with Applications to
               Molecular Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9627330

Award Number: 9627330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benedict J. Leimkuhler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian B. Laird  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Krzysztof Kuczera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Leimkuhler  9627330       The investigator and collaborators form a
              multidisciplinary  team from biochemistry, chemistry and mathematics that seeks
              new,  more efficient numerical integrators for problems of molecular 
              simulation.  They develop timestepping schemes that are based on  detailed
              study of the structure and force laws of these molecular  systems, and that
              respect invariants and symmetries such as the  symplectic structure and
              time-reversibility associated to the  flow map.  The project extends the range
              of dynamical phenomena  accessible to simulation studies by increasing the
              allowable  timestep and improving stability of numerical integrators. 
              Moreover, by automating the selection of timestep in molecular  dynamics
              simulations, this work seeks to remove an outstanding  inefficiency and push
              forward the state-of-the-art in molecular  dynamics software.  The specific
              problems considered include (1)  the development of combined coordinate and
              time-transformations  as a tool for stabilizing the local dynamics of close
              particle  pairs, (2) exploration of the relationship between timestep and 
              numerical behavior for molecular dynamics and the design of  time-reversible
              stepsize variation mechanisms, and (3) the study  of timestepping schemes
              appropriate to spin dynamics, constrained  systems, and related problems and
              their application in chemical  and physical dynamics problems.  The new
              techniques are used to  simulate biological macromolecules and for problems
              concerning  the structure and dynamics of solid-liquid interfaces as well as 
              studies of transitions in glasses and spin-glasses.       Important challenges
              to our understanding of physical,  chemical and biochemical processes are being
              tackled through the  use of computer simulations, but many difficult problems
              remain  well beyond the reach of today's hardware and software  technology. 
              Even improvements in computer power of several  orders of magnitude will not
              enable the direct simulation of  complex proteins or DNA chains on  the longest
              relevant timescales  unless substantial improvements are also obtained in
              computer  algorithms and software.  A key component of simulation software  for
              many large-scale problems in biochemistry, chemistry,  physics, and materials
              science is the fundamental molecular  dynamics integration scheme, which
              approximates the changing  positions and velocities of the constituent atoms of
              a substance  from one moment in time to the next.  In this project an 
              interdisciplinary team from biochemistry, chemistry and  mathematics develops
              new molecular dynamics integrators in order  to improve the efficiency and
              accuracy of simulations.  Funding  for the project is provided by programs of
              Computational  Mathematics, Theoretical and Computational Chemistry, and the 
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS and by the  Computational Biology
              program in BIO.
