Title       : What's On Your Mind? Children's Televised Neuroscience Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1996    
File        : a9627170

Award Number: 9627170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Kostant   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lisboa Associates Inc
	      1317 F Street NW  Suite 400
	      Washington, DC  20004    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9627170  Kostant    Lisboa Associates, Inc. designing, producing, and evaluating
              a pilot unit for a thirteen-part, $3.5 to $4 million television series for
              pre-adolescent youth.  What's On Your Mind? - The adventures of the Brain Gang
              will center on the adventures of three youth 'neuro-nauts' who, through special
              effects combined with animation, will use their skills of observation and
              detection to solve each "mystery" from inside the brain itself.  Each episode
              will start with a question,  e.g. What does the brain have to do with how
              people see, smell, taste, feel, and hear?  Does what you eat affect your brain?
               Are girls' brains different from boys' brains?  How does drug use affect the
              brain?.  The Brain Gang, once they are inside the brain will encounter
              obstacles and experience conflicts that can only be overcome or solved by
              relying on scientific methods.  The Brain Gang also will encounter animated
              characters, such as Neuro the Neuron and Endorpah the Endorphin, who will teach
              and explain important aspects of the brain to the young team of neuro-nauts. 
              The television series would be supported by ancillary material including a
              student/teacher guide, a newsletter for youth, and a teach newsletter.      The
              PI for the project will be Steven Kostant, an independent television producer
              and Creative Director for Broadcast and New Media at Lisboa Associates, Inc. 
              The Executive Producer for the project will be Eileen Michaels, Senior Vice
              President at Lisboa Associates, Inc. responsible for the organizations outreach
              programs in areas such as neuroscience and environmental topics.  The head
              writers will be Rich Albrecht and Casey Keller, formerly head writers for
              Beakman's World.  There will be three principal neuroscience advisors:  David
              Friedman, Associate Professor of Physiology and Pharmacology and Assistant Dean
              for Basic Sciences and Research Development, the Bowman Gray School of Medicine
              of Wake Forest University; Rochelle Schwarts, Associate Professor in the
              departments of Pharmacolo gy and Neurobiology at Duke University Medical
              Center; and Harold Goldman, Clinical Research Director, Neurology Unit of
              Harvard Community Health Plan and Instructor in Neurology at Harvard Medical
              School.
