Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Structure of Attractors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1996      
File        : a9627026

Award Number: 9627026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcy M. Barge barge@math.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Barge    The main goal of this project is to extend, in parameter
              space, a recently discovered form of self-similarity displayed by a
              one-dimensional attractor at the instant of homoclinic bifurcation. The PI has
              proved that when a one- dimensional unstable manifold has a nondegenerate
              homoclinic tangency (and the eigenvalues satisfy a nonresonance condition) then
              in every neighborhood of every point of the closure of the unstable manifold,
              there is (in the closure of the unstable manifold) a homeomorphic copy of every
              member of a certain uncountable collection of continua. The goal is to prove
              that, in   typical one-parameter families undergoing homoclinic bifurcation,
              this extreme local wildness occurs for a set of parameters of positive measure.
              The ubiquity and diversity of the subcontinua of the closure of the unstable
              manifold is a result of the recurrence of arbitrary patterns of small folds in
              the unstable manifold. The main approach to extending the occurence of these
              patterns in parameter space will be to selectively excise small open sets of
              parameters for which the "critical orbit" does not recur appropriately, leaving
              a Cantor set of positive measure. This approach has been used successfully by a
              number of researchers to establish the existence of transitive attractors with
              nice measures. The goal here is more topological, less analytical, and the
              estimates should be less exacting. This   project also includes ongoing work on
              three other topics: algebraic invariants associated with one- and
              two-dimensional Markov spaces; expansive homeomorphisms on plane continua; and
              rotational dynamics on invariant plane continua.    In mathematical models of
              physical processes, there frequently occur "attractors" that contain the
              discription of the long term behavior of the model. The structure (topology) of
              the attractor reflects qualitative properties of this behavior. In case the
              model is chaotic, the structure of the attractor is extremely complicated.
              Chaotic attractors are of two  general types: hyperbolic and non-hyperbolic.
              The hyperbolic attractors are relatively well understood. The developement of
              techniques for understanding non-hyperbolic systems is perhaps the biggest
              challenge in dynamics today. Success in this project would provide the first
              coherent glimpse into the topological structure of non-hyperbolic attractors.
