Title       : Cornell Nestbox Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a9627280

Award Number: 9627280
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barry A. Van Deman                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1305765            (Estimated)
Investigator: Andre A. Dhondt aad4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Winkler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Bonney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Fitzpatrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9627280  Dhondt    Cornell's Laboratory of Ornithology will develop the "Cornell
              Nest  Box Network (CNN)".  This is an educational/research project that  will
              enable lay people to participate in scientific research and it  builds on a
              successful NSF grant "National Science Experiments".   For this project, CNN
              participants will build and place nest boxes  in their communities and monitor
              the boxes gathering information on  the breeding success of their occupants. 
              Participants will  summarize and analyze their data and then send it to the Lab
              for  more comprehensive analysis.  Lab biologists will analyze the  compiled
              data and report results in a variety of media including  scientific reports and
              popular newsletters.  The CNN includes both  an educational and research
              agenda.  Participants will learn about  birds while participating directly in
              the scientific process.  The  research questions, requiring huge,
              continent-wide databases, will  focus on the effects of acid rain on bird
              populations, geographic  variation in avian clutch size, effects of
              ectoparasites on nesting  birds and population dispersal, among others.  The
              protocol will  encourage group participation and will be especially suitable
              for  families.  It will involve a corps of trained "ambassadors" who  will help
              sustain the project a local levels.  One of the goals of  the project is to
              move participants up a ladder of science  knowledge from projects involving
              minimal knowledge and skill to  those requiring more.  It also addresses
              national education  standards that call for increased opportunities for
              students to  engage in extended inquiry and authentic research activities.  
              After the fourth development year, this research/education project  will become
              self-sustaining.
