Title       : VPW: Extension of the Temporal Scale of Newly Resolved Middle Cambrian Sr
               Isotope Stratigraphy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1997     
File        : a9627092

Award Number: 9627092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126507             (Estimated)
Investigator: Isabel P. Montanez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Seawater 87Sr/86Sr variations during the Early Paleozoic are poorly  documented
              relative to the resolution of the Late Paleozoic through  Cenozoic portions of
              the Phanerozoic seawater Sr isotope curve.   The Cambrian portion of the
              Phanerozoic seawater Sr isotope curve  is especially characterized by a
              significant degree of scatter and  a large uncertainty envelope.  Moreover, the
              newly emerging data  base of secular seawater 87Sr/86Sr variations for
              pre-Middle Cambrian  time underscores a conspicuous gap in the Middle to Late
              Cambrian  seawater Sr isotope record.  Consequently, the potential of Sr 
              isotopes for enhanced chronostratigraphic resolution of Middle to  Upper
              Cambrian stratigraphic successions, is extremely limited for  providing insight
              into the Middle to Late Cambrian ocean-  atmosphere-biosphere system, and for
              potentially constraining rates  of biogeochemical cycling during this time
              interval.    The two main objectives of this study focus on critically 
              addressing these limitations; the results of this research should  minimize or
              potentially overcome these limitations.  The first  objective is to complete a
              detailed Sr isotopic analysis of a  second section of Bonanza King carbonates
              from the southern Great  Basin in order to test the robustness of the newly
              resolved Sr  isotope stratigraphy.  The second objective is extend the 
              integrated study to lower Middle Cambrian carbonates of the Papoose  Lake
              Member of the Bonanza King Formation and the upper Carrara  Formation, southern
              Great Basin.  The results of this research,  when integrated with our new
              resolved Sr isotope curve and recently  published Early Cambrian seawater
              87Sr/86Sr values, will provide a  Cambrian seawater Sr isotope curve of
              resolution comparable to many  portions of the Late Paleozoic and Mesozoic Sr
              isotope curve.  In  turn, this will afford enhanced chronostratigraphic
              resolution of  Cambrian stratigraphic successions, a refined understanding of
              the  Cambrian ocean-atmosphere-biosphere system, and potent ial for 
              constraining rates of biogeochemical cycling during this time  interval. 
              Lastly, the 87Sr/86Sr database which will ultimately  result from this
              integrated study will inevitably contribute  insight into and potentially
              resolve many controversial 'Cambrian'  issues.    Interactive activities
              consist of four facets: 1) teaching one  graduate-upper division undergraduate
              level seminar in cycle  stratigraphy, 2) actively participating in other
              carbonate  sedimentology, stratigraphy and digenesis seminars, 3) actively 
              involving undergraduate and graduate students in this research  project, and 4)
              leading department field trips to the Cretaceous of  Texas and northeastern
              Mexico.
