Title       : Interpreting Paleoclimate when Continental Positions are Uncertain: the Effects
               of Sampling, Modeling and Reconstructing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9627771

Award Number: 9627771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77557              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith T. Parrish-Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Parrish  9627771   Paleogeographers and paleoclimatologists have tended to have
              very different agendas in studying paleoclimates, and their differing
              approaches and interests have led to a circularity in paleoclimatic studies
              that the proposed project is intended to address.  The problem is greatest in
              studies of climates of the Paleozoic Era, when continental positions are likely
              to be poorly known. Paleoclimatologists have used available paleogeographic
              reconstructions as if they were independent of paleoclimatic data, but, in
              fact, some continental positions are determined at least partly from
              paleoclimatic data.   The purpose of the proposed research is to: (1) document
              and evaluate the problems that arise from using paleoclimatic data to position
              continents, including such problems as non-uniquenessof positioning and the use
              of probability curves based on zonal climates for positioning continents that
              were likely to have had non-zonal climates: (2) establish more rigorous
              sampling procedures for the use of paleoclimatic data in both paleogeographic
              and paleoclimatic reconstruction.   To address the problem of sampling, which 
              refers not to how the data are collected but, rather, how they are compiled for
              use in a spatial fromat, we will develop a new grid system more appropriate for
              gridding data on a sphere that the latitude-longitude grid, which  suffers from
              uneven grid-cell dimensions.    We will then develop procedures for reporting
              the distribution of paleoclimatic indicators.  This will permit evaluation of
              the robustness of the various assumptions that are made in this type of work. 
              Finally, we will  apply the developed methods to a persistent problem in
              Paleozoic paleogeography, that is, the positions of Gondwana in the Late
              Devonian.  One possible outcome is that we will be able to eliminate one of the
              proposed positions, based on objectives evaluations of the data.  A more likely
              outcome is that we will show where new data must be collected and which
              underlying assumptions must  be examined to resolve the conflict.   The broader
              implications of this project will be to enforce much more rigor into
              paleogeographic reconstructions, demonstrate the error introduced by
              circularity in using for paleoclimatic modeling paleogeographic reconstructions
              that are based at least in part on paleoclimatic indicators, and suggest
              procedures that might overcome the basic conflict between the needs of
              paleogeographers and those of paleoclimatologists.
