Title       : The Greatest Places
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1997      
File        : a9627062

Award Number: 9627062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1198652            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mike Day mday@smm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Natalie Rusk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charlie Walters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melvin G. Marcus  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Science Museum of MN
	      120 West Kellogg Boulevard
	      Saint Paul, MN  551021208    651/221-4720

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9627062  Day      The Science Museum of Minnesota is developing, producing, and
              distributing a project on the geography of some of the most dynamic regions of
              the world.  This  is a joint venture between the Science Museum of Minnesota
              and the Fort Worth Museum of Science and History with additional support from
              the St. Louis Science Center.  The core element of the project is a 40-minute
              Imax film the examines seven geographically diverse locations on earth:    
              Madagascar   Iguazu Falls   The Amazon   Greenland   The Okavango Delta  The
              Namib Desert   The Tibetan Plateau    Supporting material for the film will
              include:      o Teacher Guide - 36 to 40 pages of hands-on science activities 
              o Family Guide  - to help parents share science and geography with children
              through simple, at-home activities;  geography  o Geography Museum Trunk - a
              steamer trunk filled with artifacts, specimens, activities, and resource
              materials available for rental to school, museums, and other groups  o Greatest
              Places On-Line - A World Wide Web site with activities for youth and adults to
              explore the interrelationships of earth, air, water, and life in their local
              region and a "living atlas" as a forum for comparing and sharing observations
              with others around the world.  o Summer Educator Institutes - where formal and
              informal educators will receive intensive training in utilizing all aspects of
              the project with multiple audiences.    o Accessibility Guide - which outlines
              programs and options to provide no- or low-cost viewing for underrepresented
              audiences.    The project will be guided by Geography for Life:  The National
              Geography Standards and Expectations of Excellence:  Curriculum Standards for
              Social Science.  Dr. Mel Marcus, Professor of Geography at Arizona State
              University, will have primary responsibility for content.  He will work closely
              with an advisory group of geographers, ecologists, and formal and informal
              educators.  The PI and Executive Producer of the film will be Mike Day,
              Director and Executi ve Producer of the Science Museum of Minnesota Omnitheater
              and Executive Producer of seven previous Imax films.
