Title       : Laboratory Studies of Halogen Heterogeneous Chemistry in the Troposphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9627231

Award Number: 9627231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Abbatt jabbatt@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9627231   Abbatt   In this project, experimental studies of heterogeneous
              processes involving halogen species important in determining the photochemical
              steady state of the troposphere will be performed.  The majority of the work
              will focus upon aspects of bromine heterogeneous chemistry as it relates to the
              phenomenon of ozone depletion in the Arctic boundary layer in the springtime. 
              Particular interactions to be studied are those of HOBr, HBr, BrO and
              brominated organic species with tropospheric particulate surfaces. The goal of
              these experiments is to better define the mechanism by which bromine is
              maintained in a form active towards gas-phase ozone destruction and to
              determine the dominant source of inorganic bromine.  Motivated by observations
              which indicate large amounts of active chlorine during these ozone depletion
              events, studies of chlorine heterogeneous chemistry which may be an integral
              part of this phenomenon will also be carried out.   Experimentally, these
              studies will be performed using a combination of experimental techniques. 
              Gas-surface uptake coefficients and reaction probabilities will be measured
              both in a high pressure, aerosol flow tube recently constructed in this
              laboratory and in a standard low pressure, coated-wall flow tube.  To determine
              the partitioning of brominated species between the gas and condensed phases,
              mass spectrometry will be used to measure the equilibrium vapor pressures of
              stable species dissolved in solutions and to measure the physical uptake of
              gas-phase species by thin films.  Finally, FTIR absorption spectroscopy will be
              used to monitor the phase and composition of the aerosols within the aerosol
              flow tube.  These experiments will be performed under conditions of aerosol
              composition, temperature and relative humidity which match as closely as
              possible those prevalent in the atmosphere.  ***
