Title       : The Cell Biology and Genetics of Rhizobial Invasion of Alfalfa Roots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2001      
File        : a9974483

Award Number: 9974483
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Gage gage@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1156,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

The overall goal of the work outlined in this proposal is to gain a
              better
understanding of R. meliloti growth and gene expression throughout
              the
steps of infection and invasion of alfalfa, its host plant. 
              This
investigator describes experiments that will test  the dynamics
              and
behavior of R. meliloti during growth inside of infection threads. 
              This
will be done by following Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP)-tagged,
              mixed
with non-GFP-tagged R. meliloti, as they grow together inside
              infection
threads.  A working model of bacterial growth during invasion will
              be used
to guide and help interpret these experiments.  Other experiments
              include
the isolation and characterization of genes from R. meliloti that
              are
induced when this bacterium is growing inside infection threads. 
              A
fluorescence-activated-cell-sorter (FACS) will be used to rapidly
              and
efficiently isolate R. meliloti gene fusions which are upregulated when
              R.
meliloti is growing inside of infection threads.  Upregulated
              bacterial
genes will be sequenced and then characterized by determining their
              spatial
and temporal patterns of expression.  In addition, the induced genes
              will
be mutated in order to determine their functional roles during
              bacterial
growth inside infection threads.

Much research has gone into
              developing strains of Rhizobium which lead to
increased plant yield.  Often
              these bacterial strains behave as anticipated
under controlled conditions, but
              fail to live up to their potential in
field trials.  This often occurs because
              the engineered Rhizobium strains
cannot compete effectively for access to
              infection sites with native
Rhizobia present in the soil.  To compete
              effectively, Rhizobial strains
must be able to recognize host plant roots, and
              trigger the production of
infection sites and then populate those sites.  One
              practical aspect of the
work proposed in this application is that it may
              eventually lead to
advances that will enable the design of engineered
              Rhizobium strains which
can better compete with native bacteria for access
to
              host plants in agricultural settings.



