Title       : Inhibition of the Agrobacterium tumefaciens Quorum Sensor by the TraM
               Anti-Activator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a9974863

Award Number: 9974863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316674             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Fuqua cfuqua@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Many species of bacteria employ signaling mechanisms to monitor their own
              population density and respond by altering physiological and developmental
              pathways. This process usually entails the release of a soluble pheromone, the
              local concentration of which provides a measure of cell density. Release and
              perception of the signaling molecule has been termed quorum sensing. Quorum
              sensing in a number of gram-negative bacteria is facilitated by production of
              acylated homoserine lactones (acyl HSL). Agrobacterium tumefaciens, the
              causative agent of plant crown gall neoplasia, utilizes the acyl HSL
              N-3-(oxooctanoyl) homoserine lactone to regulate the conjugal dissemination of
              its primary virulence factor, the Ti (tumor-inducing) plasmid, to other
              bacteria in the rhizosphere. The current proposal focuses on examination of a
              unique and essential inhibitory component of the A. tumefaciens acyl HSL
              regulatory pathway.  For most acyl HSL-type quorum sensors, a pheromone
              synthase and a receptor protein that also serves as a transcriptional activator
              are sufficient to impart cell-density-dependent gene expression. However, A.
              tumefaciens requires a third component, a regulator protein called TraM, to
              facilitate quorum sensing.  The hypothesis is that TraM forms a noncovalent
              complex with the acyl HSL receptor, TraR, which prevents the transcriptional
              activator from binding DNA.  The overall goal of this research is to dissect
              the interaction between TraM and TraR and to understand how this interaction
              modulates the activity of TraR.  Biochemical analysis will be employed to
              examine the inhibitory complex and to determine the effect of inhibition on the
              activity of TraM and TraR in the presence of acyl HSL.  Mutant TraR and TraM
              proteins that exhibit altered regulatory phenotypes will be
isolated and
              biochemically analyzed to correlate in vitro and in vivo activities. 
              Additional studies will assess the effects of regulation of traM expression and
              pool size.  This research will not only elucidate a unique aspect of acyl HSL
              quorum sensing in the important model pathogen A. tumefaciens, but will also
              contribute to the understanding of cell-cell communication in other species of
              bacteria.

