Title       : Analysis of the Prune/Killer of Prune Lethal Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9974403

Award Number: 9974403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen D. Shearn bio_cals@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The abnormal wing discs (awd) gene of Drosophila melanogaster was identified in
              a hybrid dysgenic screen for lethal mutations that interfere with the normal
              development of imaginal discs.  Although larvae homozygous for a null allele
              survive until the end of the third larval instar, the proliferation of imaginal
              tissues such as, imaginal discs, lymph glands and optic centers of the brain is
              severely reduced.  These mutant imaginal discs are not capable of
              differentiating adult structures when transplanted into metamorphosing larvae. 
              AWD, the polypeptide product of the awd gene, is the subunit of a hexameric
              protein that has nucleoside diphosphate kinase (NDP kinase) activity.  Killer
              of prune (Kpn) is an awd gene mutation which changes proline 97 to serine. 
              Although, Kpn mutant homozygotes have only 30% of wild-type NDP kinase specific
              activity, they are viable and have no detectable morphological phenotype.  In a
              wild-type awd gene background, null mutations in the X chromosome prune (pn)
              gene cause an eye color phenotype but do not affect viability.  Nevertheless,
              in the absence of pn gene function, Kpn acts as a dominant larval lethal
              mutation.  Several years ago, a large scale mutagensis screen for unlinked
              suppressors of the pn/Kpn lethal interaction, failed to yield any suppressors. 
              To account for the failure to recover suppressors, it was hypothesized that the
              level of mutant protein that accumulates even in Kpn mutant heterozygotes was
              too great for any potential suppressor mutation to overcome.  So, a modified
              mutagenesis protocal was designed to screen for unlinked dominant suppressors
              using a Kpn transgene as the source of mutant protein.  Three suppressor
              mutations were recovered from this modified screen.  Incredibly, all three are
              recessive lethal alleles of a single third chromosome gene.  This gene was
              named su(Kpn) and localized by genetic recombination to proximal 3R; its
              cytogenetic location with 84C was determined by deletion mapping.  One
              objective of this research is to clone the su(Kpn) gene, determine the sequence
              of its transcript, identify the localization of its protein product, and assay
              for direct protein:protein interactions between AWD and SU(KPN) and/or between
              PN and SU(KPN).  Another objective is to examine the su(Kpn) lethal phenotype
              utilizing a detailed mosaic analysis to help elucidate the function of the
              su(Kpn) gene product.  Learning the identity of the suppressor gene product
              will help to understand the lethal interaction between prune and Killer of
              prune and the normal function of the awd gene. 

The results of these
              experiments can give insight into developmental signaling pathways. The data
              thus far collected in this system suggests that the phenotypic defects are the
              secondary consequence either of the absence of a diffusible substance that is
              required for imaginal disc proliferation or to the presence of a diffusible
              substance that inhibits imaginal disc proliferation.  Analysis of the primary
              defect promises to provide new insight into the signaling that occurs between
              larval and imaginal cells.

