Title       : Sequence Specific non-LTR Retrotransposable Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a9974606

Award Number: 9974606
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $456000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Eickbush eick@mail.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              R1 and R2 are two site-specific non-LTR retrotransposable elements that insert
              in the 28S ribosomal RNA genes of arthropods.  Recent experiments have
              indicated that despite their remarkable evolutionary stability, R1 and R2
              rapidly turnover in a population (i.e new elements are inserted and old
              elements eliminated from the rDNA loci at a high rate).  Thus a major focus of
              the current proposal is experiments designed to determine the parameters that
              control the level of R1 and R2 within the rDNA loci of Drosophila.  Taking
              advantage of the diverse array of 5' truncations that frequently result from
              non-LTR retrotransposition, preliminary experiments have shown that individual
              R2 insertions and deletions can be scored in the Harwich mutation collection
              lines of D. melanogaster.  The Harwich lines have been maintained as 31 small,
              separate populations for over 250 generations.  The hundreds of
              insertion/deletion events that can be monitored by simply PCR assays of these
              31 lines should enable separate measurements of the frequency of R1 and R2
              events on the rDNA loci of the X and Y chromosomes, and determine whether they
              occur in bursts or at low constitutive rates.  Initial attempts will also be
              made to determine why certain species groups of Drosophila have retained two
              distinct lineages of R1 elements, while other species groups have retained only
              one R1 lineage.  R1 and R2 turnover and rDNA unit uniformity in two species
              with multiple R1s will be analyzed to test the hypothesis that lower levels of
              concerted evolution enable the preservation of multiple families.  Larval
              tissues of Drosophila have reduced levels of R1 and R2 insertions (relative to
              the adult levels) because rDNA units with these insertions are under-replicated
              during the formation of the polyploid (usually polytene) tissues of larvae.  A
              second series of experiments is designed to directly study the mechanism
              responsible for this under-replication.  The molecular/genetic tools are now
              available to mark individual rDNA units or to insert new sequences into these
              units.  Because the retrotransposition and evolution of R1 and R2 are so
              intimately tied to that of the rRNA genes, these studies should also provide
              insights, as well as supply new tools, for the study of the evolution,
              replication and expression of the rRNA genes themselves.  Finally, all non-LTR
              retrotransposons can be divided into a limited number of distinct, ancient
              lineages.  The oldest elements are site-specific and encode proteins similar to
              R2.  A third set of experiments in this proposal is designed to identify
              additional examples of these original site-specific non-LTR elements,
              particularly in primitive eukaryotic lineages like Giardia.  Information
              obtained from these studies will provide insights into the origins of the first
              eukaryotic genomes, and help to evaluate the relationship of non-LTR
              retrotransposable elements to their closest relatives: telomerase and group II
              introns.     

Transposable elements are abundant components of eukaryotic
              genomes.  Numerous examples now exist to indicate that these elements have
              played a significant role in determining the size, structure and regulation of
              these genomes.  A growing number of transposable elements, particularly the
              retrotransposable elements, have been shown to minimize, or control, their
              effects on the host by becoming specific for defined locations within the
              genome.  R1 and R2 are two site-specific non-LTR retrotransposable elements
              that insert in the 28S ribosomal RNA genes of arthropods.  The specificity and
              sequence uniformity of these elements has enabled them to serve as a convenient
              model system.  Considerable progress has been made in studies of their
              distribution, evolution and retrotransposition mechanism, such that R1 and R2
              are now among the best characterized retrotransposable elements.  Extensive
              studies on the evolution of these elements suggest that R1 and R2 have been
              stable, active components of the rDNA loci for the entire history of the
              Arthropod phylum, a period estimated to be over 600 million years.  In this
              proposal, a varied set of experiments are described with the objective of
              better understanding the remarkable stability and the origins of these
              elements.


