Title       : Dynamics of Phase Separating Thin Film Blends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a9974366

Award Number: 9974366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Composto composto@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9974366
Composto

The proposed research will focus on the dynamics of phase
              separating thin film blends.  These studies aim to develop a comprehensive
              understanding of thin film kinetics by measuring the wetting layer growth at
              both the air / polymer and polymer / substrate interfaces, phase morphology
              immediately beneath the wetting layer, domain coarsening, surface roughness,
              and the roughness between the wet and non-wet phases.  To probe underlying
              principles, dynamics will be studied as a function of materials parameters
              including molecular weight and composition, process dependent variables
              including film thickness and temperature, and substrate surface energy.  To
              test for universal behavior, a range of model blend systems will be
              investigated including blends with a lower critical solution temperature and an
              upper critical solution temperature, in addition to copolymer blends.  To
              directly test the interplay between phase separation and wetting, AFM will be
              used to directly image the near-surface morphology after selective etching of
              the wetting phase.  Wetting layer growth will be followed using low-energy,
              forward recoil spectrometry, LE-FRES, and neutron reflectivity.  Furthermore,
              LE-FRES will be developed for the analysis of laterally non-uniform samples. 
              To quantify lateral phase composition and possibly the interfacial width at
              curved interfaces, analytical TEM will be developed in-house and near edge
              x-ray adsorption fine structure spectroscopy will be performed in collaboration
              with NIST.  In addition to homogeneous substrates, studies will aim to control
              lateral profiling studies, wetting properties will be measured using a contact
              angle goniometer and AFM.  An important component of the proposed research is
              to extend fundamental studies on model systems to advanced materials involving
              ionomer adhesion promoters and patterned dielectric materials.

The proposed
              research on polymer films and coatings will provide fundamental scientific
              understanding that could impact advanced technological applications in the
              health (e.g. contact lenses, membranes) and microelectronics (e.g. dielectrics
              and resists) fields.  Undergraduates (4/year) will continue to participate in
              the research program, along with public high-school teachers during the
              summer.

