Title       : COLLABORTIVE RESEARCH: Complexity and Information in Avian Signals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a9974743

Award Number: 9974743
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212868             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Nowicki snowicki@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Drs. Nowicki and Searcy propose to test whether early nutrition affects the
              
development of song in birds.  Song development and production are controlled
              in
songbirds by a series of well defined brain areas, which develop to a large
              
extent during the first two months after hatching.  In many species, the
              details
of song are learned during this same two month interval.  Nowicki and
              Searcy 
hypothesize that nutrition during this period affects the development
              of the 
song control regions in the brain and consequently affects song
              learning.  As a 
test, they will manipulate level of nutrition in hand-reared
              sparrows during the
first three weeks post-hatching.  The sparrows will be
              tutored with 
tape-recorded songs, and the songs produced by these birds as
              adults will be 
recorded.  The stressed and unstressed groups will be compared
              for the quality 
of learning, in terms of how faithfully they have copied the
              notes of the tutor 
songs, and for the quantity of learning, in terms of how
              many songs are learned 
per individual.  The brains of the two groups will
              also be compared, for the 
size of the song control regions and the density of
              neurons in those regions.  
Finally, the songs of stressed and unstressed
              birds will be compared in terms of
how well they function on ecologically
              relevant tasks.

The idea that stress early in life affects brain development
              and hence learning 
ability is applicable to a wide variety of organisms, from
              birds to humans.  
Song in songbirds provides an excellent model system for
              studying such effects, 
in that the neural control, development, and
              ecological function of the behavior
are all relatively well known.  The study
              will use this system to enhance our 
understanding of the effects of nutrition
              on the development of complex 
behaviors.


