Title       : The Gut as Arbiter of Oxidative Stress in Insect Herbivores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a9974583

Award Number: 9974583
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283538             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond V. Barbehenn rvb@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Plant-feeding insects have been studied extensively because of their
              importance as pests in agriculture and forestry.  Despite the large number of
              studies that have been done on these insects, there are still basic questions
              regarding their relative abilities to feed successfully on certain plants. 
              This study will focus on the means by which insects are or are not adapted to
              feeding on some of the many plants that produce chemicals known as
              phenolics.

This research will determine whether the ability of insects to
              cope with phenolic-containing plant material depends on the degree of oxidative
              stress caused by phenolics in their guts.  The detrimental effects of oxidative
              stress on insects include reduced growth rates and death.  Clearly, protection
              from oxidative stress is essential to the growth and survival of insects that
              are adapted to feed on plants that produce pro-oxidant defensive chemicals. 
              The proposed research focuses on the insect gut because this is the first place
              in an insect's body in which chemicals that it eats cause harm, and where some
              of the insect's critical defenses may be found.  This study examines how it is
              that the adapted species are able to defend themselves successfully from
              oxidative stress in their guts, and how it is that the non-adapted species
              differ.  These differences may include the maintenance of high levels of
              antioxidants inside the gut and/or feeding on plants that contain high levels
              of antioxidants.  Other differences that will be examined include the
              production of defensive (antioxidant) enzymes in the gut wall and/or their
              secretion into the gut lumen.

Upon completion of the proposed research, the
              PIs will have a greater understanding of factors that affect host-plant
              preferences of insect herbivores.  This basic knowledge of how insects function
              will help the PIs understand ecological and evolutionary relationships between
              insects and plants, and may have future application in insect pest
              management.

