Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological Informatics for FY-1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9974214

Award Number: 9974214
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet L. Siefert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1398      BIO INFOR POSTDOCT RSCH FELLOW
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Research Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological
              Informatics for 1999.

The research and training plan is in the area of
              systematic biology and is entitled "Tracking the evolution of cellular
              processes using molecular genealogy."  This project is in two parts.  The first
              entails 'phylogeny mapping'.  This incorporates the phylogenetic framework of
              small subunit ribosomal RNA (ssu rRNA) as a scaffold on which homologous
              cellular processes such as metabolic processes, genes, or morphological
              description are mapped.  The second involves producing a model for a rate of
              evolution based on
empirical in vitro evolution data and modified versions of
              existing programs that incorporate fossil evidence for known divergence times
              in a pair of sequences.  This model will be applied to the results of
              the
phylogeny mapping in an effort to place a relative time on internal nodes
              of the ssu rRNA tree topology. Results of will include new analysis tools of
              interest to the bioinformatics community as well as providing new strategies
              for accessing and analyzing sequence data.  Some of these programs will be
              useful beyond the scope of bioinformatics.  In addition, fundamental answers
              concerning the evolution of cellular processes will
lend new insights into the
              process by which life originated.




