Title       : Dissecting Promoter Function in Vivo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9974474

Award Number: 9974474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erich Grotewold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Many fundamental cellular processes are controlled at the level of
              transcription.  The extensive knowledge that has been acquired over the past
              years on the in vivo properties of the trans-acting regulators is contrasted by
              how little is still known about the in vivo organization, evolution and
              function of cis-acting regulatory elements.  Previous studies on the control of
              maize flavonoid biosynthesis have provided unique tools to investigate promoter
              structure in its normal in vivo environment.  As a model to understand promoter
              function in vivo, the regulatory region of a structural gene of the pathway
              (A1) that has been extensively dissected in vitro, and that is a target of at
              least two well-defined regulatory systems will be studied. The organization of
              cis-acting regulatory elements in the A1 promoter will be further-investigated
              by using in vivo footprinting strategies to identify the sequences recognized
              by the regulators in normal chromatin environments.  Unique genetic resources
              will be used to study in vivo the result of deletions of cis-acting sequences
              on A1 transcription.  The in vivo effect of point mutations and small
              insertions in regulatory elements that have been refractive to in vitro
              analysis will be analyzed.  In two very well genetically-characterized cases,
              the regulation of A1 is transferred to transposable elements.  Moreover,
              epigenetic modifications of the transposons directly affect A1 transcription.
              Our unique understanding of the regulation of  A1 makes it ideal to interpret
              transposable element gene control systems providing important insights into the
              molecular bases of epigenetic phenomena.  Whether transposons can promote A1
              transcription in a regulator-independent fashion, and whether elements of the
              transposon entirely replace the normal cis-acting regulatory elements of the
              gene will be examined.  Finally, the epigenetic effect that transposons often
              have on gene expression, by studying the in vivo methylation status of the A1
              gene promoter when its expression is controlled by transposable element
              insertions will be investigated

Taken together, these studies should provide
              one of the most comprehensive in vivo studies done on the regulatory region of
              a plant gene.  Because of the uniqueness of the genetic and molecular tools
              available, the findings derived from these studies could be fundamental to the
              general field of regulation of gene expression.

