Title       : Design and Synthesis of Three-Dimensional Conjugated Organic Macromolecules:
               Towards Sensors, Actuators, and Helical Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1999      
File        : a9974548

Award Number: 9974548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Marsella michael.marsella@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award to Professor Michael Marsella at the University of
              California-Riverside is supported by the Advanced Materials and Processing
              Program in the Chemistry Division. The focus of the research is the design and
              synthesis of three-dimensional, thiophene-based conjugated organic polymers and
              the role that complex topologies  might play in their structure-property
              relationships. In the first project, highly crosslinked polymers will be formed
              by coupling tetrahedrally-joined unsaturated monomers with oligothiophene
              units. These polymers will be conducting , and with appropriate functionality,
              capable of molecular and topological recognition, suggesting applications as
              vaporesponsive sensors. Pore size and shape will be varied to optimize
              response.  In the second project, three-dimensional polymers based on coupling
              of cyclic tetra(2,3-thienylene) oligomers will be prepared. These polymers will
              serve as scaffolds for the construction of both racemic and enantiomerically
              pure conducting single and double stranded helices, capable of expanding or
              contracting as a function of their oxidation state and suggesting applications
              as actuators and pressure-sensitive electron donors/acceptors.

By
              integrating conductivity with molecular recognition elements and size and shape
              selectivity, polymers will be prepared which will serve as selective sensors
              and offer the possibility of forming arrays which may mimic the sense of smell,
              i.e an "artificial nose". Helical conducting polymers which change their bulk
              topology as a function of their oxidation state may provide a basis for the
              design of "molecular muscles".




