Title       : The Preparation and Characterization of Complex Nanostructured Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a9974457

Award Number: 9974457
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen L. Wooley klwooley@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Wooley
9974457

The objectives of the research involve the development of
              methods for the preparation of unique amphiphilic core-shell polymer materials
              of nanoscale dimensions (5-100 nm), characterization of their chemical,
              physical and micromechanical properties, and their modification for the
              advancement of nanotechnological devices.  Over the past five years, a
              synthetic approach has been optimized to generate stable nanospheres, which
              involves the preparation of amphiphilic di-block copolymers, followed by
              organization of the copolymers into micellar assemblies, and then stabilization
              of the self-assembled structures through covalently linking together the
              copolymer segments located in the periphery of the polymer micelles.  Efforts
              will next be devoted toward evaluation of the chemical control that can be
              exercised in modification of the surface, functionalization of the shell,
              probing of the interface properties, and periphery of the nanostructures, the
              development of nanocapsule-like membranes will result by removal of most or all
              of the core material.  Additionally, the synthesis of cylindrically shaped
              production of well-defined complex materials, which consist essentially of
              single macromolecular entities of nanoscale dimensions that possess specified
              features and domains.  In each case, the preparation of new materials will be
              closely coupled to characterization of their composition, structure, and
              physical properties, by a combination of spectroscopic techniques (infrared,
              solid-state NMR, fluorescence, UV-vis), transmission electron microscopy, and
              atomic force microscopy.

The nanostructured materials can be considered to
              be sub-microscopic particles that can act as containers for binding, transport,
              and release of pharmaceutically or agriculturally active agents, or for the
              entrapment of environmental pollutants.  They are also expected to be
              applicable in many areas that are currently employ larger latex particles, for
              example as coatings, lubricants, recording materials, etc., where they are
              expected to demonstrate superior performance, due to the smaller size and
              larger surface area-to-volume ratio.  Furthermore, the research is ideally
              suited to provide students with experiences and challenges in various aspects
              of chemistry, from polymer synthesis, to supramolecular chemistry, to materials
              science.

