Title       : Structural Studies of BPI, A Human LPS-Binding Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a9974912

Award Number: 9974912
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lesa J. Beamer beamerl@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Beamer,  Lisa
MCB-9974912

Lipopolysaccharides (LPS) are complex glycolipids
              found in the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria that can elicit diverse
              biological responses in higher organisms.  The human
              bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (BPI) binds to LPS with high
              affinity and can modulate its biological activity in vivo.  The recent
              determination of the crystal structure of BPI with two bound phospholipids
              provides a framework for further characterization of the protein.  X-ray
              diffraction and other biophysical techniques will be used to investigate the
              effects of the bound phospholipids on BPI's structure and stability.  In
              addition, novel complexes of BPI with fragments of LPS or LPS analogs will be
              characterized by dynamic light scattering and X-ray crystallography.  These
              experiments will provide important structural details on the molecular basis of
              protein-LPS interactions, and the ability of proteins to modulate the
              bioactivity of LPS.  

	
Many common bacteria have a molecule called
              lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on their outer surface.  Because only bacteria and no
              other organisms make LPS, it acts as a signal that bacteria are near.  Humans
              and many animals have proteins that can detect tiny amounts of LPS when it is
              found in the body.  One of these is BPI, the
              bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein.  BPI recognizes bacterial LPS in
              the midst of many similar molecules and binds to it very tightly.  Several
              experimental techniques, including X-ray diffraction, will be used to examine
              the molecular structure of BPI in the presence of LPS.  By studying how BPI
              interacts with LPS, much will be learned about how proteins detect LPS and how
              LPS can trigger many different responses in biological organisms.  




