Title       : Next Generation Software: A Collaborative Problem Solving Environment for
               Modeling of Broadband Wireless Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2001       
File        : a9974956

Award Number: 9974956
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore S. Rappaport   (Principal Investigator current)
              Layne T. Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford A. Shaffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Naren Ramakrishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 2884      NEXT GENERATION SOFTWARE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2884,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-9974960, 
Rappaport, Theodore
Virginia Polytechnic Institute

Next
              Generation Software:  A Collaborative Problem Solving Environment for Modeling
              of Broadband Wireless Communication Systems.

This project proposes to
              develop a collaborative problem-solving environment to support engineers who
              will design and analyze the wireless communication systems of the future. 
              Broadband wireless systems are essential for the success of the Next generation
              Internet and future generations of portable multimedia communicators.  However
              adequate design and analysis tools for supporting these environments do not
              exist.
  
This project will pull together researchers from the Mobile and
              Portable radio research Group and the Problem-Solving Environments group at VT
              to collaborate in building a comprehensive design and support system, the
              Site-Specific System Simulator for Wireless Communications.  This project is
              aimed to support fundamental problem solving in broadband wireless
              communications systems, and will be used not only for the design of wireless
              systems, but also validation of new wireless communications modeling
              approaches.  It is also expected to serve as a testbed for developing
              collaborative problem solving environments.

Among the research milestones
              proposed here include:
 
A. Develop methods to automatically perform and
              analyze simulations of wireless networks
B. Implement knowledge-based
              recommender system for selecting specific models
C. Fuse high-fidelity
              simulation with more abstract simulation results to minimize simulation
              effort
D. Integrate the recommender system in a larger design optimization
              loop 
E. Develop visualization techniques to aid the simulations and analysis
              
F. Implement an integrated software environment for collaborative design
G.
              Validate and test the methods and tools developed above



