Title       : Multi-Factor Analysis of Avian Life History from a Unique Long-Term Data Base
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1999    
File        : a9974077

Award Number: 9974077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127185             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Blums gaylord3@starband.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leigh H. Fredrickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Blums
9974077

The success of many bird conservation initiatives depends
              critically on the number of young that survive and return to breed in areas
              where they were raised, yet remarkably few studies have been able to evaluate
              these processes thoroughly. However, a recent long-term effort to individually
              mark day-old ducklings and their mothers coupled with a program to find and
              locate these birds later in life has produced unique reproductive and survival
              data for three species of ducks. Therefore, the principal goal of this study is
              to estimate survival and return rates of ducks, and explore reasons why they
              vary so much, by exploiting one of the largest data sets ever assembled for
              free-living birds. Advanced statistical procedures provide an opportunity to
              analyze these data and, more importantly, to identify factors that determine
              whether a population declines, remains stable, or increases. 

Results about
              factors influencing breeding success and recruitment of birds have important
              implications for private, state and national wetland management policies and
              programs. The large financial investment in wetland programs requires
              strategies that result in positive population responses and viable populations.
              Furthermore, these findings may have practical management implications for
              adjusting the timing, length, and bag limits associated with hunting seasons
              for different population levels of harvested migratory waterfowl.


