Title       : Transcriptional Activation with Sigma54-Holoenzyme
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9974558

Award Number: 9974558
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy R. Hoover   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
MCB 9974558
PI: Timothy Hoover
Sinorhizobium meliloti 
              C4-dicarboxylic acid protein D (DctD) will be used as a model to study
              transcriptional activation with sigma54-RNA polymerase holoenzyme.  DctD binds
              to enhancer sites located upstream of the dctA promoter and then contacts
              sigma54-holoenzyme bound at the promoter through DNA looping to activate
              transcription.  At high concentrations, DctD can activate transcription in the
              absence of the enhancer by contacting sigma54-holoenzyme directly from
              solution.  Some mutant forms of DctD cannot activate transcription in the
              absence of the enhancer, and these mutant proteins may have reduced affinities
              for sigma54-holoenzyme.  In the first specific aim, interactions between
              enhancer-dependent DctD mutants and sigma54-holoenzyme will be examined by
              isothermal titration calorimetry and surface plasmon resonance to determine if
              the enhancer-dependent DctD mutants have reduced affinities for
              sigma54-holoenzyme.  In addition, a search will be made for mutant forms of
              sigma54-holoenzyme that suppress enhancer-dependent DctD mutants.  Information
              gained from these studies will help identify sites that are involved in
              protein-protein interactions.  In the second specific aim, mutant forms of
              sigma54 that are defective in steps following binding of sigma54-holoenzyme to
              the promoter will be isolated and characterized in vitro.  These studies will
              help elucidate the role of sigma54 in transcriptional activation.  Finally,
              Helicobacter pylori FlgR (flagellar regulatory protein) will be purified and
              characterized in vitro.  FlgR is an activator of sigma54-holoenzyme but it
              lacks the DNA-binding domain found in other activators.  FlgR presumably either
              contacts sigma54-holoenzyme directly from solution at physiological
              concentrations to catalyze open complex formation, or it contains another
              subunit that is responsible for DNA binding.  Both possibilities are unusual
              for activators of sigma54-holoenzyme and experiments will be done to
              distinguish between the two.

Many bacteria contain sigma54-RNA polymerase
              holoenzyme, and this form of holoenzyme is responsible for the expression of
              genes whose products are involved in a variety of important microbial
              processes, including nitrogen assimilation, nitrogen fixation, toluene
              degradation, hydrogen metabolism, flagellar biosynthesis, and pilin formation. 
              Many of these microbial processes have significant environmental, industrial,
              agricultural or medical implications.  Understanding how sigma54-dependent
              genes are regulated is critical for exploiting and controlling the bacteria
              that are responsible for these microbial activities.

