Title       : Molecular Systematics and Evolution of Fungi in the Russuloid Lineage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9974018

Award Number: 9974018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Miller FUNGI@UWYO.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9974018
Miller
	Species in the mushroom genera Russula and Lactarius are
              conspicuous abundant elements of temperate zone forests and arctic alpine
              ecosystems, and increasingly are known as important elements in tropical
              regions of the world. They contribute significantly to fungal biomass, are
              important dietary elements for rodents and insects, and many species are
              harvested worldwide for human consumption. As root symbionts (ectomycorrhizae)
              with forest trees, species of Russula may constitute nearly a quarter of the
              total mycorrhizal flora in various temperate and tropical forests. Despite
              their conspicuous and cosmopolitan nature, species in both genera have been
              difficult to identify and to characterize. Taxonomy of the group has relied on
              features that are known to exhibit phenotypic plasticity (intergrading color
              variation, for example, and intergrading spore shape) or suspected of arising
              in parallel in species groups (shape of the fruiting body, for example). In
              addition, the study of tropical taxa has considerably altered earlier taxonomic
              ideas that were principally based on a restricted sampling of fungi from
              temperate zones of the northern hemisphere. The number of described species is
              now large, but all major classifications are regional in nature, and fail to
              provide a comprehensive overview of the genera on a worldwide basis. New
              molecular evidence from DNA sequencing of nuclear ribosomal genes shows promise
              of yielding data useful for constructing a phylogenetic framework of
              evolutionary relationships among the species groups of Russula and Lactarius
              and numerous allies in the basidiomycetes.
	Dr. Steven Miller of the
              University of Wyoming is working with an impressive network of collaborators in
              several countries to collect samples of these fungi and analyze them for DNA
              sequence diversity in the nuclear ribosomal genes, and to integrate these data
              with new and traditional morphological investigations. In particular, contacts
              and colleagues in South America, in Africa, and in Australasia will allow
              much-needed sampling of tropical representatives of the genera to balance
              temperate-zone exemplars, in the molecular and morphological studies.
              Preliminary studies have been accomplished on ca. 80 taxa from the order
              Russulales, demonstrating feasibility of the project and promising resolution
              from the DNA data. Well supported lineages emerging from the
              molecular-phylogenetic analyses will become the focus of intensive
              morphological studies to characterize reliable features for species
              identification. Another direct result of the newly developed classification and
              gene sequence data will be the capability molecularly to identify these fungi
              on individual mycorrhizal roots even in the absence of fruit-body production,
              thus facilitating ecological research in temperate and tropical ecosystems.

