Title       : Neural and Chemosensory Control of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a9974530

Award Number: 9974530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54877              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Edwards edwards@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Reproductive behaviors are essential for the survival of all mammalian
              species.  Testicular horomones are required for reproduction, and hormones
              activate mating in males by actions that increase the sexual responsiveness of
              males and females.  The proposed research has to do with the neural pathways
              through  which the olfactory systems and populations of hormones-sensitive
              neurons in the brain regulate reproductive behavior in the male rat. 
              Immunocytochemical techniques will be used to identify horomone-sensitive
              neurons and neurons that are active during mating.  Special attention ill be
              given to a brain region that includes the zona incerta and central tegmental
              field.  Restoration of mating in castrate males by incerta/tegmental hormone
              implants can show the importance of  the region for the hormonal regulation of
              mating.  Studying the effect of small lesions to this region can help identify
              neuronal cell essential for copulation, and provide a foundation for
              tract-tracing designed to reveal the projecting systems through which horomones
              exert their effects on reproductive behavior.  Because erection is the cardinal
              sign of arousal in males of all mammalian species, the studies should have
              relevance for understanding how male arousal and reproductive behavior are
              represented in the organization of the brain in rats and even more complexly
              evolved mammalian species.

