Title       : Mechanism of a Multifunctional RNA - Iso6
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a9974487

Award Number: 9974487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Faqing Huang faqing.h.huang@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Huang
9974487

1. Technical

The number of catalytic RNAs and the scope of
              their functions are expanding at great pace. Yet,  our current understanding of
              RNA catalysis is quite limited. Most mechanistic studies have been concentrated
              on ribozyme systems that involve phosphodiester bond cleavage or formation.
              Furthermore, most well studied ribozymes either are cis-active or use
              oligonucleotide substrates, whose bindings to ribozymes are based on
              Watson-Crick base-paring. The P.I. has previously isolated a multi-functional
              RNA, Iso6, that possesses RNA capping, cap-exchange, phosphoryl coupling,
              pyrophosphatase, and decapping activities. Iso6 catalyzes the formation of a
              variety of molecules containing "high energy" phosphoanhydride bonds from
              natural and biologically important terminal phosphate-containing molecules.
              This class of "High energy" phosphoanhydride-bridged molecules, such as mRNA
              caps, CoA, NAD, FAD, NDP-sugars, and signaling molecules A(5 cents)pppA, A(5
              cents)ppppA, etc., are widespread in the cell and play critical roles in
              cellular processes. In addition, several engineered versions of Iso6 recognize
              multiple small-molecule substrates whose binding does not rely on conventional
              Watson-Crick base-paring, and catalyze the formation of larger products with
              multiple turnovers. This project aims to probe and define the structure around
              the catalytic center and to investigate the reaction intermediates of Iso6.
              Phosphorothioate substitutions will be introduced into Iso6 around its reaction
              center, as well as into the RNA's substrates to locate the required calcium
              ion. Different probes will be linked to substrates to map the two substrate
              sites within the RNA. Detection, isolation, and characterization of potential
              reaction intermediates will be undertaken to define the reaction mechanism of
              Iso6. The  studies of Iso6 will help understand the new type of RNA-catalyzed
              chemistry of  "high energy" phosphoanhydride bond formation, and may provide
              evidence to suggest that the broad spectrum of biologically important
              phosphoanhydride-bridged molecules might have arisen in an RNA world.
              Investigations of Iso6's reaction center will address a fundamental question of
              RNA catalysis: how is RNA able to bind and juxtapose multiple small-molecule
              substrates so that reactions occur rapidly? Successful isolation of new
              reaction intermediates from Iso6 may establish new reaction pathways of RNA
              catalysis. Information obtained throughout this research will advance our
              understanding of RNA catalysis in general. 

2. Non-technical

Catalytic
              RNA molecules, or ribozymes, play important roles in the cell. With the recent
              development of in vitro molecular evolution techniques, the number of new
              catalytic RNAs and the scope of their functions are expanding at great pace.
              However, comparing our knowledge of protein enzyme catalysis, our current
              understanding of RNA catalysts is quite limited. Most mechanistic studies on
              ribozymes have been concentrated on ribozyme systems that involve
              phosphodiester bond cleavage or formation. Furthermore, well studied ribozymes
              either are cis-active or use oligonucleotide substrates, whose binding to
              ribozymes is based on Watson-Crick base-paring. Accordingly, it is highly
              desirable to study an RNA enzyme mechanism based on ribozyme systems that
              function like proteins. The objective of this study is to probe and define the
              structure and reaction mechanism of a multifunctional RNA enzyme, Iso6, which
              was previously isolated by the principle investigator. Iso6 catalyzes the
              formation of a variety of molecules containing "high energy" phosphoanhydride
              bonds from natural and biologically important terminal phosphate-containing
              molecules. Phosphorothioate substitutions and different probes will be used to
              map the reaction center within the RNA. Detection, isolation, and
              characterization of reaction intermediates will be undertaken to define the
              reaction mechanism. The results will help to understand the new type of
              RNA-catalyzed chemistry of  "high energy" phosphoanhydride bond formation, to
              suggest new reaction pathways of RNA catalysis, and to address a fundamental
              question of RNA catalysis: how is RNA able to bind and juxtapose multiple
              small-molecule substrates so that reactions occur rapidly? 










