Title       : Faculty Development in Chemical Education and Research through Partnership with
               Georgia Tech
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a9974841

Award Number: 9974841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert L. Kuczkowski                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1237000            (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Kent Barefield   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 1363,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The School of Chemistry and Biochemistry of the Georgia Institute of Technology
              is supported by the the Chemistry Division and the Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities of the Directorate of Mathematics and Physical Sciences under the
              "Research Sites for Educators in Chemistry" program.  Dr. E. Kent Barefield is
              the Principal Investigator.  Georgia Tech will collaborate on this project with
              forty-one undergraduate institutions located in Georgia and twenty-seven
              four-year institutions located in contiguous states.  Eleven of the Georgia
              institutions and all of the institutions in contiguous states have  large
              enrollments of students from minority groups.  Each year four or more faculty
              members of those colleges will spend one or two semesters as well as the
              following summer at Georgia Tech.  Funds will be provided to allow the
              undergraduate institution to hire temporary replacements for those faculty
              members.  A substantial amount of faculty-replacement funds will be provided by
              Georgia Tech.  Each faculty member will affiliate with a specific research
              group and conduct chemical research in that group.  When appropriate selected
              qualified undergraduates may join faculty from their institutions in the
              Georgia Tech laboratories for summer research.  Through this program Georgia
              Tech will provide modest support for ongoing research in the colleges,
              including remote access via the internet, to NMR and ESR spectrometers.  A
              primary objective of the program is to initiate research collaborations that
              may be continued in future years.

Research Sites for Educators in Chemistry
              (RSEC) bring together the faculty of participating two-year colleges,
              baccalaureate colleges, and master's universities with faculty at research
              universities within a geographic region to enhance the research and educational
              opportunities at all participating institutions.  Academic and research
              institutions provide abundant opportunities where individuals may concurrently
              assume responsibilities as researchers, educators, and students, and where all
              can engage in joint efforts that infuse education with the excitement of
              discovery and enrich research through the diversity of learner perspectives. 
              RSECs such as this one at the Georgia Institute of Technology provide
              mechanisms for disseminating the knowledge, skills, practices and ethics of
              research to a broader community, including those from underrepresented groups;
              assist in developing viable, sustainable research programs at participating
              institutions; and involve faculty and students at the participating
              institutions with a broader cross-section of faculty and students.

