Title       : RUI: Structural Evolution of Bimetallic Deposition Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9974545

Award Number: 9974545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lyle D. Roelofs LROELOFS@HAVERFORD.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9178,9219,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9974545
Roelofs
This Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) award
              supports theoretical research to explore the evolution of heteroepitaxial,
              deposition systems.  Homoepitaxial growth systems are now reasonably well
              understood for many systems so that coming to terms with the challenges of
              bi-metallic systems is the next natural step toward a full understanding of
              epitaxial growth phenomena.  There is a strong technological motivation for
              such progress in that bi-metallic systems encompass surface alloy systems and
              also have important relevance for surface magnetism and catalysis.  Recently
              the PI has modeled a prototypical bi-metallic, epitaxial system, the deposition
              of submonolayer amounts of Rh on the Ag(001) surface.  Extensive scanning
              tunneling microscopy (STM) results are available for this system and these
              display several unusual structural features, most notably the occurrence of
              holes in the silver substrate.  The PI has developed a model for treating the
              surface kinetics of this and similar systems at the atomic level, a detailed
              account, in other words, for the atomic scale movements that occur to produce
              the structures seen.  The model is based on a simple, but physically reasonable
              approximation for the energy barriers governing local atomic arrangement, which
              forms the basis of a powerful simulation program which generates and
              characterizes the evolution of the resulting surface features. This approach
              has already succeeded in qualitatively accounting for the interesting
              structures seen for the Rh/Ag(001) system, and a first report has recently been
              submitted for publication.  The present work will extend this treatment and
              model other regimes and systems in collaboration with the experimental group of
              Behm in Ulm, Germany.  Behm's group has extensive experimental capability for
              study of bi-metallic growth systems an is in fact the source of much of the STM
              data for the Rh/Ag(001) system.  Further refinement of our model for the
              Rh/Ag(001) system is needed and it will be extended to the multi-layer case and
              to other temperature regimes.  The modeling will be applied to other
              bi-metallic growth systems, including some with catalytic relevance.  We are
              also capable of producing important fundamental results on the role of
              vacancies and adatoms in the formation and rearrangement of complex surface
              structures.

This Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) award supports
              theoretical research to explore the evolution of heteroepitaxial, deposition
              systems.  Homoepitaxial growth systems are now reasonably well understood for
              many systems so that coming to terms with the challenges of bi-metallic systems
              is the next natural step toward a full understanding of epitaxial growth
              phenomena.  There is a strong technological motivation for such progress in
              that bi-metallic systems encompass surface alloy systems and also have
              important relevance for surface magnetism and catalysis.  The theoretical work
              will be done in collaboration with an experimental group in Germany.


