Title       : Molecular Genetics and Function of Pectinases in Two Animal Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9974805

Award Number: 9974805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald R. Reeck greeck@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Reese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Kanost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Beeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Reeck  

The following hypothesis will be evaluated in this project:
              pectin-degrading enzymes are important digestive enzymes in the rice weevil,
              Sitophilus oryzae, and, by extension, in other insects containing these enzymes
              in their guts.  This work is based on the recent success in our laboratories in
              purifying rice weevil endo-polygalacturonase and pectinmethylesterase to
              apparent homogeneity and in cloning their encoding cDNAs.  These represent the
              first pectinases purified from any animal species and the first genes (cDNAs)
              cloned for any animal pectinases.  The hypothesis will be tested in feeding
              studies where inhibitors of polygalacturonase and pectinmethylesterase are
              incorporated into a diet from which artificial pellets will be made.  In this
              project, the presence of inhibitors of pectinases will be tested for their
              effects on oviposition within artificial seeds and on larval growth and
              development. Inhibitors will be added to the artificial diets over a range from
              0.01% to 1% by weight.  A compound to be tested first is a peptide discovered
              in screening phage-display libraries for ligands or inhibitors of rice weevil
              pectinmethylesterase. While these tests are going on, more inhibitors will be
              searched for by screening other phage display libraries, a single-chain
              antibody library, and a chemically synthesized library containing D-amino acids
              (to try to prevent possible digestion of potential inhibitors in the rice
              weevil gut during the feeding studies).

The significance of this work is
              that it could lead to alternate or improved ways of controlling the attack on
              crop plants by certain insects.  The idea would be to genetically engineer
              plants to produce inhibitors of important digestive enzymes of insects.  The
              particular enzymes being examined in this work are called pectinases.  They
              degrade a structural component of plants called pectin.  Genetically engineered
              plants that contain pectinase-inhibitors should have increased resistance to
              attack by insects since the insects' attack enzymes would be inhibited.  This
              approach could decrease our reliance on chemical pesticides for controlling
              insect pests of crop plants.



