Title       : Measuring the Electron Spectral Function by Angle-Resolved Photoemission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a9974401

Award Number: 9974401
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan Carlos Campuzano jcc@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9974401
Campuzano


The goal of this project is to determine the nature of
              the charge carriers in the high temperature superconductors using the technique
              of angle-resolved photoemission (ARPES). This spectral function represents the
              probability of adding or removing an electron from a many-body system. In these
              materials, the electrons strongly interact with one another and with other
              collective excitations such as spin waves. The spectral function provides very
              useful information about these interactions. Under suitable conditions, the
              spectral function can be manipulated to yield the self energy of the electrons,
              which is the quantity directly calculable by modern theories of strongly
              interacting many-body systems. This work aims to study the self-energy in the
              different states of high temperature superconductors. This project also seeks
              to understand how the Fermi surface changes shape when the material undergoes
              the superconducting transition. Recent work by this group has found the
              remarkable effect that electronic states at different momenta become gapped at
              different temperatures, leading to a break up of the Fermi surface into
              disconnected Fermi arcs which shrink with decreasing T, eventually collapsing
              to points in the superconducting ground state below Tc. This novel behavior,
              where the Fermi surface does not form a continuous contour in momentum space as
              in conventional metals, is unprecedented in that it occurs in the absence of
              long range order.
%%%
The high temperature superconductors are materials that
              carry current without any resistance when cooled to the temperature of liquid
              air. This research using the technique of angle-resolved photoemission (ARPES)
              is designed help reach an understanding of how electrons move in the high
              temperature superconductors to carry electrical current. These new materials
              are unlike all previously known materials in the way they conduct electricity.
              Now, 10 years after their discovery, the mechanisms are still not fully
              understood. This work aims to connect the physical quantities measured by ARPES
              to quantities measured using other techniques. As aconsequence, this project
              provides excellent research opportunities for graduate students who wish to
              work at the frontier of our understanding of new materials.
***

