Title       : Next Generation Software: Coordinated Allocation of Processor and I/O Resources
               in Parallel Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a9974992

Award Number: 9974992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evgenia Smirni esmirni@cs.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 2884      NEXT GENERATION SOFTWARE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2884,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
EIA-9974992
Smirni, Evgenia
College of William & Mary

Next Generation
              Software: Coordinated Allocation of Processor and I/O Resources in Parallel
              Systems

A problem that plagues most parallel systems today is inefficient
              management of resources.  Parallel systems are frequently over-utilized, yet
              they deliver relatively low performance to individual applications.  In recent
              years, much research had been devoted to methods for allocating the processors
              of a parallel system to competing applications.  However, an issue that has
              been traditionally overlooked is that many applications also contend for shared
              Input/Output (I/O) resources.  Since I/O resources belong to the slowest level
              of memory hierarchy, their efficient management becomes critical for high
              performance.

The proposed research focuses on the development of an
              allocation framework that integrates the management of computational and I/O
              resources in parallel systems.  This research is facilitated, firstly, by
              previously obtained quantitative data on the processing and I/O requirements of
              parallel scientific applications.  Additionally, recent studies on processor
              scheduling that explicitly consider the I/O demands of parallel scientific
              applications demonstrate performance trends that differ significantly from
              previously observed trends where only processor allocation is
              considered.

The proposed plan considers a systematic exploration of
              coordinated allocation strategies of both processor and I/O resources and
              investigates issues that have not been addressed in traditional processor
              scheduling or I/O research in parallel systems.  The primary objectives of this
              project are: 1) the development of an analytic model that effectively captures
              the scalability of I/O intensive applications under different data
              distributions on the disks and under different assignment of computational
              resources, 2) the analysis of the relative advantages and disadvantages of new
              dual resource allocation strategies through modeling and experimental
              measurements, and 3) the development of a unified framework that allows the
              processor scheduler and the parallel file system to operate jointly towards the
              common goal of sharing the parallel resources amoung the various executing
              applications in order to maximize overall system performance.  The proposed
              work will be experimentally verified on a variety of parallel platforms and the
              dual resource allocation algorithms will be implemented so as to ensure their
              portability across these
              platforms.




























