Title       : Motivation Gains in Performance Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2000     
File        : a9974664

Award Number: 9974664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norbert L. Kerr kerr@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence A. Messe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over the past 25 years researchers have identified and explained numerous
              instances of group motivation loss - lower task motivation when people work in
              groups rather than as individuals. In contrast, relatively less is known about
              when and how group contexts can sometimes promote a gain in motivation. This
              project seeks to build on early work concerned with two types of group
              motivation gain-the "Koehler effect" and the "social compensation effect."
              Early research found evidence for a group motivation gain on persistence tasks.
              Although some contemporary attempts to explore this phenomenon have been
              unsuccessful, very recent work in our laboratory has succeeded in both
              replicating and partially explaining it. The current project will further
              explore the causes and generality of the Koehler effect. The research will
              examine: (a) the relative validity of concerns with collective success versus
              self-presentation as an explanation for the Koehler effect; (b) the role that
              workers' ability to monitor each other's performance plays in generating the
              motivation gain; (c) how long workers will persist in exceeding their usual
              individual performance; and (d) some possible group composition moderators of
              the Koehler effect. Other early research identified a motivation gain that is
              very different from the Koehler effect: social compensation occurs when a group
              member has some reason to believe that fellow group members cannot or will not
              perform well. A series of studies will extend the initial work on social
              compensation. This work will explore (a) the extent to which the effect depends
              on believing that greater effort can sufficiently compensate for other group
              member's low performance; (b) whether it matters if the others' low performance
              is due to low ability versus low motivation; and (c) how long a group member
              will continue to compensate for others' low performance. The significance of
              this project lies both in its potential for contributing to basic knowledge
              about motivation in groups and its potential for application.  The project will
              contribute to a better understanding of group dynamics in the kind of
              performance contexts found in the workplace. Finding ways to increase task
              motivation may offer an effective way of enhancing collective performance in a
              diverse array of contexts, including small groups, a marriage, a work team, or
              a business organization.

