Title       : Patterns of Species Loss in Forest Understory Plant Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2001     
File        : a9974041

Award Number: 9974041
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott L. Collins                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald M. Waller dmwaller@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9974041
Waller
Plant communities in many areas are losing species at
              unprecedented rates. While the mechanisms responsible for these losses vary and
              are often difficult to identify, there appear to be general trends governing
              which species are most vulnerable to being lost. Rare and localized species are
              usually at greater risk of local extirpation, and patterns of species loss
              often result in most habitat patches containing common and widespread species.
              Habitat fragmentation, shifts in historic disturbance regimes, the invasion of
              exotic species, and herbivory by elevated populations of white-tailed deer all
              appear to be proximate mechanisms driving these losses in various habitats.
              This study will investigate patterns of community composition and species loss
              in understory plant communities in forests of northern Wisconsin and Michigan's
              upper peninsula as a vehicle to understand the nature, extent, and mechanisms
              of these losses. Data will be collected from 120+ sites distributed across six
              community/soil types in this region to address several ecological questions. To
              test the predictability of species loss, nested species compositions will be
              analyzed. To assess historic losses, contemporary species presence data will be
              compared to historical data collected by John T. Curtis and colleagues for
              these forests. Patterns of historical decline will be compared to current
              patterns of nestedness among habitat patches to assess how well current
              patterns of nestedness reflect historical processes. Hierarchical spatial
              sampling will allow us to construct species-area curves for comparisons across
              community and soil types. These results will improve our understanding of
              natural community dynamics, historical shifts in these communities, and current
              mechanisms of species loss.

