Title       : GOALI: Optical Nonlinearities in Glass Fibers and their Effects on the Guided
               Propagation of Light
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a9974031

Award Number: 9974031
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $898788             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Toulouse JT02@Lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmet R. Kortan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Himanshu Jain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Marc P. Delavaux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Demetrios N. Christodoulides  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,1589,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Toulouse  

This GOALI (Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
              Industry) project represents an original four-way collaboration between a
              focussed research group from physics, optical engineering and materials science
              at Lehigh in a partnership with Lucent Technologies to study optical
              nonlinearities in glass fibers.  Optical nonlinearities have a significant
              effect on the propagation of light in glass fibers.  Because fibers are usually
              very long, nonlinearities become cumulatively important and because the fibers
              usually possess a narrow core (a few microns in diameter), optical intensities
              in fibers are quite high.  These factors are even more true now with the
              development of wavelength division multiplexing in which many different
              wavelengths propagate simultaneously in fibers, increasing the intensities even
              further.  However, these nonlinearities are significant in optical fibers, not
              only because of their length and their core size, but also because of the
              microscopic structure and properties of glasses. One part of the project will
              concentrate on the microstructure and properties of bulk glasses and the second
              part on the nonlinear optical properties of bulk glasses and fibers. One of the
              PIs from Lucent will contribute to both experimental parts, in the synthesis of
              the bulk glasses, in the drawing of fibers and in the characterization of their
              physical properties.  The experimental results will then serve as input for the
              theoretical calculations and simulations that will combine them with various
              fiber parameters in order to predict the effect of these nonlinear optical
              properties on the propagation of light signal in real optical systems. These
              calculations and simulations will also help guide the experimental
              investigation.  The results of the theoretical calculations and predictions
              will finally be tested in collaboration with the other PI from Lucent on real
              optical systems. The final or feedback step of the loop will consist in a
              critical examination of the test results and, in consultation with all the
              project participants, suggestions for modification of the glasses (materials
              parameters) or of the fiber parameters.  The students involved in the project
              will spend about half their time at Lucent and thus will be exposed to the
              industrial research setting.
%%%
The ultimate goal of this project is the
              control of nonlinear effects in optical systems by proper design or appropriate
              modifications of the structure and/or composition of glasses used to draw
              fibers.  These optical fibers are of increasing importance in today's
              information-intensive world (almost all of the traffic on the internet and
              world-wide-web are carried by glass fibers.)  This GOALI project is co-funded
              by the Ceramics and the Condensed Matter Physics Programs in the Division of
              Materials Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.
***

