Title       : Photoprotection During Winter Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9974620

Award Number: 9974620
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Adams william.adams@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Demmig-Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For those plants that produce or retain leaves during the winter, the potential
              hazards of being exposed to high levels of sunlight are increased.  The green
              pigment chlorophyll is responsible for absorbing light energy and passing it on
              for use in photosynthesis.  The biochemical reactions of photosynthesis cannot
              proceed or proceed more slowly at the low temperatures prevalent during winter.
               Absorbed light energy that cannot be utilized through photosynthesis can
              potentiate dangerous and damaging reactions in the leaves.  However, leaves
              possess photoprotective mechanisms to counteract this damaging potential, most
              notably the harmless dissipation of excess light energy as heat through a
              process that is facilitated by the carotenoids zeaxanthin and antheraxanthin. 
              Under nonstressful environmental conditions these carotenoids are present and
              active in large quantities only when high light is present (e.g. at midday). 
              During the winter, however, the PIs have found that zeaxanthin + antheraxanthin
              can be retained and continually engaged for the photoprotective process even
              during the night.  The main objective of this proposal is to test the
              hypothesis that phosphorylation of particular proteins to which those
              carotenoids are bound are involved in the sustained activation of this
              photoprotective process.  The PI's will furthermore evaluate whether plant
              species with different lifeforms employ different modifications of this
              mechanism.  For plant species that keep growing and maintain an active
              photosynthetic apparatus during the winter, zeaxanthin + antheraxanthin become
              disengaged and disappear rapidly on warm days.  For plant species that cease
              growth and downsize their photosynthetic apparatus during the winter compared
              to the summer, zeaxanthin + antheraxanthin are retained and remain engaged for
              days upon transition to warmer conditions.  The PIs will test the hypothesis
              that differences in the phosphorylation patterns of the pigment-binding
              proteins accompany these differences in the employment of the photoprotective
              process between species exhibiting these very different patterns of acclimation
              to winter stress.
        This study is not only important to understanding
              how plants are able to retain functional leaves during the harsh conditions of
              winter (with the obvious implications for winter-hardy crop species such as
              winter cereals, spinach, etc.), but should also serve as a guide in
              understanding the mechanism of sustained photoprotection involving the
              carotenoids zeaxanthin + antheraxanthin that occurs in the leaves of plants
              facing many other stresses, including drought stress, insufficient availability
              of nutrients, excessive levels of salinity or heavy metals, etc.

