Title       : Interaction of the Goldfish Kainate Receptor with G Proteins in a Novel Model
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2000  
File        : a9974604

Award Number: 9974604
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Oswald reo1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Interaction of the Goldfish Kainate Receptor with G Proteins in a Novel Model
              System
Robert E. Oswald
Cornell University
Proposal:  9974604

Information
              in the brain is transmitted from one nerve cell to another by the release of a
              messenger molecule from the presynaptic cell, which diffuses across the small
              space and interacts with a receptor protein imbedded in the membrane of the
              postsynaptic cell. Glutamate is the most prevalent excitatory neurotransmitter
              in the brain. The receptors for glutamate bind the amino acid, and respond by
              opening a channel between the outside of the cell and the inside of the cell
              allowing positively charged ions to flow across the cell membrane. Dr. Oswald
              is characterizing the structure, dynamics, and regulation of several glutamate
              receptors.  The first half of the project will focus on the binding of
              glutamate and related ligands.  The binding of these compounds seems to result
              a major change in the binding domain characterized by a large movement of one
              half of the domain relative to the other half.  The contributions to the
              binding energy of allosteric interactions between these domains will be studied
              using site-directed mutagenesis.  In addition, the kinetics of this
              conformational change will be studied with millisecond resolution.  The second
              half of the project will focus on the interaction of intracellular portions of
              glutamate receptors with cytoplasmic control factors.  These investigations
              will yield novel data on the structure, function, and regulation of glutamate
              receptors in the brain and are important for understanding adaptive mechanisms
              that have been borrowed from simple organisms for use in higher species during
              evolution. In addition, these studies may provide information about the
              molecular basis for learning and memory.

