Title       : Metal Uptake in Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2000     
File        : a9974837

Award Number: 9974837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Lou Guerinot Mary.Lou.Guerinot@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Iron is an essential nutrient for higher plants, with iron-containing compounds
              figuring prominently in the electron transport systems of photosynthesis and
              respiration.  Although iron is abundant in the soil, the acquisition of iron is
              problematic due to its low solubility at neutral pH.  In response to iron
              deficiency, all plants except the grasses induce Fe(III) chelate reductase
              activity, Fe(II) transport activity and proton release into the rhizosphere. 
              Of the three responses, Fe(III) reduction is thought to be the primary factor
              in making iron available to plants.  During the current funding period,
              Arabidopsis mutants that have defects in Fe(III) chelate reduction were
              identified.  frd1 cannot induce Fe(III) chelate reductase activity in response
              to iron deficiency and frd3 has high levels of Fe(III) reductase activity
              relative to wild type when plants are grown under iron sufficient conditions. 
              The gene identified by the frd1 mutation, FRO2, has been cloned and shown to
              complement the frd1 mutant.  FRO2 encodes a metal chelate reductase belonging
              to a superfamily of flavocytochromes whose members pass electrons across
              membranes.  During the course of this work, another gene family, the ZIP gene
              family, was also identified that encodes metal transporters capable of
              transporting Fe(II), Mn(II) and Zn(II).  One of the family members, IRT1, is
              only expressed in the roots of iron deficient plants and is suggested to be
              responsible for uptake of Fe(II) from the rhizosphere.  This project will build
              on the discoveries made during the current funding period, specifically
              focusing on strategies to make Fe available to the plant (i.e., metal reduction
              and proton release).  The specific objectives of this proposal are to: 

1)
              determine the role of the FRO2 metalloreductase in Arabidopsis metal ion uptake
              and metabolism using functional expression studies in yeast and genetic,
              cytological and biochemical analyses in Arabidopsis.  As time permits, analyze
              the role of other members of the FRO gene family.

2) further characterize
              the frd3 mutant and clone the FRD3 gene.

As part of the characterization of
              the FRO2 gene, organ and tissue specificity as well as subcellular localization
              will be determined.  A knockout mutant that carries an insertion in FRO2 gene
              will also be identified in order to determine the contribution of the FRO2 gene
              product to metal ion homeostasis.  Null alleles of FRO2, IRT1 and AHA2 will
              also be used to test the hypothesis that Fe(III) reduction is indeed limiting
              iron acquisition by plants, as has been suggested from physiological studies. 
              The gene identified by the frd3 mutation may be involved in metal transport,
              metal sensing or metal regulation, based on the physiological characterization
              carried out to date.  Fine mapping of the frd3 mutation will be done by
              analyzing inter-ecotype recombinants to facilitate the cloning of the FRD3
              gene.  Understanding iron uptake in plants is extremely important as one-third
              of the world's soils are iron deficient.  Furthermore, iron deficiency in
              humans is the most prevalent nutritional problem in the world today, affecting
              an estimated 2.7 billion people in developed and developing countries.  For
              most of the world, plant material is the major source of iron so ensuring that
              plants have higher stores of bio-available iron will go a long way towards
              solving an important problem in human nutrition.  

