Title       : Biophysical Studies of Human Malic Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9974700

Award Number: 9974700
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Liang Tong tong@como.bio.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Tong
MCB9974700

Malic enzymes (ME) catalyze the oxidative decarboxylation of
              malate to produce pyruvate and CO2, with the concomitant reduction of the
              cofactor NAD or NADP. They are usually homo-tetramers, with molecular weights
              of about 60kD for the monomer. In mammals, three isoforms of malic enzymes have
              been identified so far - cytosolic NADP-dependent ME (c-NADP-ME), mitochondrial
              NADP-dependent ME (m-NADP-ME), and mitochondrial NAD (P)- dependent ME
              (m-NAD-ME). m-NAD-ME has several unique features among the three isoforms. It
              is a cooperative enzyme and exhibits sigmoidal kinetics with respect to the
              substrate malate. Its activity is allosterically controlled, with fumarate as
              an activator and ATP as an inhibitor. It can use both NAD and NADP as the
              co-factor, although it prefers NAD under physiological conditions. The
              structural basis for these unique properties are currently unknown. As a first
              step towards a greater understanding of these enzymes, the crystal structure of
              human m-NAD-ME in complex with NAD was determined recently. The structure
              demonstrates that malic enzymes are a new class of oxidative decarboxylases.
              This first structure represents the starting point for further biochemical,
              structural, and biophysical studies to characterize this important class of
              enzymes. Special emphasis will be placed on defining the catalytic mechanisms
              of malic enzymes in general, and on delineating the structural basis for the
              unique allosteric properties of m-NAD-ME in particular. Another aspect of the
              research will focus on the structural basis for the co-factor selectivity of
              the malic enzymes. m-NAD-ME offers the unique opportunity of studying the
              binding of NAD and NADP to the same enzyme. Structures of the NADP-dependent
              isoforms will also be obtained to provide additional information for
              comparison.   The results obtained from the structural analyses will be
              assessed by mutagenesis and kinetic studies.

Malic enzymes are widely
              distributed in nature, having been found in bacteria, yeast, fungi, plants, and
              animals. Their amino acid sequences are highly conserved; suggesting that malic
              enzymes may have important biological functions. The proposed research should
              lead to a greater understanding of the biochemical properties and biological
              functions of this important class of enzymes. The research should also provide
              additional insights on the structural basis for the allosteric control of
              enzyme activities and the catalytic mechanisms of dehydrogenases and
              decarboxylases in general. 

