Title       : Theory of Metal-Insulator Transitions in Strongly Correlated Electronic Systems
               with Disorder
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a9974311

Award Number: 9974311
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Dobrosavljevic vlad@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9974311
Dobrosavljevic
This grant will support theoretical research into a
              theory of metal-insulator transitions, with an emphasis on incorporating both
              strong electron-electron interactions and disorder.  A dynamical mean-field
              approach to disordered interacting electrons, which has previously been applied
              to transition-metal oxides, heavy-fermion systems, and Kondo insulators, will
              be extended to treat metal-insulator transitions with strong disorder and
              strong correlations.  This approach will provide a simple order-parameter
              description of the problem, and will be used to construct equations of state
              for thermodynamic and transport properties valid over a broad range of
              temperatures, carrier concentrations, and amounts of disorder. Within this
              framework, specific problems involving transport near Mott-Anderson
              transitions, non-Fermi liquid behavior in strongly disordered metals, high
              temperature anomalies, and the effects of glassy behavior on metal-insulation
              transitions will be studied.  The results will be of direct relevance to many
              systems, including doped semiconductors, disorder heavy-fermion systems,
              layered ruthenates and manganites, two-dimensional electron gases, and
              high-temperature superconductors.

Recent years have witnessed renewed
              interest in a long-standing problem of metal-insulator transitions, with the
              traditional models of Mott and Anderson emphasizing the roles of electron
              correlations and local disorder, respectively.  Many new materials with
              technological significance have electronic properties exhibiting both strong
              electron-electron interactions and disorder, which is difficult to analyze
              using convention theoretical tools.  This grant supports research into the
              development and application of a new approach that can incorporate both of
              these relevant processes. This work will provide a simple order-parameter
              description of the problem, and will be used to construct equations of state
              for thermodynamic and transport properties valid over a broad range of
              temperatures, carrier concentrations, and amounts of disorder.  This approach
              should make it possible to incorporate all the basic mechanisms of
              localization, including both the Mott and Anderson route, as well as the
              possibility of glassy freezing of electrons. The results will be of direct
              relevance to many systems, including doped semiconductors, disorder
              heavy-fermion systems, layered ruthenates and manganites, two-dimensional
              electron gases, and high-temperature superconductors.  The formalism can be
              adapted to many realistic situations and should open new avenues for the
              development of materials science research.



