Title       : Ninth International Symposium on Nondestructive Characterization of Materials,
               Sidney, Australia, June 28 - July 2, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1999       
File        : a9974362

Award Number: 9974362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Green, Jr. robert.green@JHU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9974362
Green

The objective of these symposia is to provide a specific
              unique focus on the science and technology of nondestructive evaluation applied
              to materials characterization.  The ultimate goal is to develop innovative,
              more sensitive and more precise nondestructive methods to characterize the
              properties of materials much earlier than possible with current nondestructive
              testing techniques, so that any material alterations detrimental to the desired
              application can be detected and corrected well before macroscopic defects
              occur.  Properties of interest include microstructure, residual stress,
              precipitates, second phases, included particles, dislocation density, porosity,
              composite cure state and adhesive strength.  These symposia function to gather
              together the technologists of nondestructive methods with materials scientists
              and engineers to help explore the applications of nondestructive
              characterization and solutions to the problems encountered.  Papers include
              research and applications for aging infrastructure, microstructure
              characterization, on-line measurements for process control, mechanical property
              determination, precision and accuracy of nondestructive characterization
              measurements; advances in computed assisted tomography, laser ultrasonics,
              microwave advances and applications.  Of considerable interest are state-of-the
              art developments
and applications where the complex nature of materials has
              been recognized.  Furthermore, discussions on the applications and
              possibilities for multi-technique measurement of interdependent parameters and
              the evaluation of the data through sophisticated computer analysis are
              encouraged.  In order to permit as many participants as possible to present the
              results of their research efforts funds are provided to assist distinguished
              scientists, young scientists, and graduate students, to attend the symposium. 
              The recipients of funds are selected by the organizing committee with awareness
              of geographical distribution and the desire to include as many women and
              minorities as possible.  The proceedings of this symposium will be published as
              a bound volume entitled Nondestructive Characterization of Materials
              IX.
%%%
This symposium is the ninth in a series of bi-annual international
              symposia that was first held in 1983.  Prior symposia were held in Hershey,
              Pennsylvania; Montreal, Canada; Saarbrucken, Germany; Annapolis, Maryland,
              Karuizawa, Japan; Oahu, Hawaii; Prague, Czech Republic and Boulder, Colorado. 
              Professor Clayton Ruud, Pennsylvania State University and Robert Green, Johns
              Hopkins University were the founders of this symposia series.
***

