Title       : New Liquid Precursors for Chemical Vapor Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1999      
File        : a9974412

Award Number: 9974412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $384500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy G. Gordon gordon@chemistry.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is co-funded by Chemical and Transport Systems and the Chemistry
              Division.  The goal of this project is to develop new chemical vapor deposition
              (CVD) processes for selected metals.  Practical CVD processes are generally
              based on turning liquid precursors into vapors that react to form the coatings.
               The use of liquids, rather than dissolved solids, may be advantageous in terms
              of chemical compatibility, mixing, handling, and vaporization.  The approach is
              to synthesize novel precursor mixtures containing randomly substituted alkyl
              groups that keep the material in liquid form at room temperature.  These new
              liquid precursor materials will be purified, characterized, and vaporized as
              CVD reactants.  The deposited materials will be fully characterized for
              composition, structure, thickness, electrical resistance, surface morphology,
              and step coverage.  This approach will be tested and applied to selected metals
              and their compounds.  The CVD of materials containing several different metals
              may be more practical with this approach because the precursor liquids are
              chemically compatible and can be safely mixed.  The liquid precursors developed
              and characterized will facilitate the deposition of mixed metal oxides such as
              barium strontium titanate, a material with the potential to increase
              information storage on computer chips.  Studies of the mechanisms of precursor
              reactions will be useful in designing effective CVD reactors and providing
              rational control for the processes.  The insights gained into the reaction
              mechanisms of these novel chemical precursors will add to the fundamental
              knowledge base of chemistry.
