Title       : Kinetic Theory Method for Large Eddy Simulation of Turbulence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9974289

Award Number: 9974289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Orszag orszag@math.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9974289

In this work, we plan to explore and apply a fundamentally new
              approach to large-eddy simulation (LES) of turbulence, viz. the use of a
              Boltzmann kinetic level representation of the flow.  Conventional approaches to
              LES are based on solving a system of modified Navier-Stokes equations at the
              continuum level.  While such an approach has achieved many interesting results,
              it also encounters intrinsic difficulties (e.g. in providing faithful turbulent
              behavior at boundaries).  Owing to recent successes with the lattice Boltzmann
              method, we believe there is significant potential in approaching the problem
              from a new angle.  That is, we propose the use of the Boltzmann equation
              representation of fluid dynamics. Such a representation is not only suitable
              for describing particle motions, but may also be a useful way of studying
              large-scale fluid turbulence properties once some appropriate averaging
              procedure is constructed.  In this work, we plan to carry out an extensive
              series of theoretical and computational studies of turbulence dynamics by
              formulating such a Boltzmann description.  The specific tasks include model
              formulation, simulation results, memory and history effects, reformulation of
              wall models and boundary conditions, and initial applications to multiphase
              turbulent flows.

The work to be done here may have long-lasting impact on
              our ability to simulate fluid flows in real-world systems.  The huge range of
              eddy sizes in turbulence precludes direct solution of the flow equations at all
              scales for full-scale systems.  The novelty of the lattice Boltzmann method is
              that it circumvents some of the intrinsic limitations of conventional computers
              in order to achieve realistic flow simulations.  By coupling of this method to
              advanced ideas on large-eddy simulation, we expect to achieve progress that
              would not otherwise be possible on these difficult flow problems.  In
              particular, the lattice Boltzmann method for large-eddy simulation allows the
              efficient formulation of near-wall boundary conditions that have so far escaped
              analysis.  It is also possible that the new formulations to be established here
              will suggest new computer architectures that will enable full-scale flow
              simulations.

