Title       : Plasma Membrane Targeting of the Yck2 Casein Kinase 1 Isoform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a9974459

Award Number: 9974459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucy C. Robinson LROBIN@LSUHSC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LSU Health Scs Cntr-Shreve
	      1501 Kings Highway
	      Shreveport, LA  71130    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Yck1 and Yck2 protein kinases are together essential for viability in
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The two proteins are members of an abundant protein
              kinase family that is highly conserved in eukaryotic cells, whose properties
              have been well-studied but whose functions are not yet clear in most organisms.
              The plasma membrane-associated Yck protein kinases are required for cellular
              morphogenesis and cytokinesis in yeast, and are enriched at specific sites
              within the membrane during the cell cycle. Studies with a green fluorescent
              protein fusion to Yck2p allowed determination that the route of delivery of
              Yck2p to the plasma membrane requires a functioning secretory pathway. This was
              unexpected because the Yck proteins carry a C-terminal sequence necessary for
              membrane localization that could direct modification by a prenyltransferase
              that heretofore was only known to prenylate members of the Rab family of
              ras-like GTPases. This research is directed toward understanding the targeting
              mechanisms of the Yck2 protein by determining the cis-acting elements on Yck2p
              and the trans-acting factors that are required for modification and
              localization. Also, the question of whether prenylation has functional
              consequences, either to the targeting mechanism or to the protein's interaction
              with targets, will be tested. Finally, evidence that the Yck2 kinase cycles on
              and off the plasma membrane in association with vesicular structures will be
              explored, to characterize the apparent cycling and to determine whether this is
              an integral part of the essential function of Yck in yeast. The results of
              these studies will be important not only in understanding the localization
              mechanism of an essential protein kinase, but will address important questions
              in the area of protein prenylation -- especially the question of whether
              prenylation can determine targeting of these proteins to particular membranes
              and the functional consequences of this modification. 

The project addresses
              a fundamental question in cell biology, namely, how do specific proteins, that
              need to be located in specific places inside the cell in order to perform their
              function, get to where they need to be?  The protein under investigation in
              this project, Yck, is  a protein kinase, a type of protein that functions in
              intracellular signal transduction events by activating or inactivating other
              specific proteins by phosphorylating them.  The project will explore the role
              of protein prenylation in subcellular localization of proteins.  The
              biochemistry of prenylation (an important post-translational modification of a
              protein that results from the covalent addition of a specific fatty acyl group
              to the protein; such a modification allows a protein, that would otherwise not
              interact with membranes, to interact with membranes) is reasonably well
              understood.  However, the specific cell biological consequences of prenylation
              are not so well understood.  The study will be done in a model organism, the
              yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, that historically has richly provided cell
              biologists with fundamental information about cellular processes that are
              applicable to a broad range of other types of organisms, including plants and
              mammals. 

