Title       : Biochemistry of the Anaerobic Dehalogenation of Chlorinated Aromatics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2001      
File        : a9974836

Award Number: 9974836
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen W. Ragsdale sragsdale1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ragsdale

The EPA list of the twenty most hazardous compounds includes ten
              halogenated organic compounds. Anaerobic organisms are likely to be very
              important in the natural biodegradation of such compounds and show promise for
              bioremediation of sites contaminated with halogenated compounds. There have
              been studies of consortia that can metabolize polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs),
              pesticides, and herbicides. Members of the recently discovered
              Desulfitobacterium or Desulfomonile class can rapidly and efficiently remove
              the halogen group of alkyl halides and aryl halides in an energy yielding
              process called dehalorespiration. This is a reductive dehalogenation in which
              an electron donor (pyruvate, H2, etc.) reduces the alkyl or aryl halide through
              an electron transfer chain, effectively replacing the chloride with a hydride
              equivalent. This is an early stage in research on such organisms and the
              relevant enzymes. This project is aimed at better understanding the process of
              reductive dehalogenation of dehalogenated aromatics. So far several
              dehalorespiring organisms have been isolated. Two aryl chloride dehalogenases
              have been purified and the gene encoding one of these has been cloned. There
              have been few mechanistic studies of such enzymes. The research outlined here
              will provide new information about this relatively new class of enzymatic
              reactions. The genes encoding the dehalogenase(s) will be cloned, sequenced and
              overexpressed.  The dehalogenase(s) will be characterized and the reductive
              dehalogenation mechanism(s) will be elucidated. The enzymes appear to contain
              either heme or vitamin B12. This represents a new role for these metal centers,
              which will be elucidated.  Spectroscopic and electrochemical studies will be
              performed to identify and determine the roles of these prosthetic groups in the
              dehalogenation process. There could be significant biotechnological impact of 
              these studies. The organisms or enzymes from these organisms could be used in
              bioremediation processes. Research described here aims to determine which
              organisms and which enzymes from these organisms show the most potential for
              bioremediating sites contaminated with PCBs and for use in plant biotechnology.
              The activities of the organisms and purified enzymes will be assessed for their
              ability to dehalogenate at the ortho, meta, and para positions of the aromatic
              ring and to reductively dehalogenate xenobiotics like Aroclor and herbicides
              like dicamba and 2,4-D. 




