Title       : Developmentally Programmed DNA Rearrangement in Tetrahymena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a9974885

Award Number: 9974885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen M. Karrer kathleen.karrer@marquette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
The junctions of a novel developmentally regulated DNA rearrangement
              in Tetrahymena have been cloned and sequenced; Tlr1, for Tetrahymena long
              repeat.  Tlr1 belongs to a family of sequences that are repeated in the germ
              line genome, all of which are eliminated via developmentally regulated DNA
              rearrangement from the somatic genome.  The junctions of Tlr1 are characterized
              by an 825 bp terminal inverted repeat; thus it is structurally similar to
              certain transposable elements in Drosophila, sea urchins and the hypotrichous
              ciliates.  Nonetheless, Tlr1 rearrangement resembles the excision of short
              elements in Tetrahymena whose rearrangement mechanisms have been characterized
              in more detail.  Namely, both types of elements have heterogeneity of junction
              sites and cis-acting DNA sequences located outside the eliminated element in
              the flanking DNA.  The long term goal of this project is to understand the
              molecular mechanism of DNA rearrangement.  The general approach is to identify
              the cis-acting DNA sequences and trans-acting proteins of the Tlr family.  The
              specific goals of the experiments described in this proposal are: I.  To
              identify and characterize germ line limited genes within the Tlr1 element which
              are likely to encode the rearrangement machinery.  II. To clone and
              characterize a macronuclear genes that are specifically active at the stage of
              DNA rearrangement.  III. To knock out and/or inhibit the activity of the above
              genes in order to determine whether they have an obligatory role in DNA
              rearrangement.  IV.  To test the utility of a yeast strain engineered to
              suppress premature translation of the Tetrahymena UAA and UAG glutamine codons
              in a one hybrid screen for DNA binding proteins.

DNA rearrangement is a
              basic biological process which occurs in organisms ranging from bacteria to
              mammals.  It serves a variety of biological functions including gene regulation
              and assembly of functional genes.  Developmentally regulated DNA rearrangement
              may be related mechanistically to processes which result in mutagenesis and
              disease; namely the movement of mutagenic elements within the genome and the
              propagation of certain viruses including HIV, HTLV (human T-cell leukemia
              virus), and mammalian leukemia-sarcoma viruses.  Developmentally regulated DNA
              rearrangements require cis-acting DNA sequences to determine target for
              rearrangement and trans-acting proteins which are the cellular machinery.  The
              ciliated protozoan, Tetrahymena provides a particularly advantageous model
              system in which to study DNA rearrangement.  First, the genome undergoes
              thousands of site specific DNA rearrangements which can be induced
              synchronously in large numbers of cells.  DNA rearrangement is limited to a
              specific stage of sexual reproduction.  Thus developmental stage specificity
              helps identify protein components and DNA intermediates of the process. 
              Second, the availability of cell transformation has provided a functional assay
              for cis-acting DNA sequences.  Third, procedures are well established to knock
              out and/or inhibit the activity of specific genes, allowing for the
              identification and analysis of their role in DNA rearrangement.


