Title       : Development of Implicit Solvation Potentials for Biomolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2001       
File        : a9974621

Award Number: 9974621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348421             (Estimated)
Investigator: Themis Lazaridis themis@sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              

DBI 9974621, Lazaridis, Themis. CUNY City College. Development of implicit
              solvation potentials for biomolecules.


Project Summary

The interaction
              of biological macromolecules with solvent is crucial to their structure and
              function and needs to be taken into account in computer modeling studies. Until
              now, this has been accomplished primarily by simulating the biomolecule along
              with a large number of water molecules. This approach (explicit solvation) has
              two drawbacks: it is computationally intensive and does not reveal the
              thermodynamic origins of the observed behavior because free energies are not
              readily available in the simulation. A more efficient approach to this problem
              (implicit solvation) is to add an analytical function for the solvation free
              energy to the molecular mechanics force field. Such a function for proteins in
              water has been recently developed and added to the CHARMM force field to obtain
              an approximation to the effective energy of proteins in solution (EEF1). The
              proposed work will continue on this path by a) further testing and developing
              improvements to EEF1, b) extending the model to other biomolecules, such as
              nucleic acids, carbohydrates, lipids, metals and cofactors, c) extending the
              model to other solvents, such as denaturant solutions and nonpolar environments
              mimicking
biological membranes, and d) incorporating the effects of pH, pKa
              shifts, and ionic strength. The objective of this work is to develop a set of
              potentials that can accurate represent the various solvent environments found
              in living systems and in experimental in vitro studies of biomolecules. The new
              potentials, implemented into existing or new software, will allow the study of
              larger and more complex biological systems than has been possible so far.

