Title       : Chemically Detecting, Labeling and Avoiding Predators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9974591

Award Number: 9974591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale M. Madison dmadison@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan L. Bane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Animal Behavior Program

Non-technical Abstract



Title:  		Chemically
              detecting, labeling and avoiding predators

PI: 		Madison, Dale
              M.

Proposal #:  	9974591



PROJECT SUMMARY

      Predation plays a
              major role in community ecology.  Avoiding predators has obvious benefits, but
              routine avoidance of less threatening predators can reduce the time for
              beneficial activities, such as foraging.  A prey individual may reduce
              unnecessary avoidance by responding only to the most threatening predatory
              individuals.  Chemical cues have unique properties that permit this advanced
              risk assessment.  Eastern garter snakes and red-backed salamanders have central
              roles in the woodland communities of northeastern U.S.  Chemical cues from
              garter snakes permit red-backed salamanders to selectively avoid snakes whose
              diets represent significant threat.  The proposed research uses behavioral and
              biochemical assays to:  (1) characterize the chemical mechanism used by
              salamanders to decipher risk based on predator's diet, and (2) isolate and
              describe the active chemical components of the cue.
The focus on individual
              variation in chemical emissions from predators and on how prey detect,
              interpret and possibly manipulate these emissions can lead to new,
              chemosensory-based models of predator-prey interactions.  Knowledge of these
              interactions in northeastern woodlands may also lead to predictions on how
              chemical pollution may impact the ecology of terrestrial
              communities.






