Title       : Molecular Evolution and Adaptation of Microbial Polyketide Biosynthetic
               Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a9974984

Award Number: 9974984
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249897             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose V. Lopez lopez@hboi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harbor Branch Ocean Inst
	      5600 Old Dixie Highway
	      Fort Pierce, FL  349467303    407/465-2400

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lopez

Polyketide (PK) compounds and their biosynthetic enzymes represent
              diverse phenotypes in microorganisms, but the underlying causes for this
              diversity are not completely understood. The major hypothesis of this research
              is that biosynthetic polyketide synthase (PKS) sequence diversity and
              "programming" is driven by positive diversifying selection and accounts for the
              majority of polyketide metabolite diversity observed in nature.  A comparative
              bioinformatics approach will be implemented to achieve the following
              objectives: a) Infer the secondary and higher order enzyme structures of
              published PKS  loci, such as those coding for erythromycin, rapamicin, and
              rifamycin by comparisons with fatty acid synthases (FAS) or by using
              bioinformatics software such as FIREBIRD; b)  Compare sequences and predicted
              enzyme structures of "paralogous" modules (within a single PK pathway) and
              correlate these with corresponding PK metabolite or PK intermediates and infer
              possibility of gene duplications; c) Compare orthologous (between different
              bacteria and different pathways) PKS enzyme module sequences and structures to
              obtain correlations with PK metabolite end products and also to investigate the
              possibility and frequency of horizontal gene transfer; d) If PKS structures
              appear structurally homologous, determine specific residues and codons in
              primary sequences which are pivotal for structural determination, while if
              structures are not homologous, investigate how active centers remain
              functional, and why they are conserved, using data on predicted structural
              conformations; e) Determine whether codons and residues which appear pivotal
              for structure determination and overall enzyme function are positively selected
              (to preserve analogous/homologous structures or function); f)  Isolate several
              new or longer PKS gene sequence segments from marine microbes previously
              characterized from the HBOI collection.  Through these analyses, a model of
              molecular adaptation based on the evolution of PKS enzyme sequence, structure,
              and function will be formulated and integrated with the biosynthesis of the
              ultimate phenotypic products (PK metabolites). 


Public Impact

Nature
              manifests its diversity at numerous levels, with one being the biochemical
              diversity of natural products.   Understanding the fundamental bases of this
              diversity, at cellular, genetic and molecular levels, will facilitate the
              harnessing of natural products, such as polyketide antibiotics, for practical
              purposes. However a large knowledge gap exists between genetic sequence data
              and their phenotypes, the physical expression of genes, which this research
              aims to fill.  Still, molecular sequence information can be used for tracking
              the evolutionary history, inferring molecular structures and obtaining the
              contemporary ecological context of certain genes coding for polyketide natural
              products. Moreover, despite the many natural compounds with therapeutic
              potential that have been discovered, the supply of those products is often less
              than optimal.   This research can have a direct impact on polyketide supply
              issues since the target of study are the genes involved in the biosynthesis of
              polyketide compounds.  





