Title       : Achieving Molecular Level Control over the Chemical, Electrochemical, and
               Electrical Properties of Crystalline Si Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a9974562

Award Number: 9974562
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan S. Lewis nslewis@its.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9197,AMPP,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Professor Nathan S. Lewis and his coworkers at the
              California Institute of Technology are investigating the surface chemistry of
              crystalline silicon surfaces.  The emphasis in this work is on the wet chemical
              processing of silicon surfaces, with the goal of developing methods to suppress
              oxidation of silicon in the electrochemical environment, to control the
              formation of dielectric and barrier layers on the silicon surface, and to
              attach redox active groups to the surface in controlled geometries.  Work is
              also underway to explore the attachment and formation of patterned layers of
              nanoscale materials to the modified silicon surface.  The work builds on
              halogenation/alkylation chemistry developed in the Principal Investigator's
              laboratory and will impact the use of silicon in solar cell applications, the
              basic understanding of electron transfer at interfaces, and the development of
              silicon based-sensor devices.  Applications of this work to controlled
              electroplating and electrocatalysis are also expected. 

The control of the
              surface chemistry of crystalline silicon surfaces is the goal of this research
              project supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program.  Wet
              chemical processing methods based on halogenation and subsequent alkylation of
              the silicon surface are used to passivate and modify the silicon surface, and
              to controllably deposit nanometer sized particles on the silicon surface.  This
              work will impact broad areas of surface and analytical chemistry, including the
              development of sensor devices, the conversion of solar energy, and the metallic
              coating of semiconductor surfaces. 


