Title       : Hierarchical Length-Scale Influence on Crack Propagation in In-Situ
               Microlamellar Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2001      
File        : a9974013

Award Number: 9974013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vinayak P. Dravid v-dravid@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9974013
Dravid

Fracture of materials presents a classic
              microstructure-property correlation problem wherein crack propagation is
              affected by virtually all microstructural length-scales: from intricate atomic
              bonding at interfaces to the geometry of crack trajectory to the interfaces. 
              Fracture of ceramic microlamellar composites (microlaminates) is no exception,
              and the this project addresses the complex interplay between two extremes of
              microstructural length-scales: macroscopic residual stress and nanoscale
              interfacial phenomena.  This research project builds on prior work that
              provided insight into interface atomic structure and development of
              tools/techniques for analysis of microstructure and residual stresses in
              microlamellar directionally solidified eutectics (DSEs) of model oxide systems,
              e.g., nickel oxide-cubic zirconia.  DSEs present a uniform microstructure of
              alternate single-crystal lamellae of the two phases (~ 1-2 micrometer thick)
              with well-defined orientation relations between the two phases.  At the
              macroscopic length-scale, the sign, magnitude, and location of residual
              stresses in DSEs in the nickel oxide-zirconia system ill be altered by changing
              the thermal expansion coefficient of nickel oxide by forming solid solution
              series with cobalt oxide and manganese oxide, as well as that of cubic zirconia
              by using various stabilizers (yttria and calcia) and their amount within the
              cubic phase field.  Nanoscale tailoring of DSEs will be achieved by selective
              chemical reduction of nickel oxide/cobalt oxide materials under reducing
              atmosphere at appropriate temperature and duration. The partially reduced oxide
              DSEs would then contain thin (1-50 nm) metallic layers sandwiched between
              brittle doped nickel oxide and cubic zirconia phases. The success and efficacy
              of the microstructural tailoring approach will be evaluated by extensive
              characterization including atomic-scale imaging, spectroscopy, relative
              interface energies, to determination of residual stress tensor via single
              crystal x-ray diffraction and object oriented finite element simulations. The
              phenomenology of crack propagation behavior across tailored DSEs will be probed
              to assess the influence of residual stresses, interfacial phenomena and their
              possible synergy.  Real-space, real-time and high resolution observations of
              crack trajectory via in-situ SEM and TEM straining are proposed that will be
              greatly facilitated by the new development in site-specific microfabrication by
              focused ion beam technique.  The probable complex interplay among residual
              stresses, elastic mismatch, interface structure and crystallographic anisotropy
              in DSEs will be analyzed in the context of analytical, phenomenological and
              theoretical models of crack propagation across microlaminates. 
%%%
The
              proposed research is expected to provide considerable insight into the
              influence of microstructural length-scales on crack propagation behavior in
              microlaminate composites, with considerable implications for many other
              materials systems that exhibit length-scale interplay among microstructural
              constituents.  The PI has extensive collaborations with researchers both here
              in the US and in Europe.  The students working on this project will have a
              chance to work in the laboratories of these collaborators.
*** 

