Title       : INTEGRATING TEACHING AND RESEARCH FOR CHEMICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS IN
               APPALACHIA AND THE SOUTHEAST
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a9974734

Award Number: 9974734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2692098            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelsey D. Cook kcook@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel D. Gilman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Q. Chambers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Sepaniak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1990      CHEMISTRY EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 1363,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Chemistry of the University of Tennessee, Knoxville, is
              supported by the Division of Chemistry and the Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities of the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences under the
              "Research Sites for Educators in Chemistry" program.  Dr. Kelsey D. Cook is the
              Principal Investigator, and there are three co-Principal Investigators. 
              Several primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) that have already developed
              active programs of undergraduate chemical research are designated as "partner
              PUIs."  This award will facilitate cooperative arrangements between the
              University, the Partner PUIs and a number of other PUIs located in Appalachia
              and elsewhere in the Southeast.  Faculty members in chemistry, biology, and
              other environmentally-related fields at participating PUIs will be eligible to
              apply for fellowships.  These fellowships will enable them to spend one
              semester in residence at the University, one semester at one of the partner
              PUIs, and one summer in full-time research, either at the University, at Oak
              Ridge National Laboratory, or in the laboratories of certain "industrial
              partners."  While in residence at the University and at the partner PUI, each
              fellow will participate in teaching, typically one course a semester.  The
              program will be enhanced by a partnership with the Appalachian College
              Association, which will assist in locating candidates.  Industrial partners
              will provide participants with industrial research workshops and/or
              internships.

Research Sites for Educators in Chemistry (RSEC) bring together
              the faculty of participating two-year colleges, baccalaureate colleges, and
              master's universities with faculty at research universities within a geographic
              region to enhance the research and educational opportunities at all
              participating institutions.  Academic and research institutions provide
              abundant opportunities where individuals may concurrently assume
              responsibilities as researchers, educators, and students, and where all can
              engage in joint efforts that infuse education with the excitement of discovery
              and enrich research through the diversity of learner perspectives.  RSECs such
              as this one at the University of Tennessee provide mechanisms for disseminating
              the knowledge, skills, practices and ethics of research to a broader community,
              including those from underrepresented groups; assist in developing viable,
              sustainable research programs at participating institutions; and involve
              faculty and students at the participating institutions with a broader
              cross-section of faculty and students.

