Title       : Next Generation Software: Supporting Complex Application Requirements in
               Metasystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a9974968

Award Number: 9974968
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $999930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marty A. Humphrey humphrey@cs.virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew S. Grimshaw  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 2884      NEXT GENERATION SOFTWARE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2884,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               
EIA-9974968
Grimshaw, Andrew S.
University of Virginia

Next Generation
              Software: Supporting Complex Application Requirements in Metasystems  

The
              proposed work addresses two critical problems facing metasystems applications
              designers: a lack of a sufficient set of tools by which to structure their
              applications, predict performance, and make scheduling decisions; and a lack of
              application-level fault-tolerance techniques.  This proposal will address these
              problems by building upon our past experiences with Legion, which is an
              architecture for designing and building system services that provides to users
              the illusion of a single virtual machine with secure shared objects and shared
              name spaces.  The single virtual machine may consist of hundreds of distributed
              and heterogeneous resources in multiple administration domains.

IDAEMA
              (Integrated Design, Analysis, and Execution of Metasystems Applications) is a
              multi-stage advice and performance prediction tool for metasystems.  During
              application design, IDAEMA uses a library of cataloged research results based
              on application characteristics and high-level application requirements to
              provide analysis and advice regarding how to structure the program.  This
              advice provides multiple views that describe the implications of design choices
              on application requirements, software engineering costs, and predicted
              performance-from advice in how to get started programming in a metasystems
              environment to code templates and existing components upon which to base the
              functionality of the application.  At run-time, IDAEMA uses static and dynamic
              information about the hardware and software of the target metasystem in
              combination with the application user's security, fault-tolerance,
              predictability and cost requirements to provide assistance and performance
              prediction at multiple levels of abstraction and resolution.  Our approach to
              fault-tolerance is based upon our use of the RFE model (Reflective Graph and
              Event) and the conviction that no single fault-tolerance mechanism is
              appropriate for all applications.  Instead application must be free to use a
              variety of different techniques, all in the same system.  RGE provides a
              flexible, configurable mechanism for attaching arbitrary computation in the
              form of program graphs to events.  Exoevents, Exoevent Interests, and Exoevent
              Interest Sets are used to dynamically configure application-specific
              fault-tolerance techniques.  Together, these two components provide new
              flexibility and predictability for metasystems application development and
              execution.  IDAEMA and the RGE model are validated through proposed
              modifications to Legion in combination with collaborators at NPACI site
              developing applications that include a coupled ocean-climate model and a
              full-scale simulation of an integrated system for intelligent processing of
              materials.







