Title       : The International Monetary Fund and the Post-Communist Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9974663

Award Number: 9974663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145270             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall W. Stone stnr@troi.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Critics and proponents of the International Monetary Fund attribute to it a
              great deal of influence over the economic strategies of post-Communist
              countries; yet, both qualitative and quantitative studies of the role of the
              Fund in the developing world suggest that its influence is actually quite
              limited.  Is the IMF capable of filling the role of manager of the
              post-Communist transition, a sort of central bank of last resort that lends
              credibility to economic reform policies, or is this role too ambitious to
              assign to a politicized international organization?  The objective of this
              project is to address this question by advancing the theoretical and empirical
              frontiers of our understanding of the politics of adjustment lending.
	This
              project provides a unique combination of research methods:  formal,
              game-theoretic modeling, quantitative empirical analysis, and detailed
              qualitative research in four countries.  The combination of diverse
              methodologies strengthens each:  theory becomes empirically informed and
              relevant, quantitative tests become more precise and better specified, and
              qualitative research becomes theory-driven.
	The project starts with a
              coherent theory of why the IMF might be able to influence economic policies, as
              embodied in a game-theoretic model.  The model embeds the interaction between a
              borrowing government and the Fund in an infinite repeated non-cooperative game
              between the government and a market.  The Fund has influence in the model
              because it can help uncoordinated market actors to coordinate on equilibrium
              strategies that create incentives for governments to practice fiscal and
              monetary restraint.  The model incorporates dynamic political constraints,
              institutional differences between countries, and the political influence of the
              borrowers on the Executive Board of the IMF.
	The second stage of the project
              involves detailed historical research on the relations between the IMF and
              Russia, Ukraine, Poland, and Bulgaria.  Tracing out the process by which
              agreements are negotiated and implemented and assessing the impact of
              elections, institutional variations across countries, and interference by
              advanced industrial countries help to establish a prima facie case for (or
              against) the external validity of the model.  At the same time, this
              qualitative research guards against the danger of overlooking essential
              variables, since much of the research consists of interviews with participants
              who have their own theories about how events unfold.
	The third stage is an
              extensive effort to gather data and analyze them using new methods developed
              specifically for testing game-theoretic models.  Two new, cross-sectional
              time-series datasets are developed.  One covers the 27 post-Communist countries
              that have borrowed from the IMF using monthly data between 1990 and 1998.  The
              second is a global dataset that covers 104 countries and uses monthly data for
              the period from 1972 to 1998.  Each of these datasets is much more detailed and
              extensive than any that have been used to assess the effectiveness of IMF
              intervention in the past, and each incorporates a wider array of economic and
              political variables.  The datasets are made publicly available, and represent a
              significant scholarly resource.
	 

