Title       : AMS Dating and Agricultural Development in the Central Plains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9974895

Award Number: 9974895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13935              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary J. Adair   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Mary Adair will obtain 40 AMS
              radiocarbon dates on food plants recovered from 11 archaeological sites within
              the central Plains of North America. Because only small amounts of carbon are
              necessary, the AMS technique permits dating of plant fragments themselves
              rather than adjacent charcoal which may, or may not be chronologically
              associated. The project is part of Dr. Adair's ongoing research into the
              development of agriculture in the region. The sites to be dated range in age
              from late Archaic (ca. 1500-700 BC) to plains villages (ca. AD 900-1400) are
              located within the eastern portion of the central Plains. The cultigens to be
              dated include curcubit (squash), common bean, marshelder, sunflower and maize.
              Direct dates will help establish a temporal and spatial pattern for the
              emergence of agriculture in an area of North America where extremely little
              data is available. Understanding the ways in which domesticated plants
              contributed to the diet and lifestyle of prehistoric central Plains populations
              must begin with an undisputed association of when, where and what crops were
              grown. A sequence of direct dates on cultigens from sites that span a spatial
              and temporal dimension will go far in helping to establish how and when
              agriculture developed. Such patterns become more obvious with a substantial
              number of direct dates on a variety of domesticates.

Archaeologists who wish
              to understand the rise of complex societies know that domesticated plants and
              animals provide the subsistence base on which civilization arose. Ethnohistoric
              data indicate that at the time of European contact in North America, Middle
              American domesticates such as maize, squash and beans formed a central triad
              and were cultivated in most areas with appropriate soil and climatic
              conditions. However recent evidence has shown a complicated picture. First,
              these important plants were preceded by local domesticates such as marshelder
              and sunflower; this means that the shift from hunting and gathering to
              agriculture resulted from local processes and not diffusion. Secondly, no neat
              one to one correlation exists between the development of agriculture and social
              complexity and groups can practice cultivation for centuries without
              significant changes in lifestyle. While much data is available for the
              Southeast and Southwestern portions of the US, relatively little is known about
              the central Plains and this area is of particular interest because it lies
              outside the hearths of primary domestication. The chronology provided by this
              award will establish a framework for understanding agriculture in this
              region.


