Title       : Structural Basis for Electron Transfer between the Bacterial Reaction Center and
               Cytochrome C2 in Rhodobacter Sphaeroides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2001      
File        : a9974568

Award Number: 9974568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melvin Y. Okamura mokamura@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Okamura
MCB 9974568

The aim of this research is to determine the molecular
              basis for  the  electron transfer reaction between  cytochrome c2 and the
              bacterial reaction center (RC).  These studies will build upon recent advances
              in the x-ray co-crystal structure of the cytochrome c2/RC complex that show the
              cytochrome to be docked on the RC through a hydrophobic contact region forming
              a direct electron transfer pathway between heme and bacteriochlorophyll
              cofactors.  The questions to be addressed concern the structure of the complex
              between the RC and cytochrome c2 and the mechanism of interprotein electron
              transfer. Site directed mutations on both RC and cytochrome will be constructed
              and the effects of these mutations on  binding and rates of electron transfer
              will be determined.   The effects of the mutations on the binding of the
              cytochrome will be used to give information about the relative importance of
              electrostatic and hydrophobic contributions.  The effects of mutations on the
              collision rate of electron transfer will give information about the
              conformational dynamics involved in the protein association and electron
              transfer.  These studies will also be extended to the effects on the electron
              transfer process in chromatophore membranes in order to explore the relative
              effects of the cytochrome RC interaction in modulating the overall efficiency
              of photosynthetic electron transfer. 
	
The membranes of photosynthetic
              bacteria contain the molecular machinery that permits the efficient conversion
              of light energy into chemical energy.   The energy conversion requires a light
              induced charge separation in a protein called the reaction center, followed by
              rapid electron transfer through a chain of electron carriers that are arranged
              to do chemical work by pumping protons across the membrane.   This research is
              aimed at investigating the structural basis for electron transfer to the light
              activated reaction center mediated by cytochrome c2. The reaction between
              cytochrome c2 and the RC in  photosynthetic bacteria displays both a
              specificity in binding and high rate of interprotein electron transfer that are
               necessary to maintain a fast  electron transfer through the electron transfer
              chain.  These studies of the binding and electron transfer reactions between
              cytochrome c2 and the bacterial RC  should provide the  basis for understanding
              the energy conversion process in photosynthesis.


