Title       : Acquisition of a Circular Dichroism Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9974679

Award Number: 9974679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78589              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry W. McLaughlin larry.mclaughlin@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary F. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Clarke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Evan R. Kantrowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Armstrong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities
              (CRIF) Program, the Department of Chemistry at Boston College will purchase a
              circular dichroism spectrometer.  This instrument will be used for
              characterizing macromolecules and small molecules in solution.  Specifically,
              the investigators will carry out investigations in a number of areas, including
              a) recognition and catalytic processes of nucleic acids; b) mimicking
              photosystem (II) water oxidase; c) dinitrogen fixation catalysts; d) metal
              binding peptides as models for metalloenzymes; e) DNA mediated electron
              transfer; f) allosteric regulation of enzymes; g) interfacial activation of
              phospholipases; h) osmoregulation in archaea; i) minimal enzymes for asymmetric
              catalysis; j) conformational control over enantioselectivity; and k) the role
              of protein conformation in amyloidoses.  

Circular dichroism is a broadly
              applicable technique, particularly in the area of bioorganic, bioinorganic and
              biophysical chemistry.  While it does not provide high resolution structural
              data, it can provide vital data related to molecular interactions in chiral
              environments.  It is an especially powerful tool in the analysis of the
              chiroptical and secondary structural analysis of proteins and nucleis acids. 
              


