Title       : PIR Classification Database for Genomic Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1999 
File        : a9974855

Award Number: 9974855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283147             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cathy H. Wu   (Principal Investigator current)
              Winona C. Barker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Biomedical Res Found
	      3900 Reservoir Rd NW
	      Washington, DC  200072187    202/687-2121

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
DBI 9974855; Wu, Cathy. National Biomedical Research Foundation. PIR
              Classification Database for Genomic Research

Project Summary


As
              molecular sequence data continue to grow exponentially due to the Human Genome
              Project and other similar large sequencing projects, gaining a full
              understanding of the genome has become a great challenge in computational
              molecular biology. Advanced databases are needed to facilitate the retrieval of
              relevant information from the voluminous data and to provide insight into
              protein structure and function. The major objective of this research is to
              develop a prototype relational classification database that will provide an
              integrated platform for describing comprehensive family relationships and
              structural and functional features of proteins. The database will combine the
              classification schemes of several widely used sequence, structure, and function
              databases, allowing users to retrieve conveniently displayed summaries for any
              given sequence and to query for sequences and families with selected
              properties. The database itself will be automatically generated from the source
              databases and updated frequently. For complete and non-overlapping placement of
              all proteins, the PIR superfamily/family classification will be used as the
              underlying organization scheme. The basic superfamily entity will have
              attributes such as membership, annotation, and relationship to families,
              domains, and motifs defined by other classification schemes. In addition, a
              supplementary motif collection will be compiled to provide flexible and
              diagnostic patterns for functional and structural motifs not found in other
              motif databases. The proposed research will build upon and extend from our
              current databases. The ORACLE relational implementation will support database
              queries for asking questions concerning combinations of attributes for protein
              sequences or families and their relationships. Users will be able to perform
              sequence searches, query against the databases, and offer feedback information.
              The report will include graphical displays of features and relationships, as
              well as hypertext links to underlying databases. The framework of the proposed
              classification database has several features. The PIR superfamily is the only
              existing classification scheme supporting inclusive and unique clustering of
              all proteins, which is a prerequisite for complete database organization. The
              design supports genomic annotation based on global and motif sequence
              similarities, as well as sequence annotation. Each superfamily record in the
              classification database will document family relationships and features more
              comprehensively than any other single information resource. This database will
              be both a very useful tool for researchers and a prototype for construction of
              a more extensive database that includes more types of information and
              connections to additional structure and function classification databases. The
              classification database will be a significant informational resource to assist
              the identification of new genomic sequences, the inference of new biological
              knowledge, and the improvement of database integrity.



