Title       : Characterization of the Role of PSF During pre-mRNA Splicing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2001     
File        : a9974542

Award Number: 9974542
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Patton James.G.Patton@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James G. McAfee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Patton, James G.
NSF MCB-9974542
Abstract

Characterization of the Role of
              PSF During pre-mRNA Splicing.

        PTB-Associated Splicing Factor (PSF)
              is a 100kD RNA binding protein
that was originally identified based on its
              co-purification with
Polypyrimidine Tract Binding Protein (PTB or hnRNP I). 
              Depletion of PSF
from splicing extracts causes a block to the second step of
              splicing which
can be rescued by the addition of recombinant PSF suggesting
              that PSF is an
essential second step splicing factor.  To further characterize
              PSF, a
series of experiments have been performed to analyze its RNA
              binding
specificity and identify protein-protein interaction partners. 
              Preliminary
results suggest that PSF binds to a phylogenetically conserved
              stem
structure within U5 snRNA (stem 1b).  One of the goals of this project
              is
to determine the affinity of PSF for RNAs encompassing one or both
              strands
of stem 1b followed by direct analysis of PSF-U5 interaction and
              mapping of
the exact binding site for PSF on U5.  From mutational analyses, it
              appears
that the sequence of stem 1b is important not only for the formation
              of the
stem itself, but also as a binding site for a specific protein(s). 
              These
results suggest that PSF binds to stem 1b of U5 and that disruption
              of
PSF-U5 interaction results in a block to the second step of splicing. 
              To
directly test this hypothesis, a series of quantitative PSF-U5 RNA
              binding
assays will be performed using fluorescence spectroscopy followed by
              a
functional in vitro assay in which U5 snRNA will be depleted from
              splicing
extracts and then reconstituted with either wild type or mutated U5
              snRNAs.
This will allow us to test the effects of specific U5 mutations on
              both
splicing and PSF binding.  These experiments will be complemented by
              in
vivo analyses following the creation of cell lines in which both alleles
              of
PSF are disrupted and replaced by an inducible PSF transgene.  Thus, all
              U5
snRNA mutations that disrupt PSF binding will be tested for their
              effects
on splicing both in vitro and in vivo.
        Expression of most
              higher eukaryotic genes requires that
intervening sequences (introns) be
              efficiently and accurately excised to
allow translation of functional
              proteins.  Removal of introns occurs in two
steps within the spliceosome, a
              large complex containing multiple protein
and protein-RNA complexes.  Among
              the best characterized of the spliceosome
components are the small nuclear
              RNAs (snRNAs) U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6,
which play central roles both in
              spliceosome assembly and catalysis.  Much
less is known about the protein
              components of the spliceosome although
several factors have been identified,
              particularly those required for the
first step of splicing.  In contrast, the
              identification and functional
characterization of proteins required for the
              second step of splicing has
lagged considerably, particularly in higher
              eukaryotes.  The broad goals of
this project seek to increase knowledge about
              the second step of splicing
in humans and determine whether association of PSF
              with U5 snRNA is
essential for this process.



