Title       : Conference: 1999 CSHL Meeting on Programmed Cell Death to be held on September
               29-October 3, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9974163

Award Number: 9974163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Apoptosis, or programmed cell death, plays an important role in normal
              development,  tissue homeostasis, and in various diseases.  Apoptosis occurs by
              activating an intrinsic cell suicide program which is constitutively expressed
              in most animal cells, and key components of this program have been conserved in
              evolution from worms to insects to man.  In recent years, many gene products
              controlling programmed cell death have been identified, and the biochemical
              pathways they regulate have begun to emerge.  Studies in invertebrates and
              mammals with loss-of-function or gain-of-function of these genes has
              demonstrated the role program cell death plays in development, physiology, and
              disease.  Researchers in this field of apopotosis are a diverse group with
              interests including developmental biology, biochemistry and cell cycle control.
              The objective of this conference is to bring together researchers working in
              these diverse aspects of programmed cell death.  The meeting includes lectures
              and poster sessions, with participation by junior scientists.  The aim is to
              create an environment suitable for the exchange of information and ideas which
              will foster the advancement of the field in the identification of the
              biochemical and molecular events controlling apoptosis.
