Title       : Nonlinear Excitations in Low-Dimensional Magnets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2001       
File        : a9974273

Award Number: 9974273
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217298             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Drumheller drumheller@physics.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig Zaspel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9974273
Drumheller
This project will investigate nonlinear excitations in
              low-dimensional magnets.  During the onset of magnetic ordering in
              lower-dimensional magnetic systems, the correlation length increases as the
              critical temperature is approached from above.  In this temperature region
              where the correlation length is finite, nonlinear localized excitations
              (solitons) have been experimentally observed in layered manganese systems.  It
              has further been observed that these excitations provide the dominant
              contribution to the spin correlations as observed through the
              temperature-dependent electron spin resonance linewidth.  In addition, a new
              type of small soliton pinned to a magnetic vacancy has also been observed.  In
              the proposed research, solitons will be studied through resonance techniques to
              better understand the magnetic ordering process in layered systems.  Two main
              thrusts will include an investigation of discrete lattice effects, and quantum
              effects in solitons.  Usually, soliton calculations are done using the
              continuum approximation, which ignores the discrete lattice.  However, because
              this approximation is no longer valid in part of the temperature region of
              interest, the soliton structure on the discrete lattice will be determined. 
              The quantum nature of the vacancy-pinned small soliton will also be studied. 
              This will be done experimentally through the introduction of a highly quantum
              magnetic impurity, such as copper, into the lattice.

This project will have
              a broad impact in the area of  education.  A graduate student will do a large
              part of the experimental research, and the discrete lattice theory is well
              suited to undergraduate research.  All of the systems to be studied are layered
              manganese compounds, a class of compounds for which giant magnetoresistance
              (GMR) has been observed.  For potential device applications, it is crucial to
              have knowledge of the magnetic ordering process in these layered structures. 
              

