Title       : Control of Hypocotyl Elongation by Blue Light in Arabidopsis Seedlings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a9974585

Award Number: 9974585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edgar P. Spalding spalding@wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

A detailed description of the mechanisms plants use to sense and respond to
              their light environment is necessary for a complete understanding of plant
              development, which is important to those concerned with the practical uses of
              plants in agriculture and biotechnology.  The activities funded by this award
              will provide molecular-level details about how the blue region of the light
              spectrum exerts its profound effects on Arabidopsis seedling growth and
              development.  The mutants to be employed have lesions in genes that are
              believed to encode light receptors, such as the cryptochromes (CRY1 and CRY2)
              and photokinase (NPH1).  By measuring the growth responses to blue light of the
              mutant seedlings with high resolution, and comparing them to the wild type,
              details will be learned about how the photoreception mechanism operates. 
              Plants containing mutations in more than one photoreceptor will also be created
              and studied.  This comparative kinetic analysis of the growth responses to blue
              light will indicate when a particular photoreceptor begins to exert its effect.
               Such information on timing will enable a very focused genomics-based search
              for genes that are turned on or off by biochemical pathways emanating from the
              various genetically-identified blue light receptors to cause the growth
              responses.  This aspect of the project will employ microarrays of DNA on chips
              that represent the Arabidopsis genome.  Once such blue-light regulated genes
              are identified, studies of their properties and functions will be initiated so
              that the signaling pathway becomes known at the molecular level.  It is
              expected that the molecular details of light-signaling pathways will be an
              important component of the knowledge base that will support plant technologies
              of the future.  The research supported by this award will also impact education
              through the involvement of postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate
              students.

