Title       : The Role of Zeste White 3 Kinase in Wg Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a9974657

Award Number: 9974657
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Esther Siegfried exs19@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    Wingless (Wg) is a member of the Wnt family of conserved secreted
growth
              factors which are essential for the normal growth and
differentiation of both
              invertebrates and vertebrates.  A common signaling
pathway has been identified
              for both Wg and Wnt signaling.  One key
component of the signaling pathway is
              Zeste White 3 (Zw3), the Drosophila
homolog of Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3
              (GSK-3), a serine threonine protein
kinase, which acts antagonistically to Wg.
               It has been suggested that Wg
signaling is mediated by inactivation of Zw3
              kinase.  The long term goal of
this proposal is to further our understanding
              of the activity of Zw3 in
vivo, and the mechanism of regulation by Wg
              signaling.  Dr. Siegfried will take
advantage of the powerful techniques
              available in Drosophila, and take a
combined approach of molecular biology,
              biochemistry and genetics.
        Her preliminary studies have demonstrated
              that over-expression of
Zw3 leads to a block in the endogenous Wg signaling
              pathway, suggesting
that high levels of Zw3 can saturate the normal mechanism
              of Wg regulation.
What this mechanism is remains unclear.  However, the fact
              that expression
of rat GSK-3b can rescue zw3 mutant embryos indicates that
              this mechanism
is shared between Zw3 and GSK-3b.  In an effort to identify
              shared regions
of potential regulation, she has determined the phylogenetic
              relationship
between Zw3, vertebrate GSK-3b and vertebrate GSK-3a, a closely
              related
protein to GSK-3b which, nonetheless, is unable to rescue zw3
              mutant
embryos.  These analyses have suggested that the amino terminal domain
              of
Zw3 and seven residues within the kinase domain which are conserved
              between
GSK-3b and Zw3, but differ from GSK-3a, may be important for
              normal
activity in vivo.
        She proposea to test this hypothesis by site
              directed mutagenesis and
expression of mutant proteins to determine critical
              residues for catalytic
activity and regulation.  These mutant forms of Zw3
              will be expressed in
transgenic flies and activity of mutant proteins will be
              assayed by the
ability to rescue zw3 mutant embryos and for retention of Wg
              regulation.
The mutant forms of Zw3 will be also tested in cultured imaginal
              disc cells
which are Wg sensitive and recapitulate the modulation of Armadillo
              seen in
vivo.  She will determine the kinase activity of mutant proteins, test
              if
they can modulate Armadillo protein levels in vivo, and determine
              their
sub-cellular localization.  Finally, she will design genetic screens
              to
identify second site suppressors or enhancers of a Zw3
              over-expression
phenotype which should identify proteins which interact with
              Zw3, including
novel components of Wg signaling.


