Title       : New Developments in Algebraic K-Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9974303

Award Number: 9974303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Brian Conrey conrey@aimath.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Inst of Math
	      360 Portage Avenue
	      Palo Alto, CA  943062244    650/845-2065

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract for "New Developments in Algebraic K-Theory"

This project
              concerns the algebraic K-theory of fields.  In the last two years, V. Voevodsky
              has revolutionized algebraic K-theory with the methods he uses in his proof of
              the Milnor conjecture.  The methods he has developed suggest a program which
              will be developed over the next few years to understand algebraic K-theory
              through a so-called stable homotopy category of algebraic varieties.  Using his
              methods, it has been possible to verify the Quillen Lichtenbaum conjecture in
              some cases, notably for number fields at the prime two.  Part of this project
              is to continue this work, some joint with M. Rost, to prove this conjecture in
              a larger number of cases.  G. Carlsson has developed a revised version of the
              Quillen Lichtenbaum conjecture, which should explicitly identify all homotopy
              groups of the algebraic K-theory spectra, not only the high dimensional ones as
              in the original conjecture. This version involves the representation theory of
              the absolute Galois group, rather than just the Galoios cohomology. The second
              goal of this project is to understand the relationship between The two
              constructions, in the hopes that Voevodsky's method might prove the revised
              conjecture, or that Carlsson's method will shed light on the general
              relationship between Voevodsky's work and the Quilen Lichtenbaum
              conjecture.

Algebraic K-theory is a relatively new subject in mathematics,
              which promises to relate two seemingly very disparate areas, namely topology
              (the study of curves and surfaces and their deformations),  and the very
              classical area of number theory, which studies the properties of the integers
              and equations over the integers.  Algebraic K-theory, which is defined
              topologically, appears to carry with it a great deal of arithmetic information.
               Two important conjectures concerning this relationship are the Quillen
              Lichtenbaum conjecture and the Bloch-Kato conjecture.  V. Voevodsky has
              revolutionized this area over the last two or three years with his breakthrough
              work on both conjectures.  This project will be devoted to developing this work
              further, by having Voevodsky and Rost continue their work on the Bloch-Kato
              conjecture, and by connecting Voevodsky's methods with a revised, stronger
              version of the Quillen Lichtenbaum conjecture proposed by Carlsson.  In the
              long run, solutions to these problems have the potential to help us study the
              sets of solutions in the integers of algebraic equations, such as the famous
              Fermat equation.

