Title       : Intraurban Settlement Patterns and Adaptation of China's Rural Migrants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a9974540

Award Number: 9974540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104342             (Estimated)
Investigator: Weiping Wu wwu@vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The settlement patterns and adaptation process of temporary rural migrants in
              China's urban settings are the focus of this research.  Specifically, the study
              will examine the institutional factors and individual-level determinants of
              migrant housing settlement and the impact of residential patterns on migrant
              adaptation.  Close attention is paid to the role of housing and land markets in
              the process of migrant settlement, in the context of a rapidly urbanizing
              society undergoing transition from a planned to a market economy.  Data are
              primarily drawn from new fieldwork of citywide migrant surveys, in-depth
              interviews and focused observation in Beijing and Shanghai, supplemented by
              official survey results.  The study will use several reference groups in
              measuring levels of adaptation.  Temporary rural migrants will be compared with
              temporary migrants from urban origin, and with permanent migrants as well as
              urban residents, along such indicators as employment, income, housing, urban
              living, and access to urban amenities.  A comparison of the two cities ensures
              that institutional factors are uncovered as Beijing and Shanghai differ
              significantly in their physical, cultural and policy environment.  By
              theorizing the relationship between housing and adaptation, this research
              promises an important extension to migrant adaptation theories.  Housing is
              seen as an environment in which rural migrants make their adjustments to urban
              life, and residential patterns and outcomes are assessed to reflect their
              socioeconomic standing.  The key contribution of the research is in the area of
              changing urban identity and segregation.  Collaboration with Chinese
              researchers and institutions is an essential part of this research.

China's
              temporary rural migrants settle and adapt to urban life in cities in many
              different ways.  This study examines how the unique institutional factors in
              China, such as housing market mechanism and urban welfare system, influence
              migrants' choices of housing and urban living.  Housing also is seen as an
              environment in which rural migrants make their adjustments in cities, and
              residential patterns are assessed to reflect their socioeconomic standing. 
              Linking housing and adaptation, this research adds to the understanding of how
              urban segregation and marginalization occur.  While some migrants gradually
              adjust to urban life or choose to preserve rural linkages, others may have no
              choice but to become the first of an emerging group of poor in spatially
              segregated cities.

