Title       : MAP Kinase in Plant Disease Resistance Signaling Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9974796

Award Number: 9974796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shuqun Zhang zhangsh@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation play important roles in plant
              disease resistance at multiple steps from the perception of invading pathogens
              to the activation of plant defense responses.  WIPK, a tobacco
              mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) is activated during resistance
              responses initiated by either non-host specific elicitors or 'gene-for-gene'
              interactions.  Furthermore, induction of WIPK mRNA and protein occur
              systemically and correlates with the establishment of systemic acquired
              resistance (SAR).  Extensive recent research in yeast and animals demonstrated
              that MAPK cascades are major pathways that transduce extracellular stimuli,
              including various stresses, into cellular responses.  In contrast to all other
              characterized MAPKs that pre-exist in cells and require only phosphorylation
              activation, WIPK activation requires both post-translational phosphorylation
              and a preceding gene transcription and de novo synthesis of WIPK protein.  Very
              interestingly, the activation of WIPK gene is mediated by H2O2, another
              important signaling molecule in plant defense responses.
The goal of this
              project is to functionally define the role(s) of WIPK in both local and
              systemic resistance.  A combination of molecular, biochemical and genetic
              approaches will be utilized to address this goal.  To elucidate the function of
              WIPK, the upstream kinase of WIPK, WIPK kinase (WIPKK), that phosphorylates and
              activates WIPK, will be identified. In vivo WIPK activity will then be
              manipulated by overexpressing a constitutively active WIPKK mutant.  The
              phenotypic change of such transgenic plants in response to pathogens or
              elicitors should provide the first functional definition of WIPK.  To
              compliment the "gain-of-function" study, "loss-of-function" transgenic lines
              with suppressed WIPK or WIPKK expression and/or activation will be attempted by
              using anti-sense, co-suppression and overexpression of dominant negative mutant
              kinase.  In addition, orthologs of WIPK and WIPKK in Arabidopsis will be
              identified which will facilitate the isolation of knock-out plants from T-DNA
              insertional mutant pools. 
One practical extension of this work is that the
              identification of an important regulatory component in the plant defense
              signaling pathway may lead to the engineering of crop plants with enhanced
              disease resistance.  The development of such a strategy, which is based on the
              enhancement of the plant's own defenses, is important for sustaining
              agricultural production and improving the quality of our environment.  Insights
              into the WIPK cascade should also provide a basis for (1) studying the
              regulation of plant MAPKs involved in responses to other stresses (e.g. cold,
              salt, and drought) or phytohormones (e.g. ethylene, auxin and ABA), (2)
              comparing stress-activated MAPKs in plants, yeast and mammals, (3) identifying
              unique aspects in the regulation and function of plant MAPKs.  Equally
              important, understanding the role of WIPK, a regulatory component down-stream
              of H2O2, will greatly extend our knowledge about the signaling role of the
              oxidative burst in both local resistance and establishment of SAR.

