Title       : The Genetics of Speciation: The Genetic Architecture of Premating Behaviors in
               the Hawaiian Cricket Genus Laupala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9974844

Award Number: 9974844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $488287             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kerry L. Shaw   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract.	Testing hypotheses about the genetic basis of traits that change
              during speciation and generate biodiversity is the primary goal of this study. 
              The genomic contributions of acoustic communication behaviors involved in mate
              recognition in the cricket genus Laupala will be studied.  Different species of
              Laupala sing distinctively and show species-specific acoustic preferences that
              lead to patterns of interbreeding within species, and thus present a useful
              model for this problem. The acoustic phenotypes of Laupala (both song and
              preference) will be measured and a quantitative trait locus study will be
              undertaken in this recently derived pair of species.  A genomic linkage map
              will be constructed and a large interspecific breeding population will be
              generated to address questions about these traits:  1) do many genes of small,
              additive effect underlie and make directional contributions to the
              interspecific variation in song and in preference between these two species,
              and 2) do the genomic regions affecting song variation also affect acoustic
              preference variation?  	
Behavioral differences may be the primary differences
              between recent species, and yet our understanding of the genetic basis of these
              behaviors lags behind our understanding of other aspects of speciation.  This
              study will begin to change this deficiency.  The present work creates a
              resource for future studies that will integrate candidate loci, such as ion
              channel and biological clock genes, into our linkage map and genetic mapping
              analyses.  Much of the functional coordination between the mating partners
              depends on the expression of biologically timed elements of behavior and
              Laupala provides a useful model to study this observation.  Rhythmic behavior
              extends well beyond interbreeding events and are deployed in many contexts,
              making a substantial contribution to biological diversity.  These diverse
              behaviors may share common mechanical properties and origins.  Changes in the
              rate at which these clocks tick may cause phenomena as diverse as neurological
              disease and variation in speciation and diversification tempos.


