Title       : Bulk/Film Structural Comparison of Chalcogenide Glasses for Waveguide
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a9974129

Award Number: 9974129
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388371             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen A. Cerqua-Richardson kcr@creol.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sudipta Seal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9974129
Cerqua-Richardson

Optical components based on arsenic sulfide
              (As2S3) glasses have been widely used for infrared optical applications since
              the development of these glasses in the late 1960's.  During the past several
              years, As2S3 and related chalcogenide glasses have found use in a variety of
              novel optical components based on bulk, film, or fiber forms. This three year,
              multidisciplinary research project will examine the fundamental structural and
              optical property differences that exist between bulk arsenic-sulfur-selenium
              glasses and the as-deposited glass films as would be used in the multilayer
              thin film waveguides found in integrated optical device systems . The project
              aims to identify the underlying chemical and structural differences in the
              glasses and assess the ramifications of such differences on the optical
              performance of the resulting waveguide.  The structural and compositional
              (including stoichiometric and bonding variations) differences in glass film
              versus parent bulk glass, and how these differences relate to processing
              conditions (melting versus vapor deposition) will be examined.  Surface and
              bulk glass structural tools such as XPS, EXAFS and selected spectroscopic
              techniques will be used to identify differences in structural features.  Film
              deposition conditions, which dictate how structural units form and assemble
              into stable and metastable configurations, will be characterized by Raman
              spectroscopy and other techniques.  The identity of key structural units in
              bulk and film forms of chalcogenide glasses and the role that relative
              differences in unit concentrations play on physical properties (including
              linear and nonlinear optical) will be identified. The stability of as-deposited
              film structure and properties and the role of intrinsic and extrinsic glass
              defects on the glass structure, optical behavior, and stability will be
              determined.  Finally, the structural modification that occurs in glass films
              with light interaction and the impact on glass structure and ultimate device
              optical performance will be investigated.  
%%%
The objective of this project
              is to assess what variation in composition, structure, physical properties, and
              optical performance result when bulk chalcogenide glasses undergo thin film
              processing procedures commonly used in the production of multilayer thin film
              waveguides used in integrated optical device systems.  This project will be
              performed by a Focussed Research Group consisting of an international,
              multidisciplinary team of researchers from the Center for Research and
              Education on Optics and Lasers (CREOL) and the Advanced Materials Processing
              and Analysis Center (AMPAC) at the University of Central Florida, the Center
              for Optics, Photonics and Lasers at the Universite de Laval (Quebec, Canada),
              and the Institut de Chimie de la Matiere Condensee Bordeaux of the Centre
              National de la Recherche Scientifique (Bordeaux, France).  These groups have
              and on-going relationship that will facilitate the faculty and student exchange
              part of the project, further broadening the project's impact on technological
              and educational programs at the participating institutions.
***

