Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Development of New Functional Microbial Based
               Biodegradable Polyesters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a9974598

Award Number: 9974598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Miko Cakmak cakmak@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5940,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9974598
Cakmak

Description:  This award is for support of a joint research
              project by Dr. Miko Cakmak, Department of Polymer Engineering, the University
              of Akron, Akron, Ohio and Dr. Burak Erman, Professor, School of Engineering and
              Natural Sciences at Sabanci University, Istanbul, Turkey and two other Turkish
              scientists.  These four scientists plan to synthesize new biodegradable
              polyesters with advantageous functionalities, to make mechanical and physical
              characterization, and to describe and interpret their properties from a
              molecular point of view. They plan to address the problem in an integrated
              hierarchical approach to connect normally fragmented fields in the study,
              characterization and use of these biopolymers. 

Scope:  This award will
              allow a US scientist to collaborate with three scientists at three Turkish
              institutes.  The research area, the development of biodegradable polyesters, is
              of interest in the United States and in Turkey.  Polymers derived from
              biodegradable or renewable resources are of broad importance, and would have
              many applications.  In this project a group at the Marmara Research Center
              outside Istanbul will produce SCLPHAs `                     cross-linking for
              modifying the properties of the polyesters.  Two groups at Sabanci University
              and Koc University in Istanbul will participate with Dr. Cakmak at Akron in the
              characterization of the samples.  Their work will involve both theoretical and
              experimental techniques.  They will also participate in the processing of
              selected polymers. The P.I. and his collaborators have the complementary
              experience needed to do this research.  This proposal meets the INT objective
              of supporting US-foreign scientific collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.

