Title       : New Developments in Understanding the Amorphous State of Matter Conference, May
               22-27, 1999, Buffalo, NY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9974343

Award Number: 9974343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: John Kieffer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9974343
Kieffer

Evidence for the occurrence of more than one non-crystalline
              modification of a given glass-forming substance is growing.  This phenomenon,
              termed polyamorphism, introduces new perspectives to our perception of the
              amorphous state of matter. It is therefore indicated to conduct an assessment
              of this phenomenon and determine its impact on future directions in glass
              research. To this end, a conference dedicated to this issue will be held, on
              the occasion of the Annual Meeting of the American Crystallographic
              Association, May 22-27, 1999, in Buffalo, NY. The purpose of this conference is
              to critically evaluate the leading findings that suggest polyamorphism, assess
              the importance of this concept, and its implications for design and processing
              of glassy materials. The meeting will also address the new challenges ensue for
              structural characterization, which in this context is facing new challenges. 
              Polyamorphism is a fairly new concept and researchers in this area come from
              various backgrounds, including materials science, condensed matter physics,
              applied mathematics, chemistry, geology, etc.  This diversity is reflected in
              the list of invited speakers.  The invited speakers represent most of the
              researchers from around the world who have conducted pioneering work on this
              subject matter.  The three symposia that comprise this conference are entitled:
               Dynamics at and Below the THz; Alternative Methods for Structural
              Characterization; and Structural Transitions and Poly(a)morphism.  Each of the
              symposia will be led off with 1 or 2 invited talks and then followed by
              contributed papers.  At the end of each day time has been set aside for
              discussion.  The results of this conference will be available as a proceedings.
               
%%%
This conference on polyamorphism in non-crystalline materials will be
              held in conjunction with the annual American Crystallographic Association
              meeting.  The consensus of the scientific community is that our understanding
              about the structure of non-crystalline materials is incomplete.  Recent work by
              a variety of researchers indicates that the several amorphous states, or
              phases, may exist for one material.  This conference will allow researchers to
              compare results of their work and thus enable them to develop new ideas and
              directions for research in glass science and technology.
***

