Title       : Characterization of Fluorescence-Based Bacterial Biosensors that are Responsive
               to Water Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1999      
File        : a9974059

Award Number: 9974059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gwyn A. Beattie gbeattie@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Microbial growth, survival and activity are strongly influenced by environmental
              conditions. Although the average environmental conditions across a given
              habitat can be easily measured, the conditions that are actually sensed by
              bacteria in individual microhabitats are more important to the ecology of the
              bacteria than the average conditions. Currently, there are few environmental
              monitoring tools that function on the scale of a microorganism. The goal of
              this study is to develop a new tool that will allow us to "see a microhabitat
              from a bacterium's perspective." This tool, called a bacteria] biosensor, is a
              bacterium that visibly changes when it senses a particular environmental
              condition. The biosensors that are the focus of this study are bacteria that
              "glow" or fluoresce when they sense limited water availability. This study will
              characterize the range of detection and specificity of several water
              stress-responsive bacterial biosensors that are designed for use on plant
              leaves. This study will also test whether the operating range of these
              biosensors is appropriate for evaluating bacterial exposure to limited water
              availability on plant leaves.

Bacteria on plant leaves are exposed to large
              and frequent changes in environmental conditions, particularly in water
              availability. Understanding the extent to which these bacteria are limited for
              water is crucial to identifying the survival strategies bacteria employ on
              leaves, to identifying the process by which bacteria colonize leaves, and to
              our general understanding of the ecology of these organisms. This information
              will contribute to strategies for maximizing the survival of bacteria
              introduced onto leaves, such as for controlling plant diseases or promoting
              plant growth. Furthermore, demonstrating the effectiveness of these
              water-stress responsive bacterial biosensors will lay the foundation for
              building similar tools to evaluate other microbial habitats, as well as other
              environmental conditions in the leaf surface habitat.

