Title       : Synthesis of Novel Cytotoxic Marine Macrolides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9974384

Award Number: 9974384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Horacio F. Olivo horacio-olivo@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Research Planning Grant is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program.   Prof. Horacio F. Olivo of the University of Iowa will
              synthesize the aglycone moiety of the natural product, callipeltoside, a
              natural product recently isolated from a lithistid sponge.  Callipeltoside is a
              14-membered macrocyclic halogenated lactone.  The synthesis involves
              Cr(II)-mediated coupling of two key fragments, the synthesis of which involves
              whole-cell systems and isolated enzymes.  A biocatalytic method will be used to
              introduce the two stereogenic centers present in the chlorocyclopropane side
              chain.  The non-racemic synthesis of the first intermediate involve the
              desymmetrization of a meso-cyclopropane using an esterase.  The second fragment
              will be prepared via a Baeyer-Villiger oxidation using an engineered Baker's
              yeast.  During the eighteen-month grant period, the PI will prepare these two
              key intermediates in racemic form and investigate their chemistry.  He will
              investigate stereo- and regio-controlled ring openings of bicyclic oxiranes
              derived from cyclopentadiene to provide new methods for the elaboration of
              substituted hemiketal oxane rings.  Prof. Olivo will also explore the use of
              palladium and chromium coupling reactions in an effort to develop new synthetic
              methods.  

Most of the 2500 naturally occurring organohalogen compounds
              known have had their structure elucidated in the last decade and a half. 
              Several cytotoxic and/or antitumor macrolides have been encountered in marine
              sponges.  One form of callipeltoside appears promising as an anti-HIV agent and
              as a chemotherapeutic agent.  


