Title       : Function and Diversity of Molluscan FREPs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a9974930

Award Number: 9974930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320107             (Estimated)
Investigator: Coenraad M. Adema coenadem@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The systems for non-self recognition in invertebrate internal defense systems
              remain poorly understood.  Invertebrates rely exclusively on innate or
              non-adaptive immunity.  They lack the ability to  rearrange immunoglobulin
              superfamily genes to generate the specific immunoglobulins and
              antigen-receptors which typify the acquired immune systems of jawed
              vertebrates.  Rather, invertebrates employ carbohydrate-binding proteins
              (lectins) which recognize the carbohydrates displayed by many of their
              pathogens.  Despite recent progress, few invertebrate recognition factors have
              been characterized.  This project is based on preliminary experiments in which
              a novel category of non-self recognition factors have been found in a mollusc. 
              The M line strain of Biomphalaria glabrata (Gastropoda, Planorbidae) when
              exposed  to a parasite (Echinostoma paraensei) responds by producing a family
              of 65kDa lectins that bind both the parasite and its soluble antigens.  These
              lectins comprise a novel combination of variable (V)-type immunoglobulin
              domains and fibrinogen-related domains. These lectins have been named
              fibrinogen-related proteins (FREPs).  Both the individual fibrinogen-like and
              V-type  immunoglobulin domains vary among the multiple FREP genes.  Currently,
              B. glabrata is the only invertebrate known to employ V-type immunoglobulin
              domains within the structure of a defense-related protein.  However, molecular
              data indicate that FREP genes are found in other planorbid snails.  The
              discovery of FREPs raises several research questions.  This project will
              address the functional role of FREPs in the immune system of B. glabrata. 
              Functional aspects that will be studied include (1) binding of FREPS to
              parasites and hemocytes, (2) tissue sites of FREP production, and (3) FREP
              involvement in the encapsulation of parasites by hemocytes.  The project will
              also examine the genetic diversity of FREPs among different molluscan species. 
              The fibrinogen-related and V-type immunoglobulin domain sequences will be
              compared to other members of these gene families to investigate the
              evolutionary relationships of the individual domains.  This study will provide
              knowledge regarding the functional role of FREPs in the internal defense system
              of molluscs and the relationship of FREPS to the evolution of immune systems in
              other animals.

