Title       : Control of Cap-independent Translation by a 3' Untranslated Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9974590

Award Number: 9974590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Allen Miller wamiller@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
MCB 9974590
PI: W. Allen Miller 
Translation was originally thought
              to be linear: ribosomes, with associated factors, recognize the messenger RNA
              at its 5' m7GpppG cap structure, then scan in a 3' direction to the first AUG
              codon at which protein synthesis begins.  Two major discoveries have changed
              this view: (i) the ability of certain RNA sequences to facilitate
              cap-independent translation, allowing the ribosome to bind internally to the
              cap site; and (ii) the important role of the 3' untranslated region (UTR),
              including the poly(A) tail, in regulating translation.  This revealed that
              mRNAs must be circularized by protein factors in the initiation process.  These
              discoveries still require that the ribosome binds the mRNA upstream of the
              start codon, and all 3' UTR control models rely on recognition of the 5' cap
              structure to circularize the mRNA.  In contrast to all known models, the
              investigator discovered a sequence in the 3' UTR of a plant viral genome that
              facilitates very efficient translation initiation at the 5' end of mRNA lacking
              a 5' cap and a poly(A) tail.  The goal of this research is to understand how a
              3'UTR can recruit the ribosome and deliver it to a specific start codon far
              upstream, in the absence of a 5' cap.  The hypothesis to be tested in this work
              is that specific RNA sequences and structures in the 3' UTR mimic a 5' cap and
              a poly(A) tail and, via specific protein interactions, interact with the 5' UTR
              to recruit the translational machinery to the 5'-proximal AUG codon. Deletion
              and site-directed mutagenesis of UTRs of a reporter gene mRNA that will be
              translated in vitro and in vivo will be used to identify the specific sequences
              in the UTRs that are required for ribosome recruitment and communication with
              the 5' end. Enzymatic and chemical probing will also be used to determine the
              RNA secondary structure.  Finally, a search for cellular proteins that mediate
              this process by using the yeast 3-hybrid system, and by RNA affinity binding
              columns will be initiated.  This will shed light on the surprisingly diverse
              ways by which the translational machinery can be assembled on an active mRNA. 
              

The process by which genetic information that is stored as a nucleic acid
              sequence is converted to a protein that carries out the functions of the cell
              is called translation.  This requires a complex macromolecular machine called
              the ribosome, along with associated protein factors, to recognize the messenger
              RNA (mRNA), and "read" it in a controlled fashion.  In addition to the portion
              of the mRNA that codes for a protein sequence, non-coding sequences at the ends
              of the mRNA often regulate its interaction with the ribosome, to control
              protein synthesis.  Much remains to be learned about this complex process. 
              Viruses often employ unconventional means of bypassing normal host translation
              mechanisms, that allow them to avoid host defenses.  They also serve as useful
              tools for understanding translation in general.  This project focuses on an
              unusual plant viral mRNA that has a sequence near the "wrong" untranslated end
              ("downstream" of the coding region), that somehow recruits the ribosome to the
              other end of the mRNA where translation begins.  Thus, the mRNA must be
              circularized.  Normal mRNAs are also circularized, via special modifications or
              sequences in the untranslated regions that interact with a complex assemblage
              of protein factors.  The viral RNA in this project lacks these modifications
              and sequences, and presumably has different sequences that mimic the
              conventional ones, and they likely interact by at least some different proteins
              than are used in translation of normal mRNAs.  The goal is to identify both the
              RNA sequences and the proteins that are involved in this process.  Translation
              mechanisms are fundamentally the same in all plants and animals.  Thus, this
              work is of fundamental relevance to our understanding of translation in both
              kingdoms.  Novel gene expression mechanisms first discovered in viruses often
              are found later to exist in cellular genes.  This work may reveal new means of
              controlling viruses by inhibiting gene expression mechanisms that are unique to
              viruses, and it may provide genetic engineering tools for constructing genes
              that bypass cellular mechanisms of regulating and limiting gene expression.

