Title       : SGER: Granular Dynamics and Fluid Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1999     
File        : a9974095

Award Number: 9974095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38854              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond E. Goldstein gold@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adriana I. Pesci  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Juan M. Restrepo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9974095
Goldstein

This is an interdisciplinary theory and experiment project
              that addresses pattern formation in granular matter such as sand, seed grains,
              micro beads, particles, etc.  The objective is to refine an existing apparatus
              that produces ripples andpatterns in a heterogeneous medium consisting of water
              and glass micro-spheres.  With this apparatus, new experiments can be carried
              out that should shed light on fundamental issues underlying wind- and
              water-driven patterns that occur in beaches, sand dunes, and similar
              situations.  The apparatus is an annular chamber in which water overlaying sand
              is sheared with controllable speed.  A large parameter space is defined by
              variations in size and roughness of the sand, its buoyancy, the fluid
              viscosity, depth and shear rate.  Time-lapse video recording of the
              instabilities, pattern competition, and long-time dynamics will be used to
              quantify the behavior.  The project will provide excellent training for
              students in topics of both fundamental and practical significance.
%%%
This
              interdisciplinary theory and experiment project will construct a new apparatus
              to investigate ripples and patterns that form during the flow of granular
              matter such as sand in water.  Despite the ubiquity of wind- and water-driven
              patterns in granular matter, these patterns are not well understood.  The new
              apparatus will allow the variation of many important parameters, equivalent to
              wind speed, sand density, shear forces, etc.  Video techniques will be used to
              capture the development of patterns.  The patterns will be modeled and
              theoretically analyzed.  The project will provide excellent training for
              students in topics of both fundamental and practical significance.
*** 

