Title       : Effect of the Electrodynamic Environment on Electrical Transport in Nanoscale
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a9974365

Award Number: 9974365
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander J. Rimberg rimberg@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9974365
Rimberg

This project focuses on the investigation of the tunneling
              process in the presence of a tunable source of radiation. In many nanoscale
              systems, quantum mechanical tunneling is a fundamentally important process in
              electrical transport.  In condensed matter systems, when considering tunneling
              attention must be paid not only to the electrons (or other particles) which are
              themselves tunneling, but also the electromagnetic environment to which they
              are coupled.  In many cases the environment is fixed and not well
              characterized.  In this project a model system consisting of a tunneling
              structure coupled to a tunable environment has been fabricated.  The system
              consists of an Al/AlOx single-electron transistor (SET) coupled to a quantum
              dot in a GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructure.  The Al/AlOx tunnel junctions form nearly
              ideal tunneling elements due to their high barriers and lack of defects. The
              quantum dot forms an extremely flexible environment, since its impedance and
              energy level structure are tunable over a physically interesting range.  By
              measuring the dc I-V  characteristics of the SET as the degree of confinement
              of the quantum dot is varied, one is able to observe how changes in the
              environment affect transport through the SET.  Furthermore, since the SET I-V
              characteristics are naturally sensitive to the impedance of the environment and
              to frequencies eV/h where V is the applied voltage, one may also obtain
              information about the impedance of the dot at frequencies in the gigahertz
              range.  The research in this project will also serve as an opportunity for
              students, both graduate and undergraduate, as well as post doctoral research
              associates to acquire state-of-the-art experimental skills in an area of great
              technological importance during the next few decades of the 21st
              Century.

%%% 

In many very small physical systems (ones which measure
              only a few tens of billionths of a meter on a side), electrons facing a barrier
              can "tunnel" through the barrier instead of going over it.  This kind of
              process is the dominant form of electrical conduction in many tiny structures. 
              The environment surrounding an electron, including the presence of other
              electrons or of vibrations, can affect its ability to tunnel.  In many cases,
              however, it is unclear what in the environment is affecting the tunneling, and
              it is usually impossible to change it.  This research proposes to use two
              specialized devices to approach this problem.  One, known as a single electron
              transistor, allows great control over tunneling; in fact electrons in this
              device can be used to tunnel one at a time.  The second device, known as a
              quantum dot, consists of a small number (only a few hundred) of electrons
              confined in a very small area by energy barriers.  By controlling the height of
              the barriers it is possible to control how easy or difficult it is for
              electrons to enter or leave the dot. This variability will allow the dot to
              serve as an artificial environment that is well understood and tunable.  By
              fabricating the single electron transistor very close to the dot, one is able
              to observe how changes in the dot affect the tunneling in the transistor.  The
              goal of this research is then to obtain a clearer understanding of how
              electrical conduction works in extremely small structures and thereby guide
              further advances in the technological realization of quantum structures in
              subnano-technology.  Undergraduate and graduate students, as well as post
              doctoral research associates will participate in this research.  They will
              thereby acquire state-of -the-art skills that will prepare them for employment
              in forefront areas of science and technology during the 21st Century.   


