Title       : Spectroscopic Investigations of Reactive Chemical Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2001     
File        : a9974404

Award Number: 9974404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $653750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry A. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
Program Ref : 0000,9188,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Terry Miller of Ohio State University will use cavity
              ringdown spectroscopy (CRDS) and other techniques to investigate and
              characterize reactive chemical intermediates.  Radical intermediates will be
              cooled using molecular-beam jets, and electronic transitions will be probed in
              the visible and infrared spectral regions.  Calculations will be used to help
              analyze spectra, which then become a standard against which computational
              methods can be compared.  Specific species to be examined include weakly bound
              clusters such as Ne2OH and Ne2SH, metal monomethyl radicals and larger alkyl
              derivatives, highly unsaturated carbon chain molecules, aryl carbenes, phenyl,
              and phenoxy radicals, alkyl peroxy radicals, and halogen dioxides.

Complex
              chemical reactions that occur in atmospheric, combustion, and organic synthesis
              processes typically involve transient chemical  intermediates, such as free
              radicals and molecular ions, that determine the overall result of the process. 
              Spectroscopic identification of the intermediates is critical for the practical
              investigation and monitoring of such reactions.  Spectroscopic characterization
              of the intermediates provides a foundation for the basic understanding of the
              nature of chemical reactivity.  This research involves a multifaceted approach
              to the spectroscopic detection and characterization of these intermediates and
              species involving them.  Such intermediates play critical roles in a variety of
              chemical reactions that are important in understanding such diverse phenomena
              as ozone depletion, lower-atmospheric air pollution, combustion, and
              astrochemistry.

