Title       : Transcriptional Regulation of Carbon Utilization in the Hyperthermophilic
               Archaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a9974453

Award Number: 9974453
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Blum pblum@biocomp.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Blum, Paul 
MCB-9974453

Small subunit (16S) ribosomal RNA sequence
              comparisons have identified a unique lineage or grouping of prokaryotic
              organisms called Archaea.  They are as distantly related to Bacteria as they
              are to Eukaryotes.  Archaea generally are subdivided into two major groups
              called the Euryarchaea and the Crenarchaea; the aerobic hyperthermophile,
              Sulfolobus solfataricus, is an intensively studied member of the Crenarchaea. 
              Hyperthermophiles are present in both prokaryotic groups and are distinguished
              by their deeply rooted (slowly evolving) 16S rRNA. Archaea are distinct from
              Eukaryotes yet there is remarkable conservation between their general (basal)
              transcription components including RNA polymerase, promoters and promoter
              binding proteins.  Whether this evolutionary overlap includes regulatory
              (accessory) transcription components is not known.  This project focuses on the
              question of whether the biochemistry of gene expression in Archaea employs
              mechanisms like those in Eukaryotes or in Bacteria, or instead, altogether new
              strategies.

In previous studies a Catabolite Repression (CR) gene regulatory
              system was discovered in S. solfataricus.  CR controls expression of at least
              three genes all encoding glucosyl hydrolases which are used for growth on
              polysaccharides.  The affected genes include an a-glucosidase (malA), an
              a-amylase (amyA), and a b-glycosidase (lacS).  These genes are coordinately
              regulated at the transcriptional level in response to the quality of the carbon
              source provided for growth.  Carbon quality is measured by how readily it can
              be assimilated into the TCA cycle. As carbon source quality decreases,
              expression of these genes is increased (CR is relieved). Because these genes
              are physically unlinked, coordinated expression indicates they are controlled
              by a trans-acting regulatory factor. The existence of such a factor is further
              supported by the isolation of unlinked (extragenic) mutations which
              pleiotropically reduce CR gene transcription. 

 	This project will test the
              following hypotheses: 1) CR alters gene expression through action at cis-acting
              promoter sequences; 2) Changes in CR gene expression require the action of a
              trans-acting factor; and 3) Differential regulation of CR-gene expression is
              promoter specific.  The experimental approach will entail the exchange of
              promoter regions between CR-dependent and independent genes and the
              construction of promoter hybrids between CR-dependent genes.  These constructs
              will be fused to a reporter gene and analyzed in vivo by enzyme assays, western
              blot and northern blot. Promoters will be analyzed in vitro by primer extension
              of transcription products and by gel retardation assays.  The anticipated
              results will provide insight into basic aspects of archaeal hyperthermophilic
              metabolism and the evolutionary origin of gene expression.



