Title       : RUI: Ubiquitin--Mediated Degradation of Picornavirus Processing Proteases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9974497

Award Number: 9974497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Lawson tlawson@bates.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bates College
	      
	      Lewiston, ME  04240    207/786-6093

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Lawson
MCB 9974497

The ubiquitin system, which selectively marks certain
              proteins for destruction by catalyzing the attachment of polymers of the
              76-amino  acid ubiquitin molecule to the targeted protein, appears to be
              responsible for the rapid turnover of a number of key regulatory proteins in
              eukaryotic cells.  Very few viral proteins have, however, been proven to be
              substrates for ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, and no explorations of what
              roles the rapid turnover of these proteins play in virus replication have been
              carried out.  Considerable understanding of how the components of the
              ubiquitin-mediated system function has been gained in recent years, but major
              questions remain unanswered, including the mechanisms by which substrate
              proteins are selected for conjugation with ubiquitin. The positive stranded RNA
              genomes of picornaviruses encode a single large polyprotein, which is
              synthesized upon infection of the host cell.  This polyprotein is processed
              into individual functional proteins by a series of specific proteolytic
              cleavages, most of which are catalyzed by a protein, designated as the 3C
              protease, that resides within the viral polyprotein.  The mature 3C proteases
              of the encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV) and hepatitis A virus (HAV) turn over
              rapidly, and in both cases the degradation is carried out by the
              ubiquitin-mediated proteolytic system, in contrast to 3C protease of 
              poliovirus which is  a poor substrate for the ubiquitin system. EMCV 3C
              protease is recognized by  two different ubiquitin-protein ligases.  One of
              these ligases, E3 , is responsible for most of the ubiquitin-3C protease
              conjugate synthesis which occurs in vitro, and the other, a ten-amino acid
              protein destruction signal sequence in the EMCV 3C protease is required for E3
              to catalyze ubiquitin-3C protease conjugate synthesis.  Preliminary evidence
              has suggested that the HAV 3C protease also contains a similar destruction
              signal sequence.  This study uses the EMCV and HAV 3C proteases as model
              proteins to examine in detail the biochemical mechanisms by which ubiquitin
              system components interact with, and catalyze the attachment of ubiquitin to,
              rapidly degraded proteins.  The information so gained is likely to be
              applicable to the understanding of how other short-lived proteins are selected
              for destruction in mammalian cells.  In addition, the significance of the
              turnover rates of 3C proteases will be examined in terms of their impact on
              virus replication in infected cells.  This work will demonstrate whether the
              rapid turnover of viral proteins can be an integral and necessary event in the
              replication of certain viruses.  

